CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF McALLEN, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 1994 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted: February 28, 1994 
Effective: February 28, 1994 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
McALLEN, TEXAS 
____________ 
James E. Darling 
Mayor 
____________ 
Richard F. Cortez 
Trey Pebley 
Hilda Salinas 
Aida Ramirez 
John J. Ingram 
Veronica Vela Whitacre 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Roel (Roy) Rodriguez 
City Manager 
____________ 
Kevin Pagan 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Annette Villarreal 
City Secretary 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
McALLEN, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Othal E. Brand 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jan M. Klinck 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Carlos I. Garza 
Phyllis Griggs 
Leo Montalvo 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Mike R. Perez 
City Manager 
____________ 
Jim Darling 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Leticia Vacek 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of McAllen, Texas. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1966 Code, as supplemented through May 11, 1992, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1966 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CDB:1 
CDC:1 
CDD:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Charles Vignos, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Leticia M. Vacek, City Secretary, James Darling, City Attorney, and the other members of the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1994-11 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of McAllen, Texas Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the Board of Commissioners of the City of McAllen, Texas: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of McAllen, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 138, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 11, 1993, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, governing fire, safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00 dollars and the violation of any other provision of this Code, or of any other ordinance, shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $500.00; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than a penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the state, and it is further provided that anywhere in this Code wherein a fine of less than $500.00 is set for a violation of any particular ordinance or section thereof, notwithstanding the designation of such fine of less than $500.00, the maximum fine shall be $500.00 for any violation other than a violation relating to fire, safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, in which case, for such violations, the fine shall be $2,000.00 regardless of the designation of a fine as set out in any particular ordinance or section of the Code of Ordinances. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 11, 1993, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This Ordinance shall be and remain in full force and effect from and after its passage by the Board of Commissioners and the caption of this Ordinance shall be published according to section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of McAllen. 
Considered, Passed and Approved this 28th day of February, 1994, at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of the City of McAllen at which a quorum was present and which was held in accordance with Chapter 551 of the Texas Government Code. 
Signed this 28th day of February, 1994. 
CITY OF MCALLEN 
By: _____ 
Othal E. Brand, Sr., Mayor 
ATTEST: 
By: _____ 
Leticia M. Vacek, City Secretary 
Approved as to form: 
_____
James E. Darling, City Attorney 
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of the City of McAllen, Texas, held on the 28th day of February, 1994. 
_____
Leticia M. Vacek, City Secretary  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's Home Rule Charter, adopted at an election held January 31, 1927. The original arrangement and article and section numbers have been retained. The article headings and section catchlines have been changed in some instances for clarity. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 1. - Incorporation; corporate name. 
All of the inhabitants of the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, as the boundaries and limits of said city are herein established, or may hereafter be established, shall be a body politic incorporated under Article XI, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Texas and under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Chapter 13 of Title 28, and the name and style of said city shall be "McALLEN."  
Sec. 2. - Boundaries described. 
The territorial boundaries and limits of the City of McAllen shall be such as are fixed from time to time by ordinance of McAllen in accordance with provisions of this Charter, or by Charter amendments, and the boundaries and limits of McAllen are established, until altered as aforesaid, as follows: 
COMMENCING for the initial point of this Survey, at the intersection of the West line of a Forty (40) foot road lying on West side of Hidalgo Canal Company's Subdivision and the center line of the St. Louis, Brownsville and Mexico Railroad, within Porcion No. 64. Said West line of Road, being also the West line of 18th Street of the City of McAllen, as per current maps of said City. 
THENCE with West line of 18th Street eight (8) degrees 45 minutes West 2921.4 feet to the intersection of the South line of a 40 foot road, designated on the City Map of McAllen as 10th Avenue, for a point on the South City Limits of McAllen and the beginning point of this survey; 
THENCE with the South line of 10th Avenue, South 81 degrees 15 minutes East at 2948 feet, cross East line of 10th Street McAllen, at 3248 feet, to an old Post marked "S. E. MCA."[;] 
THENCE North 8 degrees 45 minutes East 2664.5 feet to South line of 50 foot County Highway, for an inside corner of this Survey; 
THENCE South 78 degrees 27 minutes East 1125.3 feet; 
THENCE North 8 degrees 45 minutes East with the West side of a 40 foot Road along East line of Lots Nos. Fourteen (14) and Eleven (11), N. E. one-quarter (NE¼) Section Eight (8) of Hidalgo Canal Company's Subdivision of Porciones 64, 65 and 66, to the North line of said Lot Eleven (11), for a Northeast (NE) corner of this Survey; 
THENCE North 81 degrees 45 minutes West 1124 feet, to old East line of the Corporation of McAllen; 
THENCE with the old incorporation line, North 8 degrees 45 minutes East 1360 feet, to the North line of 40 foot road on North side of Lot (4), of the Northeast one-quarter (NE¼) Section Eight (8) Hidalgo Canal Company's Subdivision of the Northeast corner of this Survey, marked "N.E. MCA."[;] 
THENCE North 81 degrees 15 minutes West with North line of said 40 foot road and North line of 26th Avenue of the City of McAllen, crossing Porcion lines of Porciones 65-64, 64-63, 5685 feet, to the intersection of the East line of Alberta Avenue of Young's Addition to McAllen, produced Northward, for the Northwest (NW) corner of this Survey; 
THENCE with the East line of Alberta Avenue and same line produced, South Eight (8) degrees 25 minutes West 5392 feet to the South line of 10th Avenue of McAllen, produced for the S.W. corner of the Survey; 
THENCE with the South line of 10th Avenue of the City of McAllen, and same produced South 81 degrees 15 minutes East, 2405 feet to the place of beginning. 
Editor's note— The above section sets forth the city limits as of the time the Charter was adopted. Annexations made by the city are listed by date in appendix B. A map showing the current corporate limits of the city is on file in the office of the city secretary.  
Sec. 3. - Annexation—By petition. 
Whenever a majority of the qualified voters who are citizens of the State of Texas and inhabitants of any territory adjoining McAllen, as said territory may be designated by the board of commissioners, or in case there are no qualified voters in said territory, then when persons owning a majority of land in area in said territory desire the annexation of such territory to McAllen, they may present a written petition to that effect to the board of commissioners and shall attach to said petition the affidavit of one or more of their number to the effect that said petition is signed by a majority of such qualified voters or in case there are no qualified voters, said affidavit shall be to the effect that there are no qualified voters in said territory and that the persons signing said petition own a majority of the land in area in said territory; and thereupon the board of commissioners, at regular session held not sooner than twenty (20) days after the presentation of said petition, may by ordinance annex such territory to McAllen and thenceforth the said territory shall be a part of McAllen, and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all of the rights and privileges of other citizens and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of said city. 
State Law reference— Annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 43.021, 43.022.  
Sec. 4. - Same—By ordinance. 
The board of commissioners shall have power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of McAllen and to provide for the extension of said boundary limits and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to said city with or without the consent of the territory and inhabitants annexed. Upon the introduction of such an ordinance in the board of commissioners and after it has been amended as desired by the board for final passage, it shall be published in some newspaper in McAllen one time and shall not thereafter be finally passed until at least thirty (30) days has elapsed after said publication, and any citizen of McAllen, or of the territory to be annexed, shall have the right to contest said annexation by filing with the board of commissioners a written petition setting out their reasons for said contest, and said ordinance shall not be finally passed until such citizen, or citizens, have had the right to be heard on his, or their petition, and when said ordinance is finally passed, the territory so annexed shall be part of McAllen, and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of said city.  
Sec. 5. - Platting of property. 
The city plan for McAllen, as herein recommended, is the plans and specifications drawn by A. E. Wood, city planning engineer, and submitted to McAllen, and which are now on file in the city offices, and the board of commissioners and property owners, when platting property for subdivision purposes, shall follow said plans in a general way as nearly as it is practicable to do, [and] any property owner or owners desiring to plat any property in lots and blocks, shall plat the same to conform as nearly as practicable to the city plans as herein adopted, and shall file with the city engineer a correct map of the same, and before actually opening up and laying out the streets and alleys on said property, shall obtain a permit from the board of commissioners or from the city plan board, as the case may be, before opening the same, and when said property has been platted and opened the streets and alleys on the same shall become the property of McAllen for use as public highways, and shall be cared for as such; provided however, that in no case shall the City of McAllen be required to pay for the property included in said streets and alleys, except wherein the same has been condemned by the city; and provided further that the City of McAllen, through its board of commissioners, shall have the right and power at any time by ordinance to change, relocate, open, or close streets and alleys.  
ARTICLE 2. - GENERAL CORPORATE POWERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 1. - Enumerated. 
McAllen, a city of more than five thousand (5,000) inhabitants, is created a body politic and corporate by this act, and shall have perpetual succession, may use a common seal, may sue and be sued, may contract and be contracted with, and may exercise all rights and privileges granted to cities of more than five thousand (5,000) inhabitants by Article XI, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Texas, and granted to cities of more than five thousand (5,000) inhabitants by Chapter 13 of Title 28, of the Revised Statutes of the State of Texas together with all amendments thereto, and shall have and exercise all powers granted to it by the Constitution of the State of Texas, as the same now exist[s], or as the same may hereafter be amended, and all powers granted to cities of its class by the Legislature of the State of Texas, either now or hereafter, and shall exercise all powers of local self-government which are not prohibited by the Constitution of the State of Texas, or by laws of the State of Texas or by this Charter; and said powers shall be exercised whether they are herein especially enumerated or not, and there being no attempt in this Charter to especially enumerate said powers, any enumeration of powers herein made shall not be construed in any wise to limit the powers of said city, but the City of McAllen shall, at all times, derive its powers from [the] Constitution and laws of the State of Texas.  
ARTICLE 3. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 1. - Board of commissioners. 
The governing body of McAllen shall consist of a Board of Commissioners composed of the Mayor and six (6) commissioners, who shall be elected, as hereinafter provided. 
(Amended, election 5-6-00)  
Sec. 2. - Officers elected. 
The elective officers of McAllen shall consist of a Mayor and six (6) commissioners. 
(Amended, election 5-6-00)  
Sec. 2a. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-19 adopted March 13, 2000, and passed by the voters at an election May 6, 2000, repealed § 2a, which pertained to commissioner places. See the Charter Comparative Table.  
Sec. 3. - Election of officers generally. 
At the regular municipal election for city officials of the City of McAllen to be held on the first Tuesday in April, 1965, the candidate for the office of mayor receiving a majority of the votes cast shall be elected mayor and shall hold office for four (4) years from the date of such election and until his successor is elected and qualified. Thereafter, on the first Tuesday in April each four years thereafter, the mayor shall be elected as above provided for a term of four years, and thereafter until his successor is elected and qualified. At the regular municipal election for city officials of the City of McAllen to be held on the first Tuesday in April of 1965, the candidate for commissioner for each of the four places, respectively, receiving a majority of the votes cast for commissioner of such place shall be elected commissioner and shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified. After the election of the four (4) commissioners and the canvass of returns and declaration of results the four (4) commissioners elected shall meet at the McAllen City Hall and determine by lot which two (2) commissioners will serve for two (2) year terms and which two (2) shall serve for four (4) year terms. Thereafter on the first Tuesday in April of each odd numbered year, two (2) commissioners shall be elected, each of whom shall serve for a four (4) year term and until his successor is elected and qualified. 
(Amended, election 11-3-64) 
Editor's note— Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Election Code § 41.001, the election day of the city is the first Saturday in May.  
Sec. 3a. - Run-off elections. 
In the event no candidate for mayor receives a majority of the votes cast and/or in the event no commissioner for a particular place receives a majority of the votes cast or in the event of a tie vote for mayor or a tie vote for commissioner of any place, there shall be a run-off election between the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes or tied for mayor and/or commissioner. Such run-off election shall be held on the first Tuesday after thirty (30) days from the date of the first election. The candidate receiving the majority of votes for the respective office at such run-off election shall be elected. 
(Amended, election 11-3-64)  
Sec. 3b. - Officers; election of after April 2000. 
The city shall be divided into six (6) single-member election districts for the purpose of electing one city commissioner from each single member election district. Candidates for city commission shall have resided in the district from which he or she seeks election for at least six (6) months prior to the date of the election. The mayor will continue to be elected from the city at-large. 
The six (6) single-member election districts shall be drawn according to state and federal laws. 
In the first election held pursuant to this provision all six (6) single-member election districts shall stand for election. 
After the election and canvass of the returns and declaration of results the six (6) commissioners elected shall meet and determine by lot which three (3) commissioner[s] shall serve two (2) year terms and which three (3) commissioners shall serve a full four (4) year term. Thereafter each commissioner elected from his or her respective single member election district shall serve four (4) year terms. 
(Amended, election 5-6-00)  
Sec. 4. - Canvass and declaration of election returns. 
On the first Tuesday following said election or run-off election, or both, as the case may be, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the board of commissioners and mayor then in office shall canvass the returns and declare the election of the candidates and shall declare the candidate receiving the majority number of votes for mayor elected mayor, and the candidate receiving the majority number of votes for commissioner for each place, respectively, elected commissioner of such place. 
(Amended, election 11-3-64)  
Sec. 5. - Petition to have name placed on ballot. 
Any person desiring to have his name placed upon the official ballot for any election may do so by presenting a written request for that purpose signed by himself or by twenty qualified voters, to the board of commissioners and filing the same with the city clerk [city secretary] or with the mayor at least five (5) days prior to the date of said election.  
Sec. 6. - Appointive officers generally. 
All officers of McAllen, except the mayor and commissioners, shall be appointed by the board of commissioners, and said board shall have the right to create as many city offices as they may desire; to prescribe the qualifications, tenure of office and bonds of said officers; to provide for the compensation of said officers; and shall also have the authority to suspend or dismiss any of said appointed officers or boards at any time with or without cause.  
Sec. 7. - Qualifications of mayor and commissioners. 
The mayor and each of the four (4) commissioners shall be at least twenty-five (25) years of age; shall be a citizen of the United States of America and a qualified voter of the State of Texas, and shall have resided for at least two (2) years next preceding the election within the corporate limits of McAllen; and shall be a bona fide owner of real estate within the corporate limits of McAllen. 
Case Law reference— Qualification of ownership of real property, Connerton v. Oliver, 33 F. Sup. 201.  
Sec. 8. - Oath of officers. 
Each person elected by the voters of McAllen, or appointed by the board of commissioners, to fill any elective or appointive office, shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe to the official oath provided by the Constitution of the State of Texas. 
State Law reference— Oath, Tx. Const. art. 16, § 1.  
Sec. 9. - Bond of officers. 
The mayor and each of the four (4) commissioners shall, before entering upon their respective duties, execute a good and sufficient bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) signed by himself as principal and two (2) sureties, payable to the county judge of Hidalgo County, Texas, or his successors in office, for the use and benefit of McAllen, which bond shall be approved by the said county judge and conditioned for the faithful discharge of the duties of the office; provided, however, that when the bond is signed by a surety company authorized to do and transact business in the State of Texas, only one (1) surety shall be required. All appointive officers shall be required to give a like bond as is required by the mayor and commissioners, to be approved by the mayor, except the amount of said bond shall be fixed by the board of commissioners. The condition of all bonds required by this section shall be for the faithful discharge of the duties of their respective offices.  
Sec. 10. - Officers' salaries. 
The board of commissioners shall have authority to fix all salaries and remuneration of all officers, either elective or appointive, of McAllen, except the office of mayor and commissioners. The mayor of McAllen shall receive a salary of twelve hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per year when he is serving in the capacity of mayor and city manager; but if a city manager is employed by the city, then the mayor shall receive a salary of six hundred dollars ($600.00); provided, however, that in arriving at said salary there shall be deducted from the same all amounts received by the mayor during said period of time as fees of office. The commissioners of the City of McAllen shall receive for their services the sum of five dollars ($5.00) per meeting for each regular or special meeting of said board of commissioners; provided, however, that if said board of commissioners shall meet more often than twice in any one month, they shall only be paid for two (2) of such meetings.  
Sec. 11. - Resignation of mayor or commissioner; vacancies. 
Resignation by the mayor or any commissioner elected shall be made in writing to the board of commissioners for their action thereon. In case of the removal of the domicile of the mayor or any commissioner from the territorial limits of the City of McAllen, such removal shall ipso facto to be deemed to create a vacancy in his office. And in case of any vacancy from any cause in the mayor's office, the same shall be filled by the remaining members of the board of commissioners appointing one of their members to fill said unexpired term, and in case of a vacancy in the office of the commissioners, same may be filled by a majority vote of the remaining commissioners, or the board of commissioners may order an election to fill such unexpired term.  
Sec. 12. - Authority to administer oaths. 
Each commissioner and the mayor and such other officers as the board of commissioners may designate are hereby authorized to administer oaths in the municipal affairs and government of McAllen.  
Sec. 13. - General powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of McAllen and shall see that all laws thereof are enforced. He shall be clothed with all of the authority that is now or may hereafter be vested in a mayor by the general laws of the State of Texas so far as the same may be applicable and not inconsistent with this Charter. He shall have and exercise full power, prerogative and authority acting independent or in concert with the board of commissioners as are conferred by the provisions of this Charter, or as may be conferred upon him by the board of commissioners not inconsistent with the general purposes and provisions of this Charter, and shall have the power to administer oaths and sign all contracts.  
Sec. 14. - Incumbents. 
The present mayor of McAllen shall remain in office until his successor has been duly elected and qualified. The present commissioners of McAllen shall remain in office and constitute two (2) of the commissioners of the City of McAllen until their successors are regularly elected and qualified. The office of two (2) commissioners is vacant and the present mayor and two (2) commissioners shall fill said offices in accordance with section 11 of this article.  
Sec. 15. - Meetings of board of commissioners; quorum. 
The board of commissioners shall from time to time by resolution provide for regular meetings and for call[ed] meetings of said board; and shall provide for the time and place of said meetings. Four (4) commissioners, or the mayor and three (3) commissioners of said board, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any and all business that may be brought before the board; provided that no bonds may be issued nor no taxes levied except at a regular meeting of the board attended by at least three (3) commissioners and the mayor, or by four (4) commissioners without the mayor. All official sessions of the board of commissioners, whether regular or called, shall be open to the public. 
(Amended, election of 5-12-07)  
Sec. 16. - Ordinances—Authority to enact. 
The board of commissioners of said city shall be vested with the power and charged with the duty of making all laws or ordinances not inconsistent with the Constitution of the State of Texas, touching every subject and matter within the local government, same to include the power to impose fines and penalties for the violation of the same. They shall have the power and authority in the government, management and control of McAllen, which are not especially delegated to some other authority and they may pass any ordinances they may desire delegating any part of their authority and duties to any other person, officer or employee, not inconsistent with the Constitution or laws of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 17. - Same—When effective; publication. 
When any ordinance has been passed by a majority vote of the board of commissioners present and voting and signed by the mayor, it shall be deemed a law, and shall be published in some newspaper published within McAllen at least once a week for two weeks, but shall become effective from and after the date of its passage; provided, however, that the caption of any ordinance need not be published; and provided further that ordinances granted [granting a] franchise need not be published in any instance.  
Sec. 18. - Same—Veto. 
When the mayor shall veto any ordinance, the same may be passed over his veto by a vote of four (4) commissioners.  
Sec. 19. - Actions for removal of officers. 
Any resident citizen or property taxpayer of the City of McAllen shall have a right to bring an action in the District Court of Hidalgo County, Texas, or in any court of proper jurisdiction, for the removal from office of any officer of the City of McAllen for malfeasance or misfeasance in office and in such actions will be governed by the general laws of the State of Texas applicable to such proceedings.  
Sec. 20. - Election and term of office of mayor pro tem. 
At the first regular meeting of the board of commissioners after their induction into office, it shall be the duty of the board to elect one of its members by a majority vote of the board, who shall be known as the mayor pro tem, and who shall continue to hold the title and office until the expiration of the term of office for which he was elected by the commissioners.  
Sec. 21. - Powers and duties of mayor pro tem; absence of mayor and mayor pro tem. 
If for any reason, the mayor is absent from the city, sick or unable to perform the duties of his office, then the mayor pro tem shall act as mayor and he shall be vested with all the powers and shall perform all of the duties of the mayor during such absence, sickness or inability. In case of the absence of both the mayor and the mayor pro tem, the remaining commissioners shall elect one of their members to act instead of the mayor or the mayor pro tem.  
Sec. 22. - Investigations by mayor and board of commissioners. 
The mayor or the board of commissioners may, and it shall be their duty, at any time to investigate each and every department of the city government and of the official acts and conduct of the city officers, and for the purpose of ascertaining facts in connection with such investigation shall have the power to compel the attendance and testimony of witnesses, to administer oaths and to examine such persons as they may deem necessary and to compel the production of books and accounts. Failure of any person to appear at such hearing, when served by a notice to do so, shall be a contempt, which may be punished by fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), and in default of the payment thereof the person so fined may be imprisoned for a period of time not to exceed three (3) days.  
Sec. 23. - Binding arbitration prohibited. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this charter, the city is prohibited from utilizing binding arbitration, or any other similar process which delegates the final decision making authority to an outside person or entity, in determining the appropriate compensation, wages, benefits, and/or any other conditions of employment for City of McAllen employees, including but not limited to police officers and/or firefighters. The city shall have the authority to use any appropriate non-binding alternative dispute resolution proceeding, but the final decision to accept and/or reject any recommendations resulting from such proceeding shall remain with the elected city officials of the City of McAllen. 
(Amended, election of 11-3-2009)  
ARTICLE 4. - POLICE 
 
Sec. 1. - Establishment and composition of department; terms of members of department. 
There is created the police department for McAllen, composed of a chief of police and as many assistants, subordinates and employees as the board of commissioners may deem necessary. The members of the police department shall hold their offices until the expiration of the term of office of the board of commissioners appointing them, or until they have resigned or have been removed by the board of commissioners.  
Sec. 2. - Special police. 
Whenever the mayor shall deem it necessary in order to enforce the laws of McAllen, or to avert danger to, or protect the life or property, in case of riot, or any outbreak, or calamity, or public disturbance, or when he has reason to fear any serious violation of law or order, or any other danger to said city, or the inhabitants thereof, he shall have the power to summon into service, as special police force, all or as many of the citizens as in his judgment and discretion may be necessary and proper, and such summons may be by proclamation or order addressed to the citizens generally, or such summons may be by general notification. Such special police, while in service, shall be subject to the order of the mayor, shall perform such duties as he may require, and shall have the power, while on duty, as the regular police of McAllen. Any person so summoned and failing to obey, or appearing and failing to perform any duty that may be required by this section, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00), but it is expressly provided that said city shall not become or be liable for any damage or injuries to personal property arising from the failure of the mayor or any police or other officer or any employee to enforce the provisions of this Charter. 
  
Note— Note: This section [3] is ineffective as it conflicts with Article 3, Section No. 23 which provides, "Notwithstanding any other provisions of this charter, the City is prohibited from utilizing binding arbitration..."  
Sec. 3. - Binding arbitration required. 
It shall be the policy of the City of McAllen to provide its firefighters and police officers with compensation and other conditions of employment that are substantially the same as compensation and conditions of employment in other comparable cities in the State of Texas. Because of the essential and emergency nature of the public service performed by firefighters and police officers it is essential for the City of McAllen to adopt a fair system of arbitration if the parties fail to agree on the compensation and other conditions of employment during collective bargaining negotiations. 
With the right to strike prohibited, to maintain the high morale of the firefighters and police officers and efficient operation of the departments in which they serve, arbitration must be expeditious, effective and binding. 
In the event that the City of McAllen is unable to reach an agreement with the firefighters and/or police officers during collective bargaining negotiations and the parties have been at impasse for at least 90 days, then the following impasse procedure shall prevail: 
Either party to the dispute, after written notice to the other party containing specifications of the issue or issues in dispute, may request arbitration. In the event that one party makes a request for arbitration, then both parties shall submit all issues in dispute to arbitration. The issues to be submitted to arbitration shall be all matters which the parties have been unable to resolve through collective bargaining. The arbitration ruling shall be final and binding on both parties. 
Arbitration shall be conducted by the parties pursuant to the procedures, duties, requirements and rights set forth in Local Government Code, §§ 174.153 through 174.164, except that Local Government Code § 174.163 shall be specifically excluded and not apply herein. 
In making its decision, the Arbitration panel may consider only the following: 
1.  The requirements of § 174.021, Local Government Code. 
2.  The total compensation, including wages and benefits, and conditions of employment provided by the City of McAllen to the firefighters and/or police officers. 
3.  The total compensation and terms and conditions of employment of firefighters and police officers in other comparable cities in the State of Texas. 
4.  The rate of increase or decrease in the cost of living for the McAllen area determined by the Consumer Price Index for the period beginning with the effective date of the current collective bargaining agreement and ending with the most recent published report at the time of commencement of the arbitration. 
5.  Revenues available to the City of McAllen and the impact on the taxpayers of the City of McAllen. 
(Amended, election of 11-3-2009)  
ARTICLE 5. - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 1. - Establishment and composition of fire department. 
There is created a fire department for McAllen composed of a fire chief and as many lieutenants and assistants as the board of commissioners may deem advisable.  
Sec. 2. - Appointment of fire chief and lieutenants and assistants. 
The fire chief and his lieutenants and assistants shall be appointed by the board of commissioners with the advice of the members of the fire department.  
Sec. 3. - Powers and duties of fire department and chief; board of firemen. 
The fire department and the fire chief are charged with the duties of enforcing all of the fire ordinances of McAllen, and in case of fire shall be in full charge of the fire and for the purpose of extinguishing fires, preventing their spread or inspecting fire hazards, and shall have the right to enter upon private property, and in case of a dangerous outbreak of fire, and for purpose of preventing its spread, shall have the right to enter upon and destroy, if necessary, any private property. The fire chief and his lieutenants and assistants shall have the right to arrest any person or persons interfering with their duties in the extinguishment of fires or the prevention of their spread, and the enumeration of powers herein shall not be construed in any manner as a limit on their powers, but they shall have the right to do and perform all things not prohibited by law, this Charter, or an ordinance of the City of McAllen; provided however, when the city shall establish a paid fire department, then the board of commissioners may require a bond, in such amount and containing such conditions as may be prescribed by the board, of any or all of the members of said fire department, which bond shall be approved by the mayor.  
Sec. 4. - Condemnation of property as fire hazard. 
In condemning and destroying property as a fire hazard, the board of commissioners and McAllen shall bring the condemnation proceedings in the County Court of Hidalgo County, Texas, and shall be governed by the same rules and the same procedure as is or may hereinafter be provided for the condemnation of property by railroad companies for rights-of-way purposes.  
ARTICLE 6. - COURTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 1. - Recorder's court. 
The board of commissioners of McAllen shall have authority when they deem necessary to create and maintain a recorder's court, to prescribe the jurisdiction and terms of said court; to provide for the appointment of a judge and prosecuting attorney and as many subordinates, clerks or assistants as said board may deem necessary; to provide for the appointment of said officers; their tenure of office, their qualifications, their bonds, their salaries and compensations, their duties, their suspensions and dismissals. The judge, clerk and prosecuting attorney of said court shall have authority to administer oaths, take complaints and in general have all the authority and jurisdiction not denied by the constitution or laws of the State of Texas, whether said duties are herein especially enumerated or not.  
ARTICLE 7. - FINANCE AND TAXATION 
 
Sec. 1. - General powers and duties of board of commissioners. 
The board of commissioners shall have full power and authority to finance the city. It shall be its duty, through its officers, to levy, assess and collect all taxes necessary for the proper operation of the city government and in the levying, assessing and collecting of the taxes they shall be limited only by the Constitution of the State of Texas. The board of commissioners shall levy, assess and collect taxes on all taxable property within the above limits for the year 1927 and for the subsequent years a tax sufficient to meet all of the general and running expense of the government of McAllen and to create a sinking fund sufficient to pay off and retire all indebtedness of McAllen. At the first meeting of the board of commissioners in July of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the board shall calculate the amount of taxes necessary for that year and shall pass an ordinance levying a tax on all taxable property within McAllen, sufficient to pay the current expenses of McAllen and create an interest and sinking fund sufficient to retire the indebtedness of the city. 
State Law reference— Appraisal districts established for property appraisal for ad valorem taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 6.01.  
Sec. 2. - Delinquent taxes. 
When taxes for any one year have been returned delinquent, the board of commissioners may, in its discretion, certify the same to the city attorney, whose duty it will be, in case of real property, to bring suit in the court of proper jurisdiction for the collection of the taxes and the enforcement of the liens. In the bringing of said tax suits, the city attorney shall be governed by the same rules and regulations that are now, or may hereafter, be applicable to the bringing of suits for the collection of state and county taxes. 
State Law reference— Delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 6.30.  
Sec. 3. - Board of equalization. 
The board of commissioners shall annually at their first meeting in April, or as soon thereafter as practicable, appoint three (3) commissioners, each a qualified voter, a resident and property owner of McAllen, who shall be styled the board of equalization. At the same meeting said council shall, by ordinance, fix the time for the meeting of such board. Before said board enters its duties, it shall be sworn to faithfully and impartially discharge all duties incumbent upon it by law as such board. The board of equalization shall have such powers and be governed by the same rules and regulations prescribed by Chapter 13 of Title 28 of the Revised Statutes of the State of Texas for cities of more than five thousand (5,000) inhabitants. 
State Law reference— Appraisal review board established, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 6.41.  
Sec. 4. - Redemption of real property sold for taxes. 
All real estate sold under and by virtue of decree and judgment of court, or if otherwise provided by law for taxes due McAllen may be redeemed by the owner thereof within two (2) years from the date of said deed upon the payment to the purchaser, if purchased by an individual, or upon payment to McAllen, if purchased by the city, or his, or its assigns, of an amount equal to double the amount of taxes for which said property was sold plus an amount equal to all costs of the suit and all surplus over and above the taxes and costs with six per cent (6%) interest on said surplus and costs. The purchaser at such foreclosure sale, and his assigns, shall not be entitled to the possession of the property sold for taxes until the expiration of two (2) years from the date of deed. 
State Law reference— Tax sales and redemption, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 34.01 et seq.  
Sec. 5. - Sale of personal property for taxes. 
In case taxes on any personal property within McAllen shall become delinquent, then it shall be the duty of the tax collector to seize said personal property and after publishing notice of said sale once each week for three (3) consecutive weeks in some newspaper in McAllen, said notice giving the time and place of said sale and a brief description of the property to be sold, together with the amount of taxes against the same; shall offer the same for sale at public auction to the highest bidder for cash; said sale to be made either in front of the City Hall of McAllen, or at the place where said property is seized. 
State Law reference— Tax sales and redemption, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 34.01 et seq.  
Sec. 6. - Issuance of bonds, warrants and other certificates of indebtedness. 
In the issuance of bonds, warrants, or other certificates of indebtedness, the board of commissioners shall be governed by the general laws of the State of Texas applicable to the same.  
Sec. 7. - Depository. 
The board of commissioners, as soon after assuming their duties as practicable, shall advertise for bids of a depository for McAllen, and after each of the banks located within McAllen has had an opportunity to bid for said depository, the board of commissioners shall select one of the banks within McAllen as a depository, and shall require said bank to give a good and sufficient bond, conditioned for the faithful keeping and accounting for all monies of the city received by it, said bonds to be in the penal sum of one and one-half times the estimated amount of money that will be on deposit in said depository at any one time during said period, to be approved by the mayor, and if personal security is given to be signed by at least two (2) good and sufficient sureties, but if the same is given by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Texas, then one (1) surety is all that shall be required.  
ARTICLE 8. - BOARD OF CITY DEVELOPMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Board of development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 371.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 1. - Appointment; composition; terms of members. 
As soon after the adoption of this Charter as practicable, there shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of McAllen what shall be known and designated: The board of city development, consisting of eleven (11) members, six (6) to serve a term of two (2) years and until their successors have been appointed and qualified, and five (5) to serve a term of four (4) years and until their successors have been appointed and qualified. As soon after the appointment of said board as practicable, the members thus appointed shall draw lots for the long and short terms and thereafter there shall be appointed at intervals of every two (2) years six (6) and five (5) members, respectively.  
Sec. 2. - Annual appropriation for board. 
The board of commissioners of McAllen shall, for the year 1931 and annually thereafter, appropriate from the general fund an amount of money equal to a one mill tax on all taxable property within the City of McAllen for the support and maintenance of said board of city development, and said monies when collected shall be turned over to said board and paid out by resolution of said board. 
Amendment note—Section 2 was amended to read as above set out at an election held October 3, 1931. Prior to the amendment, the appropriation was equal to a two mill tax.  
Sec. 3. - To function as chamber of commerce. 
The board of city development herein created, when the same has been appointed, shall function as a chamber of commerce.  
ARTICLE 9. - HEALTH DEPARTMENT; HOSPITAL BOARD 
 
Sec. 1. - Establishment and composition of health department. 
There is created the health department for McAllen, which consists of a health officer together with such subordinates or assistants as the board of commissioners may deem advisable, together with such sanitary officers as the board of commissioners may deem advisable.  
Sec. 2. - Appointment, terms, compensation and duties of health officer, sanitary officer, etc. 
The health officer and the sanitary officer and their assistants, subordinates and employees shall be appointed by the board of commissioners and shall hold their offices until the term of office for which the board of commissioners appointing them has expired unless sooner removed by the board of commissioners, and shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the board of commissioners and shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by the board of commissioners.  
Sec. 3. - Hospital board—Composition; appointment and terms of members. 
The Municipal Hospital of McAllen shall be under the management and control of a hospital board consisting of three (3) or more citizens of McAllen, who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners, and who shall hold their office until the term of office for which the board of commissioners appointing them expires, unless sooner removed by the board of commissioners.  
Sec. 4. - Same—Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the hospital board to manage and control the hospital and to make quarterly reports to the City of McAllen, which report shall be filed with the city clerk [city secretary] as a public record.  
Sec. 5. - Same—Compensation. 
The hospital board shall receive for their services the sum of five dollars ($5.00) for each and every meeting they attend, not to exceed one (1) meeting in each month.  
ARTICLE 10. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 1. - Appointment and term of office; assistants. 
There shall be appointed by the board of commissioners a city attorney with as many assistants as the board of commissioners may designate and he shall hold his office until the term of office for which the board of commissioners appointing him has expired, unless sooner removed by the board of commissioners.  
Sec. 2. - Compensation. 
The board of commissioners shall from time to time fix the salary of the city attorney, and shall have a right to deduct all fees of office received by him from said salary, and shall also have the right to fix the compensation of any assistants of the city attorney.  
ARTICLE 11. - PROTECTION OF HEALTH; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES; ETC. 
 
Sec. 1. - Authority of board of commissioners. 
The board of commissioners of the City of McAllen shall have full power and authority to enact and enforce all ordinances necessary to protect health, life and property and to prevent and summarily abate and remove all nuisances and to preserve and enforce the good government, order and security of the city and its inhabitants.  
ARTICLE 12. - RESERVATION OF POWERS 
 
Sec. 1. - Generally. 
The enumeration of powers granted to McAllen shall in no manner be construed to preclude by implication or otherwise any authorities or powers incident to the enforcement of local government that are not inhibited by the Constitution of the State of Texas, and all such authorities and powers not expressly delegated by law or by this Charter to some other authority shall be exercised exclusively by the board of commissioners of McAllen.  
ARTICLE 13. - CONTINUATION OF PROPERTY RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - Property rights continued; pending suits. 
All real estate owned or held by lease, sufferance, easement or otherwise, all public buildings, market houses, school houses, fire station[s], public schools, parks, streets, alleys and all property of whatever kind, character and description, which has been granted, donated, purchased or otherwise acquired by McAllen by any means or agency, and all causes of action, choses in action, right or privileges of every kind and character, and all property of whatever character and description which may have been held, controlled and used by said City of McAllen for public use or in trust for the public, shall vest in and remain in and inure to the said corporation of McAllen under this Charter; and all suits and pending actions to which McAllen heretofore was, or now is a party, plaintiff or defendant, shall in no wise be affected or terminated by the provisions of this act, but shall continue unabated.  
Sec. 2. - Assumption of obligations. 
All obligations or liabilities of McAllen shall become and are herein expressly assumed by McAllen under this Charter.  
Sec. 3. - [Location of civic center complex.] 
Before further construction or expenditure of any funds on any civic center complex in the City of McAllen, the location for the entire civic center complex shall be decided by the voters of the City of McAllen in a binding referendum election. The two choices for the location shall be a) the current location on 10th Street and Expressway 83 or b) a location on Ware Road and Expressway 83. This provision does not prevent the City from spending funds necessary to maintain the current convention-civic center until said election has been completed. 
(Added, election 9-14-02)  
ARTICLE 14. - CONTINUATION OF EXISTING LAWS, RULES, ETC. 
 
Sec. 1. - Continued until changed by board of commissioners. 
All ordinances, laws, rules and regulations now in force in McAllen, and all penal laws of the State of Texas shall remain in full force and effect until such time as the board of commissioners shall change, alter or repeal the same.  
ARTICLE 15. - CHARTER AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 1. - Compliance with state law. 
This Charter may be amended at any time by complying with the general laws or special laws of the State of Texas applicable in such cases.  
ARTICLE 16. - ANNUAL AUDIT 
 
Sec. 1. - Appointment, duties and compensation of auditor; audit to be public record. 
There shall be appointed by the board of commissioners each year an auditor, who shall make a full and complete audit of all books and accounts of McAllen and of its departments, and shall make a complete report of said audit to the board of commissioners to be filed by it and to be open to inspection to the public as a public record, said auditor to be paid such compensation as may be fixed by the board of commissioners.  
ARTICLE 17. - SEVERABILITY 
 
Sec. 1. - Invalidity of one section or article does not affect remainder of Charter. 
A holding of any section or article of this Charter invalid by any court, or the abolishing of the same by any act of the Legislature, shall not effect the remainder of this Charter, but all of said Charter which [has] not been specifically held invalid shall remain in full force and effect.  
ARTICLE 18. - CHARTER ELECTION 
 
Sec. 1. - Date of election. 
This Charter shall be submitted to the qualified voters of McAllen, submitting the same article at a time at an election to be held on the 31st day of January, A. D. 1927.  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES Subpart A GENERAL ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of McAllen, Texas" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1966, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt a civil and criminal code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001 et seq.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the board of commissioners, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners: 
Board of commissioners. The term "board of commissioners" shall mean the governing body of the City of McAllen, as established by article 3, section 1, of the Charter. 
Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of McAllen printed as Part I of this volume. 
City. The word "city" shall mean the City of McAllen, in the County of Hidalgo and State of Texas. 
City officers. Whenever officers are referred to by title, such as city manager, city clerk, chief of police, etc., such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of McAllen, Texas." 
Code enforcement officer. The term "code enforcement officer" means an employee holding a position designated in writing by the city manager to enforce the city ordinances, and who is licensed or certified by the state for code enforcement. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be counted. 
County. The word "county" shall mean Hidalgo County, Texas. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The words "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The word "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." shall mean the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
V.T.C.A. The abbreviation "V.T.C.A." shall mean and refer to the latest edition or supplement of Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1966, § 1-3; Ord. No. 2009-03, § I, 1-26-09) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions of state law, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.011 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1966, § 1-2)  
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters or sections. 
All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling nor meant to have any legal effect.  
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
(a)  The provisions appearing in this Code so far as they are the same as those of the Code of the City of McAllen, Texas, 1966, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code.  
Sec. 1-8. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this Code shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city repealed in this chapter and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same provision. This Code shall not be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code.  
Sec. 1-9. - Effect of repeals. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance or portion of this Code shall not revive any ordinance or portion of this Code in force before or at the time the provision repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance or a portion of this Code shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the provision repealed. 
(b)  This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.  
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance. 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
(8)  Any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles, or loading zones. 
(9)  Any land use or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map. 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city. 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations. 
(15)  Any temporary or special ordinances. 
(16)  Any ordinance calling an election. 
(17)  Any ordinance authorizing street maintenance agreements. 
(18)  Any ordinance levying a fee, rate, deposit or charge. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. All ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 1966-22, § 3, 7-18-66)  
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the board of commissioners to make such additions or amendments a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of McAllen, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of McAllen, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows: …." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1966, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____." The inserted section 
numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-13. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgement or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1966, § 1-6) 
Charter reference— Severability of Charter, art. 17.  
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code, or in any ordinance of the city, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $500.00, and it is further provided that anywhere in this Code or any ordinance wherein a fine of more or less than $500.00 is provided for violation thereof, notwithstanding such designation, the maximum fine shall be $500.00 for any violation unless State law specifically provides for a required fine less than $500.00 in which case the State law fine shall be observed. Each day any violation of this code or any violation of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Whenever in this Code, or any ordinance of the city, an act is prohibited, or the doing of a specific act is required, and in the event of the committing of an act which is prohibited or the failure to correspond to an act which is required, such act or omission constitutes an offense and unlawful conduct and is hereby declared to be against the peace and dignity of the state and the city. All such violations of this Code are punishable by a fine as provided for in this section and shall be under the jurisdiction of the municipal court in and for the city. 
(Code 1966, § 1-5; Ord. No. 2005-92, § 1, 11-14-05) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of ordinances and code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001.  
Sec. 1-15. - Culpable mental state not required. 
Except as otherwise specified, a culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this Code or any ordinance of the city, or under any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to or under the authority of this Code or of any ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-55, § 1, 7-28-03)  
Sec. 1-16. - Enforcement of code violations by city code enforcement officers. 
A code enforcement officer is authorized to enforce any and all of the provisions of this Code through such means as making inspections, giving notice of violations, issuing citations and filing charges with the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § II, 1-26-09)  
Sec. 1-17. - Ordinance violation of promise to appear; penalty; court enforcement. 
(a)  A person issued a citation by a non-peace officer city employee for a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the City of McAllen shall, on or before the appearance date indicated on the citation, enter a plea to each charge indicated on the citation in accordance with chapter 34 of this Code or Article 27.14 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person fails to appear or enter a plea on or before the appearance date indicated on the non-peace officer-issued citation. A violation is a class C misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-14. 
(c)  Municipal court judges shall have the authority to issue an arrest warrant, in accordance with Article 45.014 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, to compel the attendance of a person described under subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 2009-76, § I, 11-23-09)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration of the traffic regulations, § 102-31 et seq.; administration and enforcement of the sign regulations, § 130-31 et seq.; administration of the floodplain management regulations, § 118-41 et seq.; administration of the zoning regulations, § 138-26 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - ETHICS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-68, § 1, adopted June 12, 2006, renumbered former § 2-1 as § 2-318. Said ordinance also enacted provisions designated as a new Art. I, §§ 2-1—2-5, to read as herein set out. Former Art. I was entitled, "In General." See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article pertaining to ethics is to establish ethical standards of conduct for elected and appointed board and commission members and designated employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city and by directing disclosure by public officials of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the city. The standards adopted herein are cumulative with State of Texas law, such as conflicts relating to the sale, purchase or subdivision of real property or the designation of depository banks, and Federal law dealing with the conflicts of interest and other official conduct prohibitions and restrictions and all public officials and employees of the city are expected to be familiar with such laws and comply therewith. Other areas dealing generally with the subject of ethics (i.e.: nepotism) may be found in specific policies or ordinances (i.e.: human resources policy) where the ethics subject is more germane to the specific subject matter of city operations covered by the policy or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-68, § 1, 6-12-06)  
Sec. 2-2. - Conflict of interest and disclosure requirements. 
(a)  This section is applicable to the following boards, commissions and officials: Mayor, city commission, public utility board, Hidalgo/McAllen Bridge Board, Anzalduas Bridge Board, Development Corporation of McAllen, planning and zoning commission, zoning board of adjustments, building board of adjustments and appeals, civil service commission, and all other boards or commissions as listed in section 2-76 of this Code, department heads acting in an executive position for such board or commission (hereinafter referred to as "public officials"). This section is also applicable to the public official when also applicable to a family member of the public official defined as a spouse, parent, child or sibling of the public official or the parent, child or sibling of the spouse of the public official (hereinafter referred to as "family members"). 
(b)  No public official shall participate in a discussion, deliberation or vote on any matter coming before the public official or take any action where the public official has independent approval authority, where the public official or his/her family member has a financial, business or property interest that may be effected by action on the matter. The public official is deemed to have a designated interest where the effect on the public official's interest is distinguishable from its effect on the general public. As an example for real property, the public official shall be deemed to have an interest that is distinguishable from the general public where the public official's real property is within 200 feet of the subject matter real property (i.e.: zoning or condition use permit application) or where the public official's real property is located within a specific project subject matter area. Prior to the consideration of any subject matter by the board or commission or by the individual public official, any public official having any of such interests shall disclose the same on a form to be promulgated by the city secretary. The official conflict of interest form required by Chapter 171 Local Government Code may be used for the purposes of that chapter and this subsection. 
(c)  A public official shall disclose the occurrence of any wages, compensation, distributions, gifts, gratuities and entertainment contributions received by the public official or the public official's family from any person or entity that has submitted a proposal to do business, is doing business or has done business with the city within the preceding 12-month period from the date that public official becomes aware that such person or entity proposes, is doing or has done business with the city. The term "doing business with the city" includes but is not limited to contracting for sale of goods or provision of services or construction activity, zoning and conditional use applications and real estate sales or purchases. Acceptances of items of nominal value that are clearly tokens of respect or friendship and not related to any particular transaction or activity are not subject to this disclosure requirement. The city secretary shall promulgate the disclosure forms required to be filed under this subsection and the forms required to be filed under Chapter 176 Local Government Code may be used for the purposes of that chapter and this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2006-68, § 1, 6-12-06)  
Sec. 2-3. - Employees generally. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby directed to establish and maintain a conflict of interest policy covering the outside employment of city employees that recognizes that employees owe their primary allegiance to the duties and obligations of the city and provides for the directive that employees shall avoid outside activities and conduct that cause conflicts of interests. 
(b)  The city's internal audit department is hereby directed to establish and maintain an employee fraud detection program in concurrence with the city manager's office. 
(c)  Acceptance of gifts. A city employee shall not solicit, accept, or agree to accept any gift or benefit that reasonably tends to influence official conduct or the employee knows is intended to influence the discharge of official duties. 
(d)  The prohibition of the acceptance of gifts described in subsection (c) above does not apply to: 
(1)  Token gifts. It is not improper to accept items of nominal or minor value that are clearly tokens of respect or friendship. A token gift has a monetary value of less than $50.00 dollars. 
(2)  Meals in an individual expense of $50.00 or less at any occurrence, and no more than a cumulative value of $250.00 from a single source in a single calendar year and no more than $500.00 total in a single calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2006-68, § 1, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 2018-37, § I, 6-11-18)  
Sec. 2-4. - Open meetings and open records training. 
(a)  Each member of the boards and commissions and the respective department heads listed in section 2-2(a) of this article shall complete a course of training regarding the responsibilities of the governmental body and the board members under the Open Meetings Act (Chapter 551 Texas Government Code) and the Public Information Act (Chapter 552 Texas Government Code). Each board or commission member or department head that has not completed the training as of the effective date of the adoption of this article shall complete the training within 90 days after the effective date. Training completed under the provisions of Chapters 551 and 552 [Texas Government Code] meets the training requirement hereunder. 
(b)  The City Secretary of the City of McAllen is hereby designated the Public Information Coordinator for the City of McAllen and all boards and commissions of the City of McAllen. In such capacity the city secretary as the public information coordinator shall complete the training as required under the provisions of Section 552.012 of the Texas Government Code. 
(c)  The city secretary and city attorney, within 180 days after the effective date of this act will provide training to all board and commission members and all city department heads covering the provisions of this article. All new board and commission members appointed or elected after the effective date of this article shall be given this training by the city secretary and the city attorney's office as part of their indoctrination material and presentations. 
(d)  The public information coordinator may designate a public information specialist who shall have the duty of receipt of public information requests and the coordination of responses thereto. The designation of the public information specialist shall be advertised by posting on the city's website and posting along with other statutory or regulatory required posting relating to the Open Records Act. 
(d)  A city official or employee shall not use their position to obtain official information about any person or entity for any purpose other than the performance of official duties. 
(e)  A city official or employee shall not disclose any confidential information gained by reason of their position except for a legitimate business purpose relating to city operations or functions which are in the best interests of the city. 
(f)  A city official or employee shall not utilize any city information that has not generally been made available to the public for the personal gain of the city official or employee or of any family member or business affiliate of the city official or employee or family member. 
(Ord. No. 2006-68, § 1, 6-12-06)  
Sec. 2-5. - Political campaign contribution and expenditure limitations. 
(a)  No person or political committee, other than a spouse, son, daughter or parent of the political candidate shall contribute to a candidate for election to the office of mayor or city commissioner of the City of McAllen in excess of $10,000.00 for office of mayor for any regular, runoff or special election or in excess of $5,000.00 for any commissioner office for any regular, runoff or special election. 
(b)  No person as a candidate for election to the office of mayor or city commissioner may accept a political contribution from any person or political committee, other than a spouse, son, daughter, or parent of the candidate in excess of the limits specified in paragraph (a) above. 
(c)  No person or political committee may make political expenditures or pay for political advertisings relating to an election for the mayor or a city commissioner where the total costs are in excess of the limits specified in paragraph (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 2006-68, § 1, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 2019-06, § I, 1-28-19)  
Secs. 2-6—2-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Board of commissioners, art. 3; election, art. 3, §§ 2a—7. 
Cross reference— Appeals of decision of the planning and zoning commission, § 138-29; administrative costs under the zoning chapter to be set by the board of adjustment with the concurrence and approval of the board of commissioners, § 138-44. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-26—2-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Board of commissioners meetings, art. 3, § 15. 
State Law reference— Public meetings act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-36. - Time and place of meetings. 
(a)  The regular meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held on the second and fourth Mondays of each month at 5:00 p.m. in the commission room at city hall or at such other time decided by a majority vote of the board of commissioners so long as notice is posted seventy-two (72) hours prior to the meeting as required by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.043(a). 
(b)  Special meetings of the board of commissioners may be called by the mayor or any four commissioners by notifying the city secretary of the time, date and place of such meetings, along with the agenda items to be placed on such meetings. Such notice must be given to the city secretary sufficiently in advance in order to post a notice of such meeting at least 72 hours prior to the time of such meeting, unless an emergency exists, in which case, the specific emergency purposes as required by law will be forwarded to the city secretary for preparation of the agenda item. 
(Code 1966, § 2-3; Ord. No. 1992-96, § I, 12-31-92; Ord. No. 2001-51, § 1, 8-10-01; Ord. No. 2012-45, § I, 7-9-12; Ord. No. 2013-53, § I, 7-22-13)  
Sec. 2-37. - Agenda. 
(a)  All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents or other matters to be considered by the board of commissioners shall be submitted to the city secretary and all such items, except those items requested to be considered by the mayor or any city commissioner, as applicable, shall be forwarded to the city manager's office for approval not later than five working days prior to the meeting in which the matter will be heard. The city manager shall have the authority to waive this requirement. The mayor or any commissioner or utility board member may place items on the agenda by giving the city secretary written notice concerning such item by requesting that an item be placed on the next board meeting agenda, or during a meeting of the board. The city manager shall review all other requests and determine whether or not the subject matter is such that it requires consideration by an applicable appointive advisory board, commission or department of the city. If in the city manager's opinion, a particular item should be considered by an advisory board, commission or department prior to consideration by the board of commissioners, it shall be referred to the applicable board, commission or department. The city manager shall provide that the requesting party be notified that the proposed agenda item has been transferred for preliminary considerations. 
(b)  After the applicable board, commission or department has taken appropriate action on the item as provided in subsection (a) of this section, or after four weeks have passed since the item was referred by the city manager, and the board, commission or department has not acted after such item has been placed or could have been placed on the next regular agenda of such board or commission, whichever time is later, such item shall be placed on the next board of commissioners agenda after the expiration of five days from either the board's action or the expiration of four weeks. 
(Code 1966, § 2-95(a); Ord. No. 1992-96, § II(2-95), 12-31-92)  
Sec. 2-38. - Posting of agendas. 
(a)  Notice of all meetings of the board of commissioners required to be posted under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. shall be posted at the locations listed in this section at least 72 hours prior to the scheduled time of such meeting, unless an emergency exists, in which case a notice under such circumstances as authorized under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. shall be required. The locations which are considered as being inside City Hall for the purposes of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. are as follows: 
(1)  On the bulletin board labeled "Notice of Public Meetings," which is located on the first floor southernmost wall at the southern entrance to City Hall located at 1300 Houston Avenue, McAllen, Texas. 
(2)  On the bulletin board located on the first floor southernmost wall at the southern entrance to City Hall located at 1300 Houston Avenue, McAllen, Texas. 
(b)  The city secretary shall certify that all agendas required to be posted under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. have been posted within at least 72 hours preceding the scheduled time of the meeting, unless emergency conditions dictate otherwise, by noting such certification on all such agendas. Such certifications shall be conclusive evidence that notice was posted in accordance with the provisions of this section and V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. 
(Code 1966, § 2-97)  
Sec. 2-39. - Open meetings; public participation. 
(a)  Meetings of the board of commissioners are public meetings; however, there are no provisions for public participation unless a meeting is required to be conducted as a public hearing in limited circumstances in accordance with state law and as otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  On each regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners at 5:00 p.m. or at such other time as may be designated by the city commission from time to time by minute order, the meeting of the board of commissioners shall be open for a maximum of 30 minutes to the general public for public comment with any individual desiring to speak having a limit of three minutes. The board of commissioners may not deliberate any matter brought before them during this public comment, nor may any action be taken on any matter brought before them except to place the matter on a later meeting date schedule. Such public comment shall be included as an agenda item by the city secretary. Persons desiring to speak during the 30 minute public comment session shall sign in before the time stated on the agenda for such purposes. The form for public comments shall be promulgated by the city secretary and be made available to the public at each meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1992-96, § III(2-97(a)), 12-31-92; Ord. No. 2001-51, § 2, 8-10-01; Ord. No. 2012-45, § II, 7-9-12; Ord. No. 2013-53, § II, 7-22-13)  
Sec. 2-40. - Procedures. 
(a)  The order of procedure shall follow the order of the agenda; however, the mayor, absent any objection from any commissioner, shall have the authority to vary the order of procedure in order to expedite the proceedings, provided that no person shall be denied an opportunity to address the commission on an agenda item on the day for which the item is scheduled because of a variance to the order of procedure. 
(b)  No person shall address the board of commissioners without first being recognized by the mayor. 
(c)  Any resident of the city who wishes to address the board of commissioners concerning an agenda item which is under consideration by the board may do so upon receiving recognition as specified in subsection (b) of this section. Any resident may address the board through his authorized representative. 
(d)  Any nonresidents wishing to address the board of commissioners concerning an agenda item which is then under consideration by the board shall, upon receiving recognition as specified in subsection (b) of this section, state their place of residence and their interests in the matter being considered. Nonresidents shall be allowed to address the board of commissioners if the mayor finds that they are so situated that the disposition of the agenda item may, as a practical matter, impair or impede their ability to protect that interest. Any nonresident qualified to address the commission under this section may do so through their authorized representative. 
(e)  The mayor or any commissioner may make a motion pertaining to the subject matter of such agenda. All motions, except those requiring a greater number as set out in the Charter or under state law, shall be approved upon a majority vote of the mayor and commissioners so voting thereon. 
(f)  Any posted meeting of the board of commissioners may be recessed to another time and place for the purposes of consideration and action on any items not acted on during such meeting by the announcement by the mayor during such meeting of the time, date and place at which such recessed meeting shall be continued. 
(g)  Each person addressing the board of commissioners shall give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record, state the subject he wishes to discuss, state whom he is representing if he represents an organization or other persons, and unless further time is granted by majority vote of the board of commissioners, shall limit his remarks to five minutes, excluding the time when interrupted by a member of the board of commissioners for questions or comments. All remarks shall be addressed to the board as a whole and not to any member thereof. No person, other than members of the board of commissioners, the city manager and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the board, without the permission of the presiding officer. No question may be asked a board member or a member of the city staff without the permission of the presiding officer. 
(h)  In order to expedite matters and to avoid repetitious presentations, whenever any identifiable group of persons wishes to address the board of commissioners on the same subject matter, it shall be proper for the presiding officer to request that a spokesman be chosen by the group to address the board and, in case additional matters are to be presented by any other member of such group, to limit the number of such persons addressing the board. 
(i)  After a motion has been made or a public hearing has been closed, no member of the public shall address the board of commissioners from the audience on the matter under consideration without first securing permission to do so by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 2-95(b)—(e); Ord. No. 1992-96, § III(2-97(b)—(e)), 12-31-92)  
Sec. 2-41. - Order and decorum. 
(a)  Board members. While the board of commissioners is in session, the members must observe order and decorum, and a member shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the board, nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the presiding officer. 
(b)  Employees. Members of the city staff and employees shall observe the same rules of order and decorum as are applicable to the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Persons addressing the board. Any person who willfully utters loud, threatening or abusive language, or engages in any disorderly conduct which would impede, disrupt or disturb the orderly conduct of any meeting, hearing or other proceeding, shall be called to order by the presiding officer and, if such conduct continues, may at the discretion of the presiding officer be ordered barred from further audience before the board of commissioners during that meeting. 
(d)  Members of the audience. No person in the audience shall engage in disorderly conduct such as hand clapping, stamping of feet, whistling, yelling and similar demonstrations, which conduct disturbs the peace and good order of the meeting. 
(Code 1966, § 2-95(f); Ord. No. 1992-96, § III(2-97(f)), 12-31-92)  
Sec. 2-42. - Disturbance abatement. 
(a)  Warning. All persons at the meetings of the board of commissioners shall, at the request of the presiding officer, be silent. If, after receiving a warning from the presiding officer, a person persists in disturbing the meeting, such officer may order him to remove himself from the meeting. If he does not remove himself, the presiding officer may order the sergeant-at-arms to remove him. 
(b)  Removal. The chief of police, or such member of the police department as the presiding officer may designate, shall be sergeant-at-arms of the board of commissioners meetings. The chief shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the meeting. Upon instruction of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms to remove from the meeting any person who intentionally disturbs the proceedings of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Resisting removal. It shall be unlawful for any person at a meeting of the board of commissioners to resist removal by the sergeant-at-arms. 
(d)  Motions to enforce. Any member of the board of commissioners may move to require the presiding officer to enforce the terms of this division, and the affirmative vote of a majority of the board of commissioners shall require him to do so. 
(e)  Adjournment. If any meeting of the board of commissioners is willfully disturbed by a group of persons so as to render the orderly conduct of such meeting unfeasible and when order cannot be restored by the removal of individuals who are creating the disturbance, the meeting may be adjourned and the remaining business considered at the next regular meeting. 
(Code 1966, § 2-95(g); Ord. No. 1992-96, § III(2-97(g)), 12-31-92)  
Sec. 2-43. - Use of cameras and recorders. 
Cameras, including television and motion picture cameras, electronic sound recording devices and any other mechanical, electrical or electronic recording devices may be used in a reasonable manner in the public section of the commission chamber. 
(Code 1966, § 2-95(h); Ord. No. 1992-96, § III(2-97(h)), 12-31-92)  
Sec. 2-44. - Rules of procedure. 
The city hereby adopts Robert's Rules of Order as a guide for parliamentary procedure for the conducting of board of commissioners meetings and for all meetings of the elected or appointed boards or commissions of the city. The failure to follow Robert's Rules shall not act to invalidate any action taken by the board of commissioners by motion made, seconded and voted upon. 
(Code 1966, § 2-96; Ord. No. 1992-96, § III(2-98), 12-31-92) 
Charter reference— Meetings, art. 3, § 15.  
Sec. 2-45. - Meetings of the public utility board of trustees. 
The rules and regulations set out in this division shall be applicable to the city public utility board of trustees upon the approval of this division by such board and by substituting "chairman" for the term "mayor" and "board of trustees" for the term "board of commissioners" as set out in this division. 
(Code 1966, § 2-95(i); Ord. No. 1992-96, § III(2-97(i)), 12-31-92) 
Cross reference— Public utility board of trustees, § 106-26 et seq.  
Secs. 2-46—2-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ORDINANCES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Ordinances, art. 3, § 16. 
Cross reference— Procedure for amendment of the zoning regulations, § 138-56. 
 
Sec. 2-56. - Publication of ordinances. 
Upon passage of an ordinance by the board of commissioners, the city does hereby adopt the alternate method of publication as authorized under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 52.013 wherein the method of publication shall be that the city secretary shall cause to be published the descriptive caption or title stating in summary the purpose of the ordinance and the penalty for violation thereof, in a newspaper of general circulation as that term is otherwise defined according to state statute, in and for the city. This method shall be in lieu of and as an alternate to the method as provided for in article 3, section 17 of the Charter. 
(Code 1966, § 1-7) 
State Law reference— Home rule cities option for publication of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 52.013.  
Secs. 2-57—2-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Board of city development, art. 8; hospital board, art. 9, § 3. 
Cross reference— Community development council, § 2-126 et seq.; senior citizens' advisory committee, § 2-141 et seq.; McAllen-Miller International Airport Board, § 18-36 et seq.; building board of adjustment and appeals, § 22-115; building board of adjustment and appeals, housing code appeals, § 22-247; civic center advisory board, § 30-41 et seq.; ambulance evaluation committee, § 42-91 et seq.; police human relations committee, § 62-26 et seq.; library board, § 66-31 et seq.; parks and recreation advisory board, § 74-26 et seq.; golf course advisory board, § 74-126 et seq.; traffic commission, § 102-41 et seq.; public utility board of trustees, § 106-26 et seq.; board of adjustment, § 138-41 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-76. - Purpose and applicability. 
The ordinances creating and establishing various appointive advisory boards and commissions of the city are hereby amended in order to establish uniform standards as to terms of the members thereof, length of service, length and duration of such terms, attendance requirements, and appointment procedures, on the following boards, committees and commissions; and the number of members of the board for such boards, committees and commissions is hereby designated in parenthesis adjacent to listing of such board, committee or commission: 
Airport advisory board. (14) 
Ambulance evaluation committee. (14) 
Building board of adjustment and appeals. (7) 
Civic center advisory board. (14) 
Community development council. (14) 
Revolving loan administration board. (7) 
Golf course advisory board. (7) 
Historical preservation committee. (7) 
Police human relations board. (7) 
Library advisory board. (7) 
Mayor's youth advisory council. (21) 
McAllen New Markets Fund Advisory Board. (5) 
Parks and recreation advisory board. (14) 
Planning and zoning commission. (7) 
Senior citizens advisory committee. (14) 
Traffic safety commission. (14) 
Zoning board of adjustment and appeals. (5 regular and 4 alternates) 
(Code 1966, § 2-90; Ord. No. 2001-92, § 1, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2009-17, § I, 3-9-09; Ord. No. 2010-22, § III, 4-12-10; Ord. No. 2012-24, § III, 4-9-12; Ord. No. 2013-69, § I, 8-26-13; Ord. No. 2016-24, § I, 5-9-16; Ord. No. 2016-82, § I, 11-28-16)  
Sec. 2-77. - Appointment; terms; qualifications. 
(a)  Terms of members of the boards, committees and commissions referenced in section 2-76 shall be for two years, beginning on January 1 and ending on December 31 two years thereafter; providing, however, for the purposes of the adoption of this article, the current members of the boards as of the effective date of this article whose term otherwise would have expired on December 31, 2002, or December 31, 2003, shall hereafter, if otherwise eligible, be appointed for an additional year, terminating on December 31, 2002. 
(b)  In the event of resignation or termination of membership during such two-year terms, or portion thereof, the board of commissioners shall appoint a successor to serve for the unexpired term for which appointment. 
(c)  Each city commissioner and mayor shall nominate a member or in case of boards with 14 members, two members to the applicable advisory board, commission or committee by designating such member to the city secretary, who shall place the nomination on the first meeting in January of each odd number year for, or within 30 days after any vacancy on any of such boards, the city commission vote on each nomination. The existing members shall serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified. The term "qualified" as used herein shall mean that such board members have been verified by the city secretary's office as having met the requirements of subsection (d) below, that the appointment thereof has been approved by a majority vote of city commission. 
(d)  (1)  All members of city boards, committees and commissions shall be residents of the city and qualified electors at the time of the appointment unless: 
a.  Resolution, ordinance or other law governing the creation of the board does not require residency in the city; 
b.  Members demonstrate ownership of either a business headquartered in the city or other substantial business interest in the city; and 
c.  The board of commissioners determines that it is in the best interest of the city to waive the residency requirement. 
(2)  No member shall be an employee of the city unless otherwise required by law. 
(3)  Any member who is serving on any of such advisory boards, committees or commissions who does not comply with subsections (d)(1) or (2) herein unless otherwise required by law, shall forfeit his office creating a vacancy to be filled pursuant to this section. 
(e)  Members shall be eligible to serve for three two-year terms. A partial term is not considered as a term for such purposes. It is further provided, that any member who shall have served for two three-year terms on any such board to be determined at the adoption of the ordinance codified herein shall be ineligible for an initial appointment for any two-year term hereunder. 
(f)  Any member who has served for three consecutive terms on the same advisory board, committee or commission is not eligible for reappointment until the expiration of one year after the last date of the member's service on that advisory board, committee or commission. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-91, 2-93; Ord. No. 1994-30, § I, 5-9-94; Ord. No. 1998-31, § I, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 2001-92, § 2, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2015-04, § I, 1-12-2015) 
Cross reference— Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; community development council, § 2-126 et seq.; senior citizen advisory committee, § 2-141 et seq.; economic development loan administration board, § 2-171 et seq.; McAllen-Miller International Airport Board, § 18-36 et seq.; building board of adjustment and appeals, § 22-115; building board of adjustment and appeals, housing code appeals, § 22-247; civic center advisory board, § 30-41 et seq.; ambulance evaluation committee, § 42-91 et seq.; police human relations board, § 62-26 et seq.; library board, § 66-31 et seq.; parks and recreation advisory board, § 74-26 et seq.; golf course advisory board, § 74-126 et seq.; traffic commission, § 102-41 et seq.; board of adjustment, § 138-41 et seq.  
Sec. 2-78. - Attendance requirements. 
(a)  Members of boards, committees and commissions are expected to attend all regular and special meetings during their tenure. 
(b)  A six-month attendance monitoring period shall commence with a member's first absence from a noticed regular or special meeting. 
(1)  Members failing to attend more than 50 percent of all meetings (including regular and special meetings) during the monitoring period, shall be removed from their board, committee or commission and so notified in writing by the city manager or designee. 
(2)  Members who successfully complete the monitoring period by attending more than 50 percent of the meetings noticed (regular and special) during the monitoring period shall remain subject to removal for the same aforementioned reasons after any six-month attendance monitoring period that shall commence with a member's absence from any subsequently noticed regular or special meeting. 
(c)  Subsection (b) does not apply to an absence due to the following: 
(1)  The board member's illness or injury; 
(2)  The illness of or injury to a member of the board member's immediate family; or 
(3)  The birth or adoption of the board member's child, for 90 days after the birth or adoption. 
A board member claiming provisions in subsections (c)(1) or (2) must notify the city secretary and board liaison of the absence not later than the date of the next regular meeting of the board. For an absence due to the birth or adoption of the board member's child, the board member must notify the city secretary and board liaison not later than the date of the next regular meeting after the birth or adoption. 
(d)  In the event of any such removal, the city manager or designee shall immediately notify the board of commissioners who shall then take immediate steps to fill such vacancy. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary or otherwise in this Code or any adopted bylaws, and except for the zoning board of adjustment and appeals and any other body comprised of the members of the zoning board of adjustment and appeals, a vacancy created by the removal of any member of a board, committee or commission for failure to comply with attendance requirements shall be excluded from the calculation of the total number of members for purposes of satisfying quorum requirements under this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 2-92; Ord. No. 2013-104, § I, 12-9-13; Ord. No. 2015-04, § II, 1-12-2015)  
Sec. 2-79. - Chairperson and vice-chairperson. 
At the first meeting of any such board, commission or committee after December 31st of each year, the members of the boards, committees or commissions shall elect one of such persons as chairperson and one as vice-chairperson, whose terms of office shall run until the following December 31. In the absence or disqualification of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall act in his stead. There shall be no limit on the number of terms a board, committee or commission member may serve as chairperson or vice-chairperson. The chairperson or the vice-chairperson serving in the position as chairperson where there is an even number of board, committee or commission members appointed shall only be entitled to vote at meetings in order to break a tie of such members. 
(Code 1966, § 2-94; Ord. No. 2001-92, § 3, 12-10-01)  
Sec. 2-80. - Posting of meeting agendas. 
(a)  Notice of all board, committee or commission meetings of the city which is required to be posted under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. shall be posted at the locations listed in this section at least 72 hours prior to the scheduled time of such meeting unless an emergency exists in which case a notice under such circumstances as authorized under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. shall be required. The locations which are considered as being inside city hall for the purposes of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. are as follows: 
(1)  On the bulletin boards located on the first floor southernmost wall at the southern entrance to city hall located at 1300 Houston Avenue, McAllen, Texas. 
(2)  On the bulletin board labeled "Notice of Public Meetings," which is located on the first floor southernmost wall at the southern entrance to city hall located at 1300 Houston Avenue, McAllen, Texas. 
(b)  The city secretary shall certify that all agendas required to be posted under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. have been posted within at least 72 hours preceding the scheduled time of the meeting, unless emergency conditions dictate otherwise, by noting such certification on all such agendas. Such certifications shall be conclusive evidence that notice was posted in accordance with the provisions of this section and Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-17. 
(Code 1966, § 2-97; Ord. No. 1996-2, § I, 1-8-96)  
Sec. 2-81. - Budget procedures. 
(a)  Those boards, committees or commissions which are by ordinance responsible for the preparation of a budget for the department, or part thereof, which they advise or control, shall submit their proposed budget to the city manager, as budget officer, in the manner instructed by him; and such budget thereafter shall be treated the same as any other budget submitted by any other department of the city. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to give any authority concerning the preparation of a budget to any board, committee or commission not already expressly given such board, committee or commission by ordinance. 
(c)  Henceforth, no board, committee or commission shall have authority to take its budgetary recommendations directly to the board of commissioners. All budgetary submissions shall go from the board, committee or commission having the authority to prepare a budget by ordinance to the budget officer and the budget officer shall solely be responsible for its submission to the board of commissioners. Those boards, committees and commissions not having the authority to prepare a budget by ordinance which, nevertheless, have by custom or practice overseen the preparation of a budget, shall henceforth submit such budgets to the department head of the department responsible for implementing the activities overseen by the board, committee or commission involved. 
(Code 1966, § 2-90.1)  
Sec. 2-82. - Appeal from decision; substantial evidence rule. 
(a)  Whenever, under any provision of this Code or as otherwise provided by state or federal law, any person has the right to appeal a decision issued by any city board, committee or commission and such appeal is made to the federal or state district or county court at law, then such appeal shall be tried under the provisions of the substantial evidence rule as such rule is defined in this section. 
(b)  The "substantial evidence rule" is as follows: 
When the evidence as a whole is such that reasonable minds could not have reached the conclusion that the decisionmaker must have reached in order to justify its actions, then the order must be set aside. 
(c)  The setting out of the definition of the substantial evidence rule as provided for in subsection (b) of this section shall be used as a guideline to the courts as to the meaning of the substantial evidence rule; however, deviations from the exact language as provided for in this section in the application of the substantial evidence rule shall not prevent the use of the rule in the proceedings as appealed to the courts. 
(Code 1966, § 1-8) 
Cross reference— Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; community development council, § 2-126 et seq.; senior citizen advisory committee, § 2-141 et seq.; economic development loan administration board, § 2-171 et seq.; McAllen-Miller International Airport Board, § 18-36 et seq.; building board of adjustment and appeals, § 22-115; building board of adjustment and appeals, housing code appeals, § 22-247; civic center advisory board, § 30-41 et seq.; ambulance evaluation committee, § 42-91 et seq.; police human relations board, § 62-26 et seq.; library board, § 66-31 et seq.; parks and recreation advisory board, § 74-26 et seq.; golf course advisory board, § 74-126 et seq.; traffic commission, § 102-41 et seq.; public utility board, § 106-26 et seq.; board of adjustment, § 138-41 et seq.  
Secs. 2-83—2-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Procedure for appointment and terms and qualifications of board members, § 2-77; substantial evidence rule in effect regarding appeals from decisions of boards, commissions and committees, § 2-82; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94; vegetation, ch. 110; floodplain management, § 118-26 et seq.; manufactured homes and recreational vehicles and parks, ch. 122; planning, ch. 126; comprehensive planning, § 126-26 et seq.; signs, ch. 130; subdivisions, ch. 134; the planning and zoning commission and the public utility board shall make recommendation regarding any amendments to the subdivision ordinance, § 134-3; planning and zoning commission may recommend variances from the subdivision chapter, § 134-6; zoning, ch. 138; appeals of decision of the planning and zoning commission, § 138-29; planning and zoning commission to hear all conditional use permit requests, § 138-112. 
State Law reference— Planning and zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001. 
 
Sec. 2-96. - Created; composition; appointments, etc. 
(a)  There is hereby created a city planning and zoning commission which shall function by making plans and acting as a zoning commission. 
(b)  The commission shall be composed of seven members, all of whom shall be appointed and serve pursuant to sections 2-76 through 2-86. 
(Code 1966, § 2-7(a), (b))  
Sec. 2-97. - Reports, etc. 
The planning and zoning commission shall, either at its discretion or as requested by the board of commissioners, submit reports, plans and recommendations for the orderly growth, development and welfare of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 2-7(h))  
Secs. 2-98—2-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Board of city development, art. 8. 
Cross reference— Boards, committees, commissions of the city, § 2-76 et seq.; procedure for appointment and terms and qualifications of board members, § 2-77; substantial evidence rule in effect regarding appeals from decisions of boards, commissions and committees, § 2-82. 
State Law reference— Board of development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 371.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-126. - Created; purpose; authority. 
There is hereby created a community development council for the purpose of advising the board of commissioners whenever requested to do so by the board of commissioners, on all matters related to the desirable, proper and timely development of the city. As incidental to its defined purpose as indicated in this section, the community development council may receive and review information and reports from citizens' participation groups, as well as prepare recommendations to the board of commissioners in this regard; and generally acting and serving as the official chain of communication between various citizens participation groups and the board of commissioners. It is hereby specifically stated that the community development council is to be an advisory board to the board of commissioners solely and has no administrative authority beyond that specific authority granted to it by the board of commissioners. It is hereby specifically stated that the community development council does not relate to any federal or state program directly. 
(Code 1966, § 2-78)  
Sec. 2-127. - Membership; appointments, etc. 
(a)  The community development council may consist of 23 members, including a chairman. Each of the various neighborhoods designated on the map which is on file in the city secretary's office will serve as the residence or place of business of one member. 
(b)  All members of the community development council shall be appointed and serve pursuant to sections 2-76 through 2-82. 
(c)  It is hoped that the appointment of representatives from the various neighborhood districts will allow the community development council to be broadly representative of the interests of the entire community. 
(Code 1966, § 2-79(a), (b), (h))  
Sec. 2-128. - Bylaws to be adopted. 
The community development council shall have the power to adopt bylaws for the proper conduct of its business. All such bylaws adopted by the community development council shall be subject to the approval or disapproval of the board of commissioners, and shall be promptly submitted to the board of commissioners for approval or disapproval, in whole or in part, after their passage originally or by amendment and shall become effective from and at the time of such approval by the board of commissioners acting at its next meeting following the submittal of such bylaws by the community development council. 
(Code 1966, § 2-80)  
Secs. 2-129—2-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SENIOR CITIZEN ADVISORY COMMITTEE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees, commissions of the city, § 2-76 et seq.; procedure for appointment and terms and qualifications of board members, § 2-77; substantial evidence rule in effect regarding appeals from decisions of boards, commissions and committees, § 2-82; homestead exemption for elderly persons, § 98-46 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-141. - Created; purpose; responsibility. 
(a)  There is hereby created a senior citizen advisory committee for the purposes as follows: 
(1)  Advising the board of commissioners concerning the special needs of the city's senior citizen population. 
(2)  Advising the board of commissioners concerning the operations of the senior citizen center. 
(b)  The senior citizen advisory committee shall also have the responsibility of developing programs giving advice to the board of commissioners on matters presented to it by the board of commissioners or city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 2-85)  
Sec. 2-142. - Membership; appointments, etc. 
(a)  The senior citizen advisory committee shall be composed of no more than 13 members from the city. Membership shall be composed of the representatives from the various cross sections of the city's citizens over 55 years of age. 
(b)  Members of the senior citizen advisory committee shall be appointed and serve pursuant to sections 2-76 through 2-82. 
(Code 1966, § 2-86)  
Secs. 2-143—2-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT LOAN ADMINISTRATION BOARD[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Procedure for appointment and terms and qualifications of board members, § 2-77; substantial evidence rule in effect regarding appeals from decisions of boards, commissions and committees, § 2-82. 
 
Sec. 2-171. - Created; purpose. 
There is hereby created the economic development loan administration board for the purposes as follows: 
(1)  The loan administration board (LAB) shall receive and review any and all applications and proposals for loans from the city revolving loan program from any applicant qualified under the rules and regulations approved therefor by the board of commissioners. The LAB shall select those proposals and authorize the city manager to execute any and all documentation for loans based on the criteria as set out in the rules adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(2)  The LAB may place any additional requirements on any of the applicants consistent with the rules adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  The LAB shall be responsible for the selection, approval and final decision concerning loan applications. 
(4)  Should any member of the LAB be an owner, officer or employee of any business or financial institution having any direct interest in and to the business filing of the loan application, then such LAB member shall disclose such interest and not participate in the vote concerning such loan application. 
(Code 1966, § 2-115)  
Sec. 2-172. - Memberships; appointments, etc. 
(a)  The economic development loan administration board (LAB) shall be composed of no more than seven members who shall be appointed and serve according to the provisions of sections 2-76 through 2-82. 
(b)  As soon as practical after appointment, the city manager will call an organizational meeting of the LAB and, thereafter, the LAB shall meet on an as-needed basis subject to call by the chairman of the LAB or the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 2-116)  
Secs. 2-173—2-178. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-08, § I, adopted Jan. 25, 2016, repealed div. 6, §§ 2-179—2-184 entitled "Human Relations Board", which derived from the 1966 Code, §§ 2-62—2-67. 
Cross reference— Procedure for appointment and terms and qualifications of board members, § 2-77; substantial evidence rule in effect regarding appeals from decisions of boards, commissions and committees, § 2-82; human relations, ch. 58; police human relations committee, § 62-26 et seq. 
 
Secs. 2-179—2-184. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - MAYOR'S YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 2-185. - Created; purpose; duties; advisory nature. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a mayor's youth advisory council. The purpose of the mayor's youth advisory council is to provide students an opportunity to participate in the governmental process by providing them a forum to voice their opinions and opportunities for community involvement and leadership. The council is advisory in nature only. 
(b)  The council shall generally identify problems or concerns related to youth in all walks of life within the city, and shall, upon request by the board of commissioners, provide ideas and recommendations to address such problems or concerns. In addition, the council shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Review existing services available and promote opportunities for youth; 
(2)  Stimulate awareness in the public and private sector of young people's full potential and of the importance of their contribution to the development of the city; 
(3)  Encourage and promote access by youth to all levels of government; and 
(4)  Examine, develop and promote programs that enrich the quality of life for all youth in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § II, 3-9-09)  
Sec. 2-186. - Composition; qualifications; appointment; terms. 
(a)  The council shall be composed of 21 members and one adult advisor, who is a nonvoting member. The adult advisor shall be the city manager's designee. The council shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson in accordance with section 2-79, except that the chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be elected at the first meeting in September of each year. 
(b)  The council shall be composed of one sophomore, one junior and one senior student from each of the following high schools, except as provided in subsection (b)(6) below: 
(1)  McAllen High School; 
(2)  McAllen Memorial High School; 
(3)  McAllen Rowe High School; 
(4)  Lamar Academy; 
(5)  Achieve Early College High School; and 
(6)  Non-city independent school district high schools. (Six council positions are available to be comprised of two sophomores, two juniors and two seniors). 
(c)  Each member must live within the city limits. Students are nominated by principals at their respective schools and are appointed by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  All members shall be appointed for terms commencing the first day of September through the last day in May upon high school graduation. Terms of office shall be three years for sophomores, two years for juniors and one year for seniors. In the event of a resignation or termination of membership during a member's term, a successor shall be nominated and appointed in the same manner as set forth in subsection (c) above, and the successor shall serve for the unexpired term of his predecessor. 
(e)  The composition and terms of the council members described in subsections (b), (c) and (d) shall be relaxed to the extent of allowing those members currently serving on the council on the date this division is adopted to remain on the council until they graduate from high school, move out of the city limits, resign or are terminated. This subsection shall automatically expire on the last day of May, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § II, 3-9-09)  
Sec. 2-187. - Meetings. 
(a)  Meetings will be held monthly. All members shall be subject to the attendance requirements set forth in section 2-78. 
(b)  The adult advisor shall be responsible for coordinating meeting dates, times and location and agenda. The adult advisor shall also be responsible for coordinating with the appropriate administration, department or outside speaker as necessary to meet the goals of the prepared agenda. Meeting agendas shall be posted in accordance with section 2-80. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § II, 3-9-09)  
Secs. 2-188—2-195. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Airport security police, § 18-61 et seq.; judge of the municipal court, § 34-3; director of the office of emergency management, § 38-1; fire department, § 50-26 et seq.; fire marshal, § 50-41 et seq.; library department, § 66-56 et seq.; personnel, ch. 82; officer and employee liability coverage, § 82-151 et seq.; traffic safety department, § 102-56 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-196. - Appeal from city officer or employee; substantial evidence rule. 
(a)  Whenever, under any provision of this Code or as otherwise provided by state or federal law, any person has the right to appeal a decision issued by any city employee or officer and such appeal is made to the federal or state district or county court at law, then such appeal shall be tried under the provisions of the substantial evidence rule as such rule is defined in this section. 
(b)  The "substantial evidence rule" is as follows: 
When the evidence as a whole is such that reasonable minds could not have reached the conclusion that the decisionmaker must have reached in order to justify his actions, then the order must be set aside. 
(c)  The setting out of the definition of the substantial evidence rule as provided for in subsection (b) of this section shall be used as a guideline to the courts as to the meaning of the substantial evidence rule; however, deviations from the exact language as provided for in this section in the application of the substantial evidence rule shall not prevent the use of the rule in the proceedings as appealed to the courts. 
(Code 1966, § 1-8) 
Cross reference— Permits for carnivals, circuses and mass gatherings, § 10-41 et seq.; animals, ch. 14; McAllen-Miller International Airport, § 18-26 et seq.; airport security police, § 18-61 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; building code, § 22-26 et seq.; electrical code, § 22-56 et seq.; electrical permits, § 22-91 et seq.; building board of adjustment and appeals, § 22-115; plumbing code, § 22-136 et seq.; gas code, § 22-161 et seq.; mechanical code, § 22-191 et seq.; swimming pool code, § 22-216 et seq.; housing code, § 22-241 et seq.; building board of adjustment and appeals, housing code appeals, § 22-247; unsafe building abatement code, § 22-271; cemeteries, ch. 26; civic center, ch. 30; director of emergency management, § 38-1 et seq.; permits and registration for alarm systems, § 42-41 et seq.; ambulances, § 42-76 et seq.; nuisances, § 46-26 et seq.; littering, § 46-61 et seq.; junked, wrecked, abandoned property, § 46-86 et seq.; noise, § 46-141 et seq.; oil and gas wells and pipelines, § 46-166 et seq.; fire department, § 50-26 et seq.; fire marshal, § 50-41 et seq.; public displays, § 50-111 et seq.; permits for food establishments, § 54-41 et seq.; day care centers, group day and registered family homes, § 54-66 et seq.; fumigation, § 54-91 et seq.; smoking, § 54-121 et seq.; discrimination, § 58-26 et seq.; library department, § 66-56 et seq.; parks and recreational facilities use permits, § 74-51 et seq.; restrictions and regulations regarding parks and recreation areas, § 74-76 et seq.; golf course, § 74-106 et seq.; licenses for itinerant vendors, § 78-41 et seq.; personnel, ch. 82; officer and employee liability coverage, § 82-151 et seq.; licenses for precious metal and jewelry secondhand goods dealers, § 86-41 et seq.; salvage yards and junkyards, § 86-66 et seq.; garage sales, § 86-91 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 90; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94; traffic safety department, § 102-56 et seq.; utilities, ch. 106; landscaping, § 110-26 et seq.; taxicabs, § 114-26 et seq.; transit vehicles, § 114-151 et seq.; limousines, § 114-191 et seq.; wreckers, § 114-226 et seq.; appeals from decision of the traffic safety coordinator, § 114-156; appeals from the traffic safety coordinator regarding limousine service operations, § 114-195; floodplain management regulations, § 118-26 et seq.; manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, ch. 122.  
Sec. 2-197. - Compensation. 
The compensation of all officers and employees of the city shall be as determined by the board of commissioners from time to time, subject to provisions of the Charter and to state law. 
(Code 1966, § 2-4) 
Charter reference— Officers' salaries, art. 3, § 10.  
Secs. 2-198—2-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Appeals from decision of the traffic safety coordinator, § 114-156; appeals from the traffic safety coordinator regarding limousine service operations, § 114-195. 
 
Sec. 2-211. - Office created. 
There is hereby created the office of city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 2-22)  
Sec. 2-212. - Appointment, term. 
The city manager shall be appointed by the board of commissioners for an indefinite period and shall be subject to discharge at the will of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 2-23)  
Sec. 2-213. - Residence requirements. 
The city manager may or may not be a resident of the city when appointed, but during the term of his office he shall reside in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 2-24)  
Sec. 2-214. - Administrative head of municipal government. 
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the municipal government under the direction and supervision of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 2-25)  
Sec. 2-215. - General powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the city manager shall be to: 
(1)  Devote all of his working time and attention to the affairs of the city, and be responsible to the board of commissioners for the efficient administration of its affairs. 
(2)  See that all provisions of this Code and other laws and ordinances are enforced. 
(3)  Exercise supervision and control over all departments created by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Attend all meetings of the board of commissioners with the right to take part in discussions, but having no vote; and he shall be notified of all special meetings of the board of commissioners. 
(5)  See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city and its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed and, upon knowledge of any violation thereof, to call such violation to the attention of the board of commissioners. 
(6)  Recommend to the board of commissioners the salaries to be paid each appointive officer and subordinate employee of the city. 
(7)  Recommend to the board of commissioners, in writing, from time to time, for adoption, such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(8)  Do and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Code or ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 2-26)  
Sec. 2-216. - Duties as budget officer. 
The city manager shall act as budget officer and as such shall prepare and submit to the board of commissioners, prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as much detail as practicable the estimated amounts required by months for the efficient operation of each department of the city government and the reasons for such estimated expenditures. In addition, the city manager shall make and file a budget as required by state law. 
(Code 1966, § 2-27) 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-271 et seq. 
State Law reference— Manager to serve as budget officer and general provisions relative to city budgets, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.001.  
Sec. 2-217. - Powers and duties as purchasing agent. 
(a)  The city manager or his designated representative shall act as purchasing agent for the city and shall purchase through the purchasing and contracting department as the city's centralized purchasing authority all merchandise, material and supplies needed by the city and may establish, if needed, a suitable storehouse where such supplies shall be kept and from which such supplies shall be issued as needed. He shall adopt such rules and regulations as he shall deem necessary governing requisitions and the transaction of business between himself as purchasing agent and the heads of departments, officers, and employees of the city. 
(b)  The city manager, or his designated representative as purchasing agent, through the centralized purchasing authority of the purchasing and contracting department, shall provide an opportunity for competition on city contracts for purchases, sales and services as outlined in section 2-286. 
(Code 1966, § 2-28(a), (b); Ord. No. 2008-15, § 1, 2-25-08)  
Sec. 2-218. - Reports to commissioners. 
The city manager at the request of the board of commissioners shall make a full written report as soon after the close of each month's accounts as possible, showing the operation and expenditures of each department for the preceding month, and a comparison of such monthly expenditures, by departments, with the monthly allowances made for such departments in the annual budget, and he shall keep the board of commissioners fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 2-29) 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-271 et seq.  
Sec. 2-219. - Acting manager. 
During the absence or disability of the city manager, the board of commissioners shall designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of such office. 
(Code 1966, § 2-30)  
Secs. 2-220—2-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY ATTORNEY[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Charter reference— Court, art. 6; city attorney, art. 10. 
 
Sec. 2-231. - Duties generally. 
It shall be the duty of the city attorney, or an assistant selected by him, with the approval of the board of commissioners, to prosecute all cases before the municipal court, to receive complaints, secure the issuance of process and cooperate with the judge of the municipal court and the peace officers of the city in the enforcement of this Code and other ordinances. He shall attend faithfully to the legal business of the city and represent it in all civil litigation, and advise the board of commissioners in all legal matters. 
(Code 1966, § 2-5)  
Secs. 2-232—2-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY ENGINEER 
 
Sec. 2-241. - Office created; duties generally. 
There is hereby created and established the office of city engineer. The board of commissioners shall appoint some competent engineer to such office. It shall be the duty of the city engineer to supervise the construction of all improvements made by the city, to establish grades, and confer with the superintendent of public works, the building official and other city officers in regard to the performance of their duties, and to counsel and advise them in technical matters. The city engineer shall have such further powers and duties as are prescribed by the Charter, this Code and other ordinances and laws of the state. 
(Code 1966, § 2-6)  
Secs. 2-242—2-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - HEALTH DIRECTOR[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Charter reference— Health department, art. 9; health officer, appointed, etc., art. 9, § 2; health board, art. 9, § 3. 
Cross reference— Proclamation by the health director for confinement of certain animals during rabies emergency, § 14-38; nuisances, § 46-26 et seq.; littering, § 46-61 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-251. - Office created; duties. 
(a)  The office of city health director is hereby created. The health director shall exercise the powers and perform the duties prescribed to him by state law, by the Charter and ordinances of the city. 
(b)  The city health director may delegate enforcement of this Code and V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 342 ("Local Regulation of Sanitation") to such of the employees of such departments as he may designate. 
(Code 1966, § 17-1; Ord. No. 2008-79, § I, 11-13-08)  
Secs. 2-252—2-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - INTERNAL AUDITOR AND INTERNAL AUDIT COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-261. - Office created; duties generally. 
There is hereby created and established the office of internal auditor. The number of employees authorized for such office shall be provided in the approved budget each year. The internal auditor's office shall conduct audits of various city departments and outside agency contractors in accordance with generally acceptable accounting principles and other recognized guidelines relating to internal audit functions for local governmental entities. For audit purposes, such office shall report to the city commission, McAllen Public Utility Board and the audit committee as directed; for day to day operational and employment matters, such office will be under the city manager. The audit committee shall have the authority to determine the scope of the internal auditor's investigations, including access to City of McAllen records, physical properties and personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, 2-15-06; Ord. No. 2016-16, § I, 2-22-16)  
Sec. 2-262. - Internal audit committee; creation, duties generally. 
There is hereby created and established the internal audit committee. The committee shall consist of two members appointed by the city commission and one member appointed by the McAllen Public Utility Board. Committee members may be elected officials but do not have to be. The audit committee members may also serve as the investment committee established under the city investment policy but operate under separate agendas if serving in both capacities. The investment committee will meet from time to time to receive and review the audit reports from the internal auditor. The city manager, utility manager, internal auditor and city attorney shall attend meetings of the investment committee. The investment committee will receive the internal auditor's reports and management responses, if applicable and may refer matters and make recommendations to the city commission, McAllen Public Utility Board or outside agency for consideration or action. The committee shall have no rule making or quasi-judicial authority, nor may it make or approve any contracts or expenditures of city funds. The internal audit committee shall have the authority to hire and terminate the internal auditor and be responsible for staffing levels and establishing and managing the position's and staff's compensation. The city manager and the utility manager may provide recommendations to the audit committee in regards to the staffing of the internal audit department. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, 2-15-06; Ord. No. 2016-16, § II, 2-22-16)  
Secs. 2-263—2-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[16] 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Charter reference— Finance and taxation, art. 7; annual audit, art. 16. 
Cross reference— The city manager shall act as budget officer, § 2-216; report regarding financial matters to the city commission by the city manager, § 2-218; billing procedure for the collection of solid waste, § 90-96 et seq.; taxation, ch. 98; the utility system may make joint purchases and expenditures with the other city departments, § 106-29; billing procedure for the collection of utility bills, § 106-221 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-271. - Liability of city to garnishment. 
(a)  No fund of the city shall be subject to garnishment, and the city shall not be required to answer in any garnishment proceedings. 
(b)  No property of the city shall be subject to any execution of any kind or nature. 
(Code 1966, § 2-12) 
State Law reference— Garnishment, Texas Const., art. 16, § 28.  
Sec. 2-272. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on October 1 of each year and end on September 30 following. 
(Code 1966, § 2-2) 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.05.  
Secs. 2-273—2-285. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference— The utility system may make joint purchases and expenditures with the other city departments, § 106-29. 
 
Sec. 2-286. - Bidding procedures. 
(a)  All city contracts requiring expenditures in excess of $2,500.00 and not more than $15,000.00 shall be made by the purchasing agent to the lowest responsible bidder after the receipt of informal bids. All city contracts requiring expenditures in excess of $15,000.00 and not in excess of $50,000.00 shall be made to the lowest responsible bidder after the receipt of informal written bids, or the city manager may submit such bids to the board of commissioners with his recommendation and the board of commissioners will decide which bid to accept. All city contracts requiring expenditures in excess of $50,000.00 shall be made to the lowest responsible bidder, in accordance with the provisions relating to formal bidding procedures of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 252.001 et seq. 
(b)  The procedures required in these sections relating to formal competitive bidding procedures on city contracts shall not apply to exempt procurement required by public calamity, the need for preservation of public health and safety, or to repair or replace unforeseen damage to public property, machinery or equipment as provided under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 252.001 et seq., but not otherwise, unless such requirements are otherwise waived by the board of commissioners. Contracts for purchases by the city of any real estate or rights or easements therein or professional service contracts which are otherwise regulated by the state law are not covered by the provisions of this section(s). 
(c)  All sealed bids received as a result of solicitation by the city shall be opened in public and thereafter be subject to public inspection. The city manager, after the receipt of bids under the conditions as expressed in the subsection, may reject any and all bids, and the purchasing agent shall have the right to reject any bid which is the sole bid on the project or all bids where all such bids are over the budget for such item. The purchasing agent may require the successful bidder to furnish security conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract or conditioned upon the payment of wages and compensation of all laborers employed by the contractor, subcontractor, agent or any other person, on work for which a contract is awarded, or conditioned upon both, as provided by law. 
(d)  In case of accident or other circumstances creating an emergency, the city manager, as purchasing agent, may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of repairing damages caused by such accident or avoiding such public emergency, but immediately afterwards, he shall file with the mayor a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity of such action, together with an itemized account of expenditures. 
(Code 1966, § 2-28(b), (c); Ord. No. 1994-16, § I, 3-14-94; Ord. No. 1994-64, § I, 9-15-94; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 2, 2-25-08; Ord. No. 2014-04, § I, 1-27-14)  
Sec. 2-287. - Disposal of surplus property. 
(a)  The purchasing agent with the consent of the board of commissioners may periodically sell or dispose of the city's surplus or salvage property by competitive bid, auction, or other method as provided in this division. "Salvage property" means personal property, other than items discarded as waste, that have no value for the purpose for which it was originally intended. "Surplus property" means personal property that is not salvage property and is not currently needed by the city and is not required for the city's foreseeable needs, but however has some usefulness for the purpose for which it was intended. Surplus property may be offered as a trade-in for new property of the same general type when it is in the best interest of the city. Any surplus or salvage property may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of if required by law or if not suitable for sale or if in the best interest of the city. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall publish notice of sale of salvage or surplus property not earlier than the 30th day, nor later than the tenth before the date of the sale. The purchasing agent may conduct the sale unless otherwise directed by the board of commissioners and may reject any offer for purchase that is not in the best interest of the city. The purchasing agent shall keep a record of each item of surplus or salvage property sold and the sale price of each item, which record shall be kept for the period of one year, and for such period the purchasing agent shall keep a record of each item of property destroyed or otherwise disposed of other than at sale. Proceeds of any property so sold shall be deposited into the appropriate account as required by law or ordinance of the city. The purchasing agent is hereby authorized to execute all documentation in order to convey title for any goods sold under the provisions of this section. The provision for the sale and disposition of surplus or salvage property as provided in this section shall not apply to the sale or disposition of unclaimed property held by the police department under the provisions of section 62-101 et seq. as amended, or as required under the code of criminal procedures. 
(Code 1966, § 2-28(d); Ord. No. 2014-04, § I, 1-27-14)  
Sec. 2-288. - Professional service contracts. 
All city contracts relating to professional services as defined by state law for architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, professional engineering and accounting shall be entered into according to the following procedures: 
(1)  All engineering, architectural, landscape architecture, and surveying contracts with an estimated cost of $25,000.00 or more, including all reimbursable expenses, which costs are to be estimated by the city engineer's office, shall be approved by the city commission using the following process: 
a.  The city commission shall first select the most highly qualified provider of those services on a basis of demonstrated competence and qualifications. The specific criteria relating to such qualifications shall be approved by the city commission under standard operating procedure for the procurement of professional services which shall be adopted and amended from time to time by the city commission by minute order; 
b.  The city commission shall then delegate to the city engineer the obligation to attempt to negotiate with that selected provider a contract at a fair and reasonable fee. The city engineer shall make a recommendation as to the fair and reasonable fee to the city commission for approval of the final contract; 
c.  If a satisfactory contract cannot be negotiated with the selected provider, the city commission shall: 
1.  Formally end negotiations with that provider; 
2.  Select the next most highly qualified provider; and 
3.  Attempt to negotiate a contract with that provider at a fair and reasonable fee based upon a recommendation by the city engineer. 
(2)  Except as provided by subsection (3) below, all engineering, architectural, landscape architecture and surveying contracts with an estimated cost of less than $15,000.00, including all reimbursable expenses, which costs are to be estimated by the city engineer's office, shall be awarded using the same criteria as provided in subsection (1); provided however, the city manager shall make the final determination of the demonstrated competence and qualifications of the providers arrive at such determination according to the standard operating procedures as adopted and amended by the city commission by minute order from time to time. Same procedure as it relates to the city commission for arriving at a fair and reasonable fee shall be followed by the city manager who shall have the authority to make the final decision as to the professional service contract. 
(3)  Real estate appraisal, surveying services environmental services, laboratory and analytical tests and services construction material testing, and geotechnical services for less than $5,000.00 per project, and accounting services, save and except the accounting services for the city audit, which such accounting services contract will be awarded to the provider using procedures to be established by the board of commissioners by minute order, shall be contracted on a general service provider basis for each fiscal year by advertising the qualifications for the provision of such services and entering into the contracts with the number of such service providers meeting the stated qualifications for a fair and reasonable price to be established by the city commission. Such contracts will be approved by the city commission for the fiscal year. Projects will be assigned on a rotation basis as city projects require such services, provided however, the city manager may authorize the deviation from the rotation basis for such provider, where it is in the best interest of the city as it relates to any particular project. 
(Ord. No. 2002-34, § 1, 5-31-02; Ord. No. 2014-04, § I, 1-27-14)  
Secs. 2-289—2-310. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ANNEXATION OF PROPERTY[18] 
(Code 1966, § 2-1; Ord. No. 2006-68, § 1, 6-12-06) 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-12, § I, adopted March 9, 2020, repealed art. VI, §§ 2-311—2-318 and enacted a new art. VI as set out herein. Former art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 2-1 and 2-101—2-107 of the Code of 1966 and Ord. No. 2006-68, § 1, adopted June 12, 2006. 
Charter reference— Annexation, art. 1, §§ 3, 4. 
Cross reference— Newly annexed land, § 138-143; annexations in the city, app. B. 
State Law reference— Municipal annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-311 - Annexation of property. 
Annexations of property into the corporate limits of the city shall be in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 43 or by an agreement permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 2020-12, § I, 3-9-20)  
Secs. 2-312—2-340. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PUBLIC RECORDS[19] 
Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Cross reference— Law enforcement and police records, § 62-76 et seq. 
State Law reference— Public records, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-341. - Fee for certified copy of death certificate, birth certificate, etc. 
Fees charged by the city secretary's office for certified copies of death certificates and birth certificates shall be as authorized by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 191.0045(d), plus a $1.00 preservation fee as authorized by Health and Safety Code § 191.0045(h) or, if greater, as may otherwise be authorized for a municipality, it being the intent of this section that such fees shall automatically increase as applicable with any amendment to state law providing for such fees. 
(Code 1966, § 2-10; Ord. No. 2003-65, § 1, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 2006-013, § 5, 10-9-06) 
State Law reference— Vital statistics, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 191.0045.  
Secs. 2-342—2-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
State Law reference— Records management system, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-351. - City records. 
All papers, correspondence, memoranda, accounts, reports, maps, plans, photographs, sound and video recordings, files, microfilm, magnetic or paper tapes, punch cards or other documents, regardless of physical form or characteristic, which have been or shall be created, received, filed or recorded by any city office or department or its lawful successor, or officials thereof in pursuance of all ordinances, or in the conduct, transaction or performance of any business, duty or function of public business, whether or not confidential or restricted in use, are hereby declared to be public records of the city and shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by this article, unless provided for in other codes or chapters of this Code. Library and museum materials acquired solely for reference, exhibit or display and stocks of publications shall not constitute records for purposes of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 2-120)  
Sec. 2-352. - Office of records management. 
(a)  The city secretary's office shall be the office of records management, and shall be responsible for administering records management and for citywide files management and the direction and control of the city's records disposition program. The city secretary as records manager shall report to and be responsible to the city manager. The records manager shall be responsible for providing efficient, economical and effective control over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance and use and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition. The records manager shall be responsible for formulating policies and procedures relating to the carrying out of the duties as aforesaid. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby authorized to name and appoint a specific person to be the records management officer from time to time at the discretion of the city manager, and upon so naming and appointing a specific person to be designated records management officer for the city, the city manager will cause the designation of the records management officer to be entered on the minutes of the board of commissioners and thereafter to notify the director and librarian of the state library of such designation within 30 days after the date of designation as required under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.025. 
(c)  The records management officer shall be responsible for carrying out all the requirements of Chapter 203, Management and Preservation of Records, Subchapter B, All Other Local Government Offices, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.021 et seq., which pertain to the responsibilities of the local records management officer as such requirements presently exist or as may be amended. 
(d)  All custodians of records in the city shall comply with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.022 relating to the duties and responsibilities of custodians of governmental records. To that end the city manager is hereby authorized to issue standard operating procedures to the various departments for the purposes of carrying out the policies and procedures of the city for the efficient and economic management of records and meeting the provisions of state statutes relating thereto. The records manager shall designate specific custodians of records for each department of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 2-121)  
Sec. 2-353. - Development of records retention and disposition schedules. 
(a)  Retention periods to be included in records schedules shall be submitted by the records manager to the city manager's office and the city attorney, who shall notify the records manager within ten working days of their approval or of any objection to a retention period. At the expiration of the ten-day period, if no objection has been submitted, the records schedule shall be final and shall have full force as sufficient authorization for records destruction or other action. If an objection is made, the records manager shall determine a retention period satisfactory to the city manager and to the city attorney. Copies of records retention schedules shall be submitted to the board of commissioners at least ten days prior to the next regularly scheduled board of commissioners meeting for the purposes of general review by the board of commissioners. Should any commissioner have any objection to any record retention schedule, then such commissioner shall cause the city manager to place such item on the agenda for review prior to the adoption by the records manager. 
(b)  Records retention and disposition schedules adopted under this section shall thenceforth constitute full authority to the records manager or department head to destroy, transfer, microphotograph or take other actions, and the board of commissioners hereby directs that such action be taken by the records manager or under its supervision. The records manager shall notify the state librarian of intended destruction, as required by law, but no further notice to the board of commissioners or other city office shall be required. 
(c)  Revision of retention periods shall be submitted for review to the city manager, city attorney and to the board of commissioners in the same manner as the original retention periods. 
(d)  The delineation of the records as defined in section 2-351 shall in no way amend the right of the public to have access to public records as provided for under state law nor shall the delineation of the definition of public records as provided for in this article or any other provisions relating to this article enlarge or otherwise make available to the public documents which are not disclosable under the requirements under state law. 
(e)  The records management officer for the city shall prepare and file with the director and librarian of the state a records control schedule as promulgated under this article, establishing the records retention period as required under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.042. All custodians of records in the city shall cooperate with the office of records management for the purposes of ensuring that the provisions of this article and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.041 are adhered to. 
(Code 1966, § 2-122)  
Sec. 2-354. - Preservation of permanent records. 
The records manager shall develop a procedure to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city. The records manager shall provide housing for records no longer required in the conduct of current business by any office of the city, and such records shall be promptly transferred to the records center or to the storage facilities or archives of the state library or to be destroyed, whichever is applicable, at the time such action is designated on an approved records schedule. 
(Code 1966, § 2-123)  
Sec. 2-355. - Microfilming program. 
(a)  A centralized microfilm program shall be implemented by the records manager to serve all city offices and departments. No office or department with the exception of the police department shall operate a separate microfilm program without the express consent of the city manager. Microfilm use for archival or security purposes, as provided in this section, must meet the technical standards for quality, density or resolution and definition of the American National Standards Institute (formerly the United States of America Standards Institute) as required by law. The public is hereby given identical access to records on microfilm as to which they would be entitled under law for records in any other medium. 
(b)  The records management officer is hereby directed and authorized to comply with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 204 as it presently exists or as may be amended in relationship to microfilming of city records. The city manager, along with the records management officer, is hereby authorized to promulgate standard operating procedures for the purposes of establishing the microfilming program in accordance with this section and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 204. A schedule of the specific classification of records which will be microfilmed will be prepared by the records management officer and city manager and presented to the board of commissioners for its review and approval. 
(Code 1966, § 2-124)  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages prohibited in parks and recreation areas during athletic events, § 74-77; conditional use requirement for alcoholic beverage establishments, § 138-118. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-1. - License to manufacture, sell, distribute, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distill, brew, sell or distribute any beer, liquor, wine or other alcoholic beverage, or otherwise engage in any activity for which a license or permit is required by the state alcoholic beverage code within the city unless he has a current and unrevoked license issued by the city. The annual fee for such license shall be in an amount equal to one-half the amount of the license or permit fee imposed by the state to engage in a similar activity. 
(Code 1966, § 4-1)  
Sec. 6-2. - Sale near church, school or hospital prohibited. 
(a)  Except as may otherwise be specifically provided in this Code, no beer or other alcoholic beverage manufactured in whole or in part by the means of the process of distillation, or liquor composed or compounded in part of distilled spirits, shall be sold within the city by any dealer where the place of business of such dealer is within 300 feet of any church, public or private school or public hospital. The measurements shall be as provided in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33. 
(b)  Except as may otherwise be specifically provided in this Code, permit or license holders under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code chs. 25, 28, 32, 69, or 74 may not sell any alcoholic beverage within 300 feet of any day-care centers and child-care facilities as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 42.002, except for those who hold a food and beverage certificate. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) or (b), a premises for which a dealer applies for or holds an alcoholic beverage permit that authorizes off-premises consumption only or authorizes on-premises consumption but would not be considered a bar or similar establishment requiring a conditional use permit under the provisions of subsection 113-118(a)(4) of the Code of Ordinances may be established, located, sold, leased, transferred or expanded notwithstanding that it is within 300 feet of a church; provided, that such alcohol beverage permitted premises is or will be located in a C-3, C-4 or industrial zoned district of the city. 
(d)  The limitations of this section do not apply to the Entertainment and Cultural Overlay District ("ECOD") created under section 138-333 of this Code. 
(e)  The board of commissioners may grant variances to the limitations of this section whenever it determines that enforcement of the regulation in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on an applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason which, after consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, it determines is in the best interest of the community. 
(Code 1966, § 4-2; Ord. No. 2004-42, § 1, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 2008-30, § 1, 4-28-08) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 138; supplementary zoning district regulations, § 138-346 et seq.  
Sec. 6-3. - Sale, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages during extended hours. 
(a)  It shall be lawful for the holder of a mixed beverage permit within the corporate limits of the city to acquire a mixed beverage late hours permit and under such mixed beverage late hours permit sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages during the extended hours allowed by the state alcoholic beverage code. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to consume or possess with intent to consume an alcoholic beverage in a public place at any time on Sunday between 1:15 a.m. and 12:00 noon or on any other day between 12:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., provided, however, it shall not be unlawful for a person to consume or possess with intent to consume an alcoholic beverage if such alcoholic beverage is within the confines and limits of the premises on which a mixed beverage late hours permit has been issued during the extended hours granted by subsection (a). 
(c)  A violation of subsection (b) is punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(d)  The penalty provided for in subsection (c) should not be construed as exclusive, and the city hereby provides that any other remedy available to it in the enforcement of this section, in law or in equity, is not intended to be, is not to be, and is not foreclosed by the provision of such penalty. 
(Code 1966, § 4-4)  
Sec. 6-4. - McAllen Nature Center; alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a)  The property previously known as the Valley Botanical Gardens or McAllen Botanical Gardens, shall be known and referred to as the McAllen Nature Center. 
(b)  No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverages in the McAllen Nature Center at any time. 
(Code 1966, § 21-7; Ord. No. 2016-06, § II, 1-25-16) 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation areas, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94.  
Sec. 6-5. - Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in the Central Business District (CBD). 
(a)  The CBD is defined as that area of the city lying within the boundaries of Business 83, Houston Avenue, 18th (Bicentennial) and Tenth Street. 
(b)  Open container means a container that is no longer sealed which contains an alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  Pedestrian shall mean any person standing, walking, or traversing any public roadway, park, sidewalk or alley, including public and private parking lots located within the CBD. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage or to consume an alcoholic beverage in the CBD. 
(e)  This section does not prohibit the legal possession of an open container or the consumption of alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles, buildings not owned or controlled by the city, residential structures or licensed premises located within the CBD, or anywhere within the Entertainment and Cultural Overlay District established under chapter 138 of this Code, whenever city manager or designee has issued a special events permit allowing the sale of alcoholic beverages, the possession by pedestrians of open containers of alcoholic beverages, or the consumption of alcoholic beverages at any location specified in said permit, which shall be made subject to such reasonable conditions and requirements as are deemed necessary and proper to maintain the health, safety and welfare of persons within and in the vicinity of the specified locations. 
(Ord. No. 1996-73, § I, 11-25-96; Ord. No. 2009-04, § I, 1-26-09)  
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES AND MASS GATHERINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Mass gatherings, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 751.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-26. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all carnivals, circuses, and to any other organized event or meeting, the majority of which is to be conducted outdoors and where over 2,000 people are expected to attend. The provisions of this article shall not apply to public property, to regularly scheduled sporting events conducted by local secondary schools or colleges, or to retail shopping establishments serving customers in the normal course of business. 
(Code 1966, § 25-16)  
Sec. 10-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Carnival means an organized activity involving any amusement rides, games or other festivities. 
Circus means an organized entertainment activity using any trained animals, acrobats or clowns. 
Mass gathering means an organized gathering of people within the city limits which attracts or is expected to attract more than 2,000 people who will remain at the meeting location for more than two continuous hours and the majority of the activities will be conducted outdoors. 
Promote means to organize, manage, finance or hold. 
Promoter means a person who organizes, manages, finances, holds or promotes a carnival, circus, street event or mass gathering. 
Street event means any activity which occurs upon a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or public property that will affect the ordinary use of public streets, rights-of-way or sidewalks. This includes, but is not limited to, public assemblies, fairs, festivals, athletic events, neighborhood events, parades and block parties. 
(Code 1966, § 25-17; Ord. No. 2018-39, § 1, 6-25-18) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Secs. 10-28—10-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-39, § 1, adopted June 25, 2018, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 10-41—10-49, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1966, § 25-26—25-32; and Ord. No. 2017-56, § I, adopted Sept. 25, 2017. 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
Sec. 10-41. - Required. 
A person may not promote a carnival, circus, street event or mass gathering within the city limits without a permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-39, § 1, 6-25-18)  
Sec. 10-42. - Application procedure for street event. 
(a)  At least 45 days before the date on which street event will be held, the promoter shall file a permit application with the city secretary's office. 
(b)  The application must include: 
(1)  Names and address of a contact person; 
(2)  Purpose and description of the event; 
(3)  A description of any proposed vendors or sales; 
(4)  A proposal of the utilization of any tents or structures; 
(5)  The event's start and end time; 
(6)  A traffic plan of the route to be traveled or utilized; 
(7)  Payment of the application fee of $20.00; and 
(8)  Proof of liability insurance or a waiver excluding the City of McAllen from any liability. 
(Ord. No. 2018-39, § 1, 6-25-18)  
Sec. 10-43. - Application procedure for a carnival, circus, or mass gathering. 
(a)  At least 45 days before the date on which a carnival, circus or mass gathering will be held, the promoter shall file a permit application with the city secretary's office. 
(b)  The application must include: 
(1)  Any and all promoters' names and addresses; 
(2)  The name and address of the owner of the property on which the carnival, circus or mass gathering will be held; 
(3)  A certified copy of the agreement between the promoter and the property owner; 
(4)  The location and description of the property on which the carnival, circus or mass gathering will be held; 
(5)  The dates and times that the carnival, circus or mass gathering will be held; 
(6)  The maximum number of people the promoter will allow to attend the carnival, circus or mass gathering and the plan the promoter intends to use to limit attendance to that number; 
(7)  The name and address of the owner of any carnival or circus and the name and address of any performer at a mass gathering; 
(8)  A description of each step the promoter has taken or will take to ensure that minimum standards of sanitation and health will be maintained during the carnival, circus or mass gathering; 
(9)  A description of each step the promoter has taken or will take to ensure that hazards of fire and smoke will be kept to a minimum and plans for orderly dispersement of people in the event of a fire; 
(10)  A description of all preparations being made to provide traffic control, to ensure that the carnival, circus or mass gathering will be conducted in an orderly manner and to protect the physical safety of the people who attend the carnival, circus or mass gathering; 
(11)  A description of the preparations made to provide adequate medical and nursing care; 
(12)  A description of the preparations made to supervise minors who may attend the carnival, circus or mass gathering; 
(13)  Payment of the appropriate permit application fee of $250.00, plus an agreement to pay any additional cost to the city due to the conducting of the event by the applicant; and 
(14)  A certificate of liability insurance in accordance with the specifications as applicable and on file with the risk management officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-39, § 1, 6-25-18)  
Sec. 10-44. - Application review. 
(a)  After a permit application is filed with the city secretary's office, the city secretary shall send a copy of the application to the city health authority, fire chief, police chief and traffic safety officer. 
(b)  Each city personnel described in subsection (a) of this section shall review the application and investigate the preparations being made concerning public safety and welfare. Each city personnel designated in subsection (a) shall submit to the city secretary a written report stating whether the department believes that the minimum standards of public safety and welfare prescribed by state and local law will be maintained and the amount of additional costs, if any, incurred by each department due to the carnival, circus, street event or mass gathering. 
(c)  The city secretary, upon receipt of all reports from the city departments set out in subsection (a) of this section, shall immediately forward such reports to the city manager. 
(d)  The city manager may deny the permit based upon findings as set out in section 10-45. The city manager may grant the permit if he finds that the requirements of the permit application have been met. The city manager may conditionally approve the permit requiring additional precautionary measures and preparations be made by the promoter to provide that adequate protection of public safety and welfare will occur, and he may condition permit approval upon payment by the promoter of the additional costs incurred by city departments due to the carnival, circus, street event or mass gathering. 
(Ord. No. 2018-39, § 1, 6-25-18)  
Sec. 10-45. - Grounds for denial of permit. 
After completion of the investigation and reports required by section 10-44, the city manager may deny the permit if he finds that: 
(1)  The application contains false or misleading information or omits required information; 
(2)  The location selected for the carnival, circus, street event or mass gathering is inadequate for the purpose for which it will be used; 
(3)  The promoter has not made adequate preparations to limit the number of persons attending the carnival, circus or mass gathering or to provide adequate supervision for minors attending the carnival, circus or mass gathering; 
(4)  The promoter does not have assurance that scheduled performers will appear; 
(5)  The preparations for the carnival, circus or mass gathering will not ensure that minimum standards of sanitation and health will be maintained; 
(6)  The preparations for the carnival, circus or mass gathering will not provide that the event will be conducted in an orderly manner and that the physical safety of persons attending will be protected; 
(7)  Adequate arrangements for traffic control have not been provided; 
(8)  The preparations for the carnival, circus or mass gathering will not provide that fire and smoke hazards will be kept to a minimum; 
(9)  The preparations for orderly dispersement of people from the carnival, circus or mass gathering in the event of fire are inadequate; 
(10)  Adequate medical and nursing care will not be available; or 
(11)  Any other basis related to public safety and welfare of either the people attending the carnival, circus, street event or mass gathering or any other citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-39, § 1, 6-25-18)  
Sec. 10-46. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city manager may revoke a permit issued under this article if the city manager finds that preparations for the carnival, circus, street event or mass gathering will not be completed by the time the event will be begun or that the permit was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation. 
(b)  The city manager shall give written notice to the promoter that the permit will be revoked by delivery of such notice to the address provided by the promoter in the application. 
(Ord. No. 2018-39, § 1, 6-25-18)  
Sec. 10-47. - Appeals. 
(a)  A promoter or a person affected by the action of the city manager in granting, denying or revoking a permit may appeal that action to the board of commissioners. 
(b)  A promoter or a person affected by any action of the board of commissioners in granting or denying a permit as set out in subsection (a) of this section may appeal that action to a state district court having jurisdiction in the county. 
(c)  Any action of the board of commissioners which is appealed to a state district court in the county pursuant to this section shall be reviewed by such court pursuant to the substantial evidence rule. 
(Ord. No. 2018-39, § 1, 6-25-18)  
Sec. 10-48. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if a person promotes a carnival, circus, street event or mass gathering without possessing a permit pursuant to this article or, after having received a permit, fails to perform any of the preparations or conditions set out in section 10-42 or 10-43 of this article. 
(b)  An offense under this article is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-14. 
(c)  Any violation of any provision of this article may be enforced by issuance of injunctive relief from a state district court with jurisdiction in the county. 
(Ord. No. 2018-39, § 1, 6-25-18)  
Sec. 10-49. - City-sponsored event vendor permit. 
(a)  No person, business, or organization shall vend, peddle, sell, promote services or events, or display goods, wares, merchandise, produce, or other articles at a city-sponsored event without a permit. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, a city-sponsored event shall mean any parade, including but not limited to a holiday parade or Fourth of July parade, or mass gathering that is primarily organized by the City of McAllen. 
(c)  At least 14 days before the date on which a city-sponsored special event will be held, any person, business, or organization seeking to vend, peddle, sell, promote services or events, or display goods, wares, merchandise, produce, or other articles shall apply for a city-sponsored special event permit. 
(d)  The number of permits issued per city-sponsored event and the conditions attached thereto shall be determined by the city manager or designee. 
(e)  City-sponsored special event permit holders must comply with all McAllen ordinances as well as any conditions of the permit, including but not limited to geographic restrictions, density requirements, and health regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-39, § 1, 6-25-18)  
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
State Law reference— Animal health and safety, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Altered means spayed or neutered. 
Cat means either a male or female of the feline species, whether altered or not. 
Confine means to restrict or secure an untethered animal to a building, structure or other enclosure from which reasonably it cannot escape. 
Dog means either a male or female of the canine species, whether altered or not. 
Designee means, when with reference to the chief of police, any person or entity authorized to exercise any authority assigned to the chief of police under this [chapter/article], which may include any regional entity and any veterinarian. 
Dog means either a male or female of the canine species, whether altered or not. 
Feral animal means an animal that is wild, untamed, or has no ascertainable owner. It shall be rebuttably presumed that a cat or dog not bearing a current license tag as required by section [14-51] has no ascertainable owner and is a feral cat or dog. 
Intact means not spayed or neutered. 
Kennel means any permanent or temporary enclosure erected or suitable for the purpose of confining a dog, including premises owned or leased by the owner or a person consenting to the dog's presence therein. 
Owner means any person owning, harboring or in any way keeping an animal within the limits of the city. 
Owner's premises means any lot, tract or parcel of land, whether or not under common ownership, including all buildings thereon and appurtenances, which are owned or leased by an owner, as well as any vehicle, travel trailer, or motor home owned or leased by an owner. 
Pet means any domestic animal kept for any reason other than utility. Wild animals are not pets. 
Pet shop means any place where pets are sheltered, enclosed or grouped for wholesale or retail sale. 
Run at large means to be free of physical restraint beyond the boundaries of the owner's premises. When controlled by a leash held by a competent person a dog shall not be deemed to be running at large. Fixed length leashes shall not exceed 12 feet in length. Retractable leashes shall be lockable at six feet and shall not exceed 25 feet in total length. A dog that is free of physical restraints within the confines of an animal park and in compliance with park regulations shall not be deemed to be running at large. 
Stray is an animal running at large and without an ascertainable owner. It is a rebuttable presumption that a cat or dog without a current license tag as required by under division 2 hereof has no ascertainable owner. 
Wild animal means any mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl which commonly exists in a natural unconfined state and is usually not domesticated, and any animal of a species that is wild by nature and dangerous to human beings, and specifically including, without limitation or intention to be exhaustive: lions, tigers, panthers, bears, wolves, non-human primates, elephants, all forms of poisonous reptiles and snakes of a constricting type. 
(Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, 4-26-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, adopted Apr. 26, 2010, deleted the former § 14-1, and enacted a new § 14-1 as set out herein. The former § 14-1 pertained to enforcement of chapter and derived from the Code of 1966, § 5-1; Ord. No. 1992-54, § I, 6-8-92; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 1, 6-28-04.  
Sec. 14-2. - Keeping of hogs prohibited; permitted exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any hogs, swine, or pigs within the city limits at any time. 
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence the keeping or maintaining of domesticated miniature pigs commonly referred to as miniature vietnamese, chinese or oriental-pot bellied pigs (sus serafa bittotus) is allowed subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Such pigs shall not exceed a maximum height of 24 inches at the shoulder or weigh more than 200 pounds. 
(2)  No more than one such pig may be kept on any one parcel or tract of land and only in residentially or agriculturally zoned districts. A pigpen utilized to house such pig shall not be less than 15 feet from the resident side yard property line of any single-family residential lot nor shall it be less than 15 feet from any residence or building adjacent to such lot not owned by the owner of the pig. A minimum of 100 square feet of area shall be required for outdoor use by the pot bellied pig. 
(3)  No such pig shall be allowed to run at large and at anytime when not constrained to the yard of the owner, such pig shall be on a leash not to exceed six foot in length. 
(4)  The premises where any such pigs are kept shall be kept clean and free of all offensive odors, flies, rodents or other pests. Droppings shall be placed in the suitable container and disposed of on a regular basis. 
(5)  No such pigs may be bred within the city limits. In the event a pig becomes pregnant, such pig must be taken outside of the city limits in order to rear the piglets. All of such pigs must be spayed or neutered as applicable. 
(6)  All of such pigs must have their tusks surgically removed. 
(7)  All of such pigs must be vaccinated against communicable diseases, within the species. 
(8)  All such pigs must be licensed by the chief of police on the payment of an annual license fee to be set by the board of commissioners by minute order from time to time. In order to obtain a license for any such pig, the owner of the pig must present the following: 
a.  Proof that the pig is neutered and that the tusks have been removed; 
b.  The address and property description where the pig will be kept; and, 
c.  Immunization records as required. 
It should be unlawful for any owner of any such pig to violate the provisions of this section or not provide for any requirement as set out herein. Any violation shall be subject to a fine in municipal court not to exceed the maximum fine as set out under section 1-14, General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations. 
(9)  Any pig that is running at large or is found to be in violation of this section or any other ordinance of the City of McAllen may be seized by animal control officer and impounded at the Humane Society Animal Shelter. Any animal control officer so seizing such pig shall use reasonable efforts to notify the owner that such pig has been seized and turned over to animal control shelter along with notification of the specific violations of this section. The animal control shelter may dispose of the pig in accordance with the procedures therefore as established from time to time by the Humane Society Animal Shelter. 
(Code 1966, § 5-2; Ord. No. 1999-31, § 1, 3-22-99; Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 4-12-99; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 1, 6-28-04) 
Cross reference— Supplementary district regulations, § 138-346 et seq.  
Sec. 14-3. - Poisonous, dangerous animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any poisonous reptile or dangerous animal within the city. 
(Code 1966, § 5-3) 
Cross reference— Supplementary district regulations, § 138-346 et seq.  
Sec. 14-4. - Keeping livestock near buildings; area requirements for livestock. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed, breed, stable, pasture or keep any cow, goat, horse, sheep or any other animal of like species in or on any lot, pen, building, parcel of land, stable, or other enclosure in the city, any part of which lot, pen, building, stable, parcel of land or other enclosure is nearer than 200 feet to any building occupied by any person during any part of the day or night. A minimum of 400 square feet of area shall be required for each such animal. 
(Code 1966, § 5-4)  
Sec. 14-5. - Poultry and fowl prohibited; exception; violation. 
(a)  Prohibition; exception. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, maintain or permit the presence on any lot or parcel of land within the city of any poultry or fowl, except that no more than six such birds per acre are allowed on any lot or parcel of land, provided the requirements and conditions of this section and section 14-8 are complied with. 
(b)  Sanitary requirements. Each place in the city used for feeding, harboring or keeping any poultry or fowl shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times and kept free of offensive odors, flies, rodents and other pests. 
(c)  Declaration of nuisance; complaint; violation; penalty. It shall be unlawful to keep any poultry or fowl in the city which by loud, frequent or habitual crowing or any other noise annoyance from such animal shall disturb the peace and quiet of any person of ordinary sensitivities. If the chief of police has cause to believe that a nuisance described in this subsection exists, the chief of police shall so find and shall notify the bird's owner in writing of the finding by personal service. In the alternative, service may be by certified mail and by posting on the animal owner's property, in which case service of shall be deemed completed upon mailing. The notice shall advise that failure to abate the nuisance may lead to impoundment of the birds under section 14-9, and the right, within five days after service of the notice, to personally serve upon the chief of police or any police officer a written request for a hearing before the municipal court to contest the nuisance finding and/or impoundment, whereupon a hearing shall be held within five business days thereafter and a determination made as to whether such loud, frequent or habitual crowing or other noise annoyed the peace of such person, and if so, the court may thereupon declare such poultry or fowl to be a nuisance and order the owner or keeper therefrom to remove such poultry or fowl from the city limits, or the birds impounded for destruction. The failure to obey the order of the municipal court under this section shall constitute a class "C" misdemeanor. In addition to such remedy as provided in this section, should there be a conviction for any other violation of this section, the party convicted shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 5-5; Ord. No. 2007-30, § 1, 4-9-07) 
Cross reference— Supplementary district regulations, § 138-346.  
Sec. 14-6. - Maintenance of premises where livestock kept; disposal of manure. 
Each place in the city used for feeding, breeding, stabling, pasturing or keeping any cow, goat, horse, sheep or any other animal of like species shall be kept free of offensive odors, flies, rodents and other pests. Each lot, pen, building, stable or other enclosure in or on which any such animal is kept, fed, bred, stabled, pastured or housed shall have a suitable manure box or container in which all manure and droppings shall be placed daily. Each such box or container shall be securely screened or otherwise protected from flies, vermin and rodents, and shall be cleaned out and disinfected at least once a week. Manure from such boxes or containers shall not be left in open stacks but shall be removed or buried. 
(Code 1966, § 5-6) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 46-26 et seq.  
Sec. 14-7. - Inspection of premises where kept. 
Each person owning or keeping animals, including poultry or fowl within the corporate limits of the city shall, upon request of the chief of police, after proper identification and during reasonable times, permit access to the area or places of keeping of animals for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. Should the chief of police be denied entry, he then shall make application for a search warrant to enter the premises, such warrant to be issued by the municipal court judge of the city upon proper application therefor. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 1, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 2007-30, § 1, 4-9-07)  
Sec. 14-8. - Running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any animal owned or possessed by him or under his control to run at large or to wander in or upon or invade the premises of any other person without such person's consent, within the corporate limits of the city. The chief of police or departmental designee is hereby granted the authority to pick up and cause to be impounded any dog or cat found running at large in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 5-8; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 1, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 2007-30, § 1, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, 4-26-10; Ord. No. 2020-34, § I, 7-13-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, adopted Apr. 26, 2010, changed the title of § 14-8, from running at large, poultry, fowl or livestock to running at large.  
Sec. 14-9. - Impoundment of animals. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police or departmental designee, and in compliance with any procedural requirements in this chapter, to seize and deliver to the Palm Valley Animal Center any and all animals, including livestock, poultry or fowl, dogs or cats, found in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Subject to any limitation or requirement in this chapter to the contrary, and provided the chief of police consents, the owner of any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter may claim such animal after paying any applicable impoundment fee to the Palm Valley Animal Center and otherwise following their rules and regulations. 
(c)  No impounded cat or dog shall be released unless proof is presented showing the animal is in compliance with this chapter's vaccination and licensing requirements. 
(d)  Whenever an owner has had two prior impoundments of any animal it shall be a condition of the release of any subsequently impounded animal owned by that person that such animals shall be altered. 
(Code 1966, § 5-9; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 1, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 2007-30, § 1, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, 4-26-10)  
Sec. 14-10. - Confinement of animals suspected of having rabies, etc. 
(a)  Any person who knows of an animal bite or scratch to an individual that the person could reasonably foresee as being capable of transmitting rabies, or who knows of an animal that the person suspects as rabid, shall report the incident or animal to the chief of police. The report to be given under this section shall contain the name and address of the victim and of the animal's owner if known, and other information that may help in locating the victim or animal. In addition, upon written complaint of any person that any kind of animal has bitten any person or other animal, the owner of such animal, if known, shall be notified by the chief of police, by the most expedient means available, which notification shall be documented in writing, and shall be ordered to properly confine such animal for a period of not less than ten days from the date of such attack. The term "properly confine" shall be construed to include confinement in an animal hospital or humane society animal shelter under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian, who shall notify the chief of police by telephone the same day such animal is received and further notify the chief of police by telephone immediately upon the development of any symptoms suspicious of rabies. 
(b)  In no event shall any animal which is the subject of this section be allowed to remain at the owner's home unless a written evaluation by a licensed veterinarian, establishing the animal's safety, is submitted to the chief of police. 
(Code 1966, § 5-10; Ord. No. 1992-54, § II, 6-8-92; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 1, 6-28-04) 
State Law reference— Rabies control, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq.  
Sec. 14-11. - Disposal of rabid animals. 
Any animal that dies of, or is killed while suffering from, or suspected of suffering from rabies, is hereby declared a nuisance, and shall be impounded forthwith and held for such disposition of the body, and under such conditions, as the chief of police may prescribe. 
(Code 1966, § 5-11; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 1, 6-28-04) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 46; health and sanitation, ch. 54.  
Sec. 14-12. - Exemption for agricultural-open space. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this Code, the following sections of this chapter shall not be applicable to any land zoned agricultural-open space designation according to the zoning ordinance of the city, provided that this exemption shall not apply within 300 feet of any residence or residentially zoned district: 
(1)  [Reserved.] 
(2)  Section 14-4, Keeping livestock near buildings; area requirements for livestock; 
(3)  Section 14-5, Area and sanitary requirements for poultry or fowl; 
(4)  Section 14-6, Maintenance of premises where livestock kept. 
Provided, however, that no person owning property under which the foregoing sections are inapplicable shall utilize such property for the purposes of keeping animals thereon where such utilization shall cause or constitute a nuisance. 
(Code 1966, § 5-12; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1, 1-28-02; Ord. No. 2007-30, § 1, 4-9-07) 
Cross reference— Agricultural and open space district, § 138-161 et seq.  
Sec. 14-13. - Unlawful to harbor, feed or care for animals on city property. 
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to regularly or routinely harbor, feed, care for or provide any form of sustenance to a cat or dog on city property or right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, 4-26-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, adopted Apr. 26, 2010, deleted the former § 14-13, and enacted a new § 14-13 as set out herein. The former § 14-13 pertained to animal fighting and derived from the Code of 1966, § 5-61.  
Sec. 14-14. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any different provision in this chapter otherwise, any person found guilty of the violation of any provision of this chapter involving a pet, shall be punished with a minimum fine as follows, but not more than $500.00: 
First violation involving an altered animal .....$50.00 
First violation involving an intact animal .....100.00 
Second violation involving an altered animal .....100.00 
Second violation involving an intact animal .....200.00 
Violations after second involving an altered animal .....200.00 
Violations after second involving an intact animal .....400.00 
(b)  In addition to the fine specified in subsection (a) hereof, the municipal court shall sentence owners, at their own cost, to complete a responsible owner course every time they are found guilty after a first violation. 
(c)  In the event the municipal judge allows community service in lieu of or in addition to the imposition of a fine, whenever possible such community service shall be served at an animal shelter or similar institution. 
(d)  Prior to sentencing in the case the owner of an intact animal is found guilty of or pleads no contest to a violation of a provision in this chapter, if the defendant represents that the animal will be altered, the municipal court may reset the sentencing, but only once and for no more than 60 days, for the purpose of allowing the defendant to present sufficient proof that the animal was altered after the finding of guilt or entry of the plea of no contest. Upon presentation of such proof the fines imposed pursuant to this section shall be reduced by one-half. 
(Ord. No. 1992-54, § III, 6-8-92; Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, 4-26-10)  
Sec. 14-15. - Regulation of sale of animals and poultry or fowl; sale of pets; pet shop license required; prohibitions; application; fees; inspections; requirements; revocation; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or display for purposes of sale, any animal, including poultry or fowl in, on or adjacent to any public roadway, unimproved parcel of land or in any public or private parking lot, or at any open-air or enclosed flea market, farmer's market, or similar operations where stalls are rented on a temporary basis. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a pet shop without a license. Application for a pet shop license shall be on a form prescribed by the chief of police or departmental designee, provide such information as shall be require, and specify the number and type of animals to be maintained. It shall be unlawful to maintain more animals or types of animals than allowed by such license. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to sell or to allow the sale of pets in flea markets, or on a roadside or any other outdoor or unenclosed location. No pet shop license shall be issued for the sale of pets in flea markets, or on a roadside or any other outdoor or unenclosed location. 
(d)  It shall be a condition of the issuance of pet shop permits that the licensee agree to the inspections provided for in this section. The application fee shall be $100.00. Pet shop licenses shall be annually renewable. 
(e)  Pet shop premises shall be inspected by the chief of police or departmental designee prior to the issuance of any license, and the same shall be subject to random inspections as well as to inspections based on complaints. 
(f)  Pet shops shall be kept and maintained in a clean manner, free from odors detectable at or near neighboring property. 
(g)  Pet shops shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with this ordinance and all applicable state law regulating pet shops and/or the sale of pets, as the same may hereafter be amended from time to time. 
(h)  Pet shop licenses are subject to revocation by the chief of police or departmental designee, for failure to operate the same in accordance with this ordinance and all applicable state laws. 
(i)  Excepted from the provisions of subsection (a) hereof is the sale of the offspring of an owner's pet, provided the sale takes place on the premises where the owner's pet resides, and there is compliance with any other applicable ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1994-29, § I, 5-9-94; Ord. No. 2007-30, § 1, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, 4-26-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, adopted Apr. 26, 2010, changed the title of § 14-15 from regulation of sale of animals and poultry or fowl to regulation of sale of animals and poultry or fowl; sale of pets; pet shop license required; prohibitions; application; fees; inspections; requirements; revocation; exceptions.  
Sec. 14-16. - Cruelty to animals prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for anyone to beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. 
(b)  It is unlawful for anyone to breed or train an animal for fighting with any other animal. 
(c)  Failure to provide acceptable standards of housing and care constitutes animal cruelty. 
(d)  It is unlawful for anyone to intentionally or knowingly leave a pet in a motor vehicle for longer than five minutes, knowing that the animal is not attended by an individual in the vehicle who is 14 years of age or older. 
(e)  This section is not intended to contravene the provisions for animal cruelty contained in the Texas Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-30, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, 4-26-10)  
Sec. 14-17. - Pets riding in motor vehicles. 
It is unlawful to have any pet ride in a vehicle on a paved roadway, except in a manner that does not allow it easily to fall off or exit the vehicle onto the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, 4-26-10)  
Sec. 14-18. - Enforcement of chapter. 
(a)  The chief of police or departmental designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. Enforcement efforts conducted as to animals within private property shall be restricted to those instances where required by clear public health or safety concerns or in response to a complaint. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse permission to or refuse to permit the chief of police to go upon any premises during reasonable times when the chief of police is engaged in the enforcement of this chapter. The chief of police is hereby authorized to apply for an administrative search warrant from the municipal court judge of the city, which judge is authorized to grant such warrant upon reasonable grounds in order to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, 4-26-10)  
Secs. 14-19—14-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-36. - Tethering and confinement. 
(a)  It is unlawful to tether a dog: 
(1)  Using any device that is directly attached to its neck, but instead via a tying device attached to a properly fitted collar or harness made of leather or nylon, and not of the choker type; this does not prohibit the proper use of choker collars in the training of dogs; 
(2)  Using a collar exceeding one and one-half inches wide for any dog weighing less than 60 pounds, or using a collar exceeding two inches in width for dogs weighing 60 pounds or more; 
(3)  Except by using a tying device at least ten feet in length or five times the dog's length, whichever is longer, with a swivel device on the anchor and collar end to prevent tangling and: 
a.  Made of 3/16 th-inch links of a minimum grade 30 with a load limit of 800 pounds for dogs that weigh between 30 and 80 pounds, or 
b.  Made of one-quarter-inch links of a minimum grade 30 with a load limit of 1,500 pounds for dogs that weigh from 80 pounds and up to 200 pounds. 
(4)  Using a device that weighs more than one-eighth-inch of the dog's body weight; 
(5)  In any manner that allows it, or any part of the tying device by which it is tethered, to go into, upon or over any sidewalk, alley, street, or any property not belonging to the dog's owner; 
(6)  To any lamppost, light pole, utility pole, awning post, tree, fence, hydrant, shrubbery, or other object belonging to another person without the consent of the owner of the object to which the animal is to be tethered; 
(7)  If on its owner's property, for more than four hours per day, and only if it has access to water and shelter at all times is, and the owner or a duly authorized person that is familiar with dog handling, their habits and behavior, is on the premises and within its view and a reasonable distance therefrom; or 
(8)  If anywhere other than its owner's property, for more than ten minutes, and only if it is in a safe place and the owner, or a duly authorized person that is familiar with dog handling, their habits and behavior, is never out of sight of the dog and never more than 50 feet away. 
(b)  The confinement of any vicious animal shall be secure, whether indoors or outdoors. If outdoors, the vicious animal shall be confined in an enclosed and locked kennel. Animals that are not vicious animals may be tethered or kenneled when outside any structure on their owner's premises, but are not required to be thus restrained if reasonable measures are taken to maintain the animal within the owner's premises, such as a fenced or adequately secured backyard. Kennels, whether indoors or outdoors, must be large enough for the animal to comfortably have shelter from the elements, provide at all times access to shade and water, allow a reasonable amount of space for movement, and a place to eliminate body waste. Kennels must have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet and must have secure sides and, if outdoors, a secure top attached to the sides in order to make it escape proof. If a concrete slab floor or patio block floor over sand is not provided for an outdoor kennel, the bottom must be wire fencing or similar material that is secured to the sides, and otherwise the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two feet. All kennels must be adequately lighted and kept clean and sanitary. The animal shall be taken out of the kennel daily for training, playtime, exercise, and attention. 
(Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, 4-26-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, adopted Apr. 26, 2010, deleted the former § 14-36, and enacted a new § 14-36 as set out herein. The former § 14-36 pertained to definitions and derived from the Code of 1966, § 5-20; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 1, 6-28-04.  
Sec. 14-37. - Dogs running at large (leash law). 
It shall be unlawful to allow any dog to run at large within the city. The chief of police or departmental designee is hereby granted the authority to pick up and cause to be impounded any dog found running at large in the city. The impoundment notice and hearing procedures of sections 14-86 and 14-87 shall apply in the case of any such dog. 
(Code 1966, § 5-21; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 1, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, 4-26-10)  
Sec. 14-38. - Confinement during rabies emergency. 
The chief of police, whenever he may detect danger from hydrophobia, shall request that the mayor issue an emergency proclamation requiring all dogs and/or other affected animals to be properly confined as required under section 14-10, or securely muzzled. If such proclamation is issued, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any affected animal to fail to comply with such proclamation. Such proclamation shall be published and broadcast for public dissemination. 
(Code 1966, § 5-22; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 1, 6-28-04) 
Cross reference— Health director, § 2-251 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 54.  
Sec. 14-39. - Barking dogs. 
It shall be unlawful to keep any dog in the city which by loud, frequent or habitual barking or howling shall cause annoyance and disturb the peace and quiet of an ordinary normal person. 
(Code 1966, § 5-23; Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, 4-26-10) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 46-26 et seq.; noise, § 46-141 et seq.  
Sec. 14-40. - Maintenance of premises where dogs and cats kept. 
Every person keeping any dog or cat in the city shall maintain the area used or occupied by such animal in a sanitary manner at all times and such area shall be kept free of offensive odors, flies, rodents and other pests. 
(Code 1966, § 5-24)  
Sec. 14-41. - Unvaccinated dogs or cats are a nuisance. 
When not confined on the owner's premises, any dog or cat in or within 5,000 feet of the corporate limits of the city, except where such distance lies in an incorporated area of another city, that is found without a current tag issued as required under division 2 hereof, shall be rebuttably presumed to be unvaccinated and is hereby declared to be a nuisance. The chief of police or departmental designee is hereby authorized to impound any such dog or cat. The owner shall be notified of the impoundment in writing in a manner similar to how it is provided in section 14-86. Ownership of the animal may be rebuttably presumed in a manner similar to how it is provided in subsection 14-82(b). Such animal may not be released unless its owner furnishes proof of vaccination and licensing or shall cause the animal to be vaccinated and licensed. If within five days of service of the notice the animal's owner does not claim such animal and fully comply with the requirements of this division then the animal may be humanely disposed of in accordance with the procedures of the chief of police or departmental designee. 
(Code 1966, § 5-25; Ord. No. 2003-30, § 1, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 1, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, 4-26-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, adopted Apr. 26, 2010, changed the title of § 14-41 from unvaccinated dogs or cats to unvaccinated dogs or cats are a nuisance.  
Secs. 14-42—14-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-12, § I, adopted Feb. 8, 2016, deleted div. 2, §§ 14-51—14-55 entitled "License," which derived from: Code of 1966, §§ 5-40—5-48, § 5-49(b); Ord. No. 2003-30, §§ 2—7, adopted Apr. 28, 2003; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 1, adopted June 28, 2004; and Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, adopted Apr. 26, 2010. 
 
Secs. 14-51—14-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - VICIOUS ANIMALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-12, § II, adopted Feb. 8, 2016, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III, §§ 14-81—14-91, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1966, §§ 5-51—5-60; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 1, adopted June 28, 2004; and Ord. No. 2010-25, § I, adopted Apr. 26, 2010. 
State Law reference— Dangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.041 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-81. - Dangerous animals. 
Section 822 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as it may be amended by state law, is hereby adopted for the city, and such law is referred to, incorporated in this article and made a part of this article for all purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § II, 2-8-16)  
Secs. 14-82—14-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BEEKEEPING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; nuisances, § 46-26 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 54; zoning, ch. 138; agriculture and open space district, § 138-161 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apiary means a place where bee colonies are kept. 
Bee means any stage of the common domestic honeybee, apis melifera species. 
Colony means a hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees, comb, honey, pollen and brood. 
Hive means a structure intended for the housing of a bee colony. 
Tract means a contiguous parcel of land under common ownership. 
Undeveloped property means any idle land that is not improved or actually in the process of being improved with residential, commercial, industrial, church, park, school or governmental facilities or other structures or improvements intended for human use occupancy and the grounds maintained in association therewith. The term shall be deemed to include property developed exclusively as a street or highway or property zoned for commercial or agricultural purposes. 
(Code 1966, § 5-70) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-112. - Certain conduct declared unlawful. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to establish certain requirements of sound beekeeping practices which are intended to avoid problems that may otherwise be associated with the keeping of bees in populated areas. 
(b)  Notwithstanding compliance with the various requirements of this article, it shall be unlawful for any beekeeper to keep any colony or colonies in such a manner or of such disposition as to cause any unhealthy condition, interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of human or animal life of others or interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of any public property or property of others. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person not to comply with any of the provisions or terms of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 5-71)  
Sec. 14-113. - General restrictions. 
(a)  Hives. All bee colonies except for temporary purposes relating to commercial pollination for agricultural purposes shall be kept in properties zoned agricultural-open space under the city's zoning ordinance. All bee colonies shall be kept in Langstroth-type hives with removable frames which shall be kept in sound and usable condition. 
(b)  Fencing of flyways. In each instance in which any colony is situated within 25 feet of a public or private property line of the tract upon which an apiary is situated as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line, the beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least six feet in height consisting of a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation or a combination thereof that is parallel to the property line and extends ten feet beyond the colony in each direction so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six feet above ground level over the property lines in vicinity of the apiary. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the property adjoining the apiary tract in the vicinity of the apiary is undeveloped property for a distance of at least 25 feet from the property line of the apiary tract. 
(c)  Water. Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available at all times to the bees so that the bees will not congregate at swimming pools, bibcocks, pet watering bowls, birdbaths or other water sources where they may cause human, bird or domestic pet contact. 
(d)  General maintenance. Upon their removal from the hive, all such materials shall promptly be disposed of in a sealed container or placed within a building or other beeproof enclosure. 
(e)  Queens. In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually aggressive characteristics by stinging or attempting to sting without due provocation or exhibits an unusual disposition towards swarming, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to promptly requeen the colony. Queens shall be selected from stock bred for gentleness and nonswarming characteristics. 
(f)  Colony densities. The maximum number of colonies permitted shall be as follows: 
(1)  One-acre or larger tract size: Six colonies; 
(2)  Greater than one-acre tracts where all hives are situated at least 200 feet in any direction from all property lines of the tract on which the apiary is situated so long as all property, other than the tract upon which the hives are situated, that is within a radius of at least 200 feet from any hive remains undeveloped property: Ten colonies. 
(g)  Nucleus colony. For every two colonies authorized under colony densities (subsection (f)), there may be maintained upon the same tract one nucleus colony in a hive structure not exceeding one standard 9 5/8 -inch depth ten-frame hive body with no supers attached as required from time to time for management of swarms. Each such nucleus colony shall be disposed of or combined with an authorized colony within 30 days after the date as acquired. 
(h)  Marking hives; presumption of beekeeping. 
(1)  In apiaries, the name or telephone number shall be branded, painted or otherwise clearly marked upon the structure of at least two hives and placed at opposite ends of the apiary. Instead of marking the hives, the beekeeper may conspicuously post a sign setting forth the name and telephone number of the beekeeper. It is a defense to prosecution for lack of telephone number under this subsection that a colony is kept upon the same tract upon which the owner resides. 
(2)  Unless marked in accordance with subsection (h)(1), it shall be presumed for the purposes of this article that the beekeeper is the person who owns or otherwise has the present right of possession and control of the tract upon which a hive or hives are situated. The presumption may be rebutted by a written agreement authorizing another person to maintain the colony or colonies upon the tract setting forth the name, address and telephone number of the other person who is acting as the beekeeper. 
(i)  Inspection. 
(1)  The chief of police shall enforce the provisions of this article, and he or his duly authorized representative, upon presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent or tenant in charge of such apiary and with their consent, may enter any structure, house or premises during all reasonable hours except in cases of emergency where extreme hazards are known to exist which may involve the potential loss of life or severe property damage; in which case, the above limitation shall not apply. Should the chief of police be denied entry, then he shall make application for a search warrant to enter the premises, such warrant to be issued by the municipal court judge of the city upon proper application therefor. 
(2)  Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this article in the discharge of his duties shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of this article shall be defended by the city until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(j)  Compliance. 
(1)  Upon receipt of information that any colony situated within the city is not being kept in compliance with this article, the chief of police shall cause an investigation to be conducted. If he finds that grounds exist to believe that one or more violations have occurred, he shall cause a written notice of hearing to be issued to the beekeeper. 
(2)  The notice of hearing shall set forth: 
a.  The date, time and place at which the hearing will be conducted; 
b.  The violation(s) alleged; 
c.  That the beekeeper may appear in person or through counsel, present evidence and cross examine witnesses; and 
d.  That the bees may be ordered destroyed or removed from the city if the chief of police finds that they have been kept in violation of this article. 
Notices shall be given by certified United States mail or personal delivery. However, if the chief of police is unable to locate the beekeeper, then the notice may be given by publication one time in a newspaper of general circulation at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(3)  The hearing shall be conducted by the chief of police. The burden shall be on the city to demonstrate by substantial evidence that the colony or colonies have in fact been kept in violation of this article. If the hearing officer finds that the colony or colonies have been kept in violation of this article, then he may order that the bees be destroyed or removed from the city within 20 days and that bees shall not thereafter be kept upon the tract for a period of two years. In instances where the hearing officer finds that the violations were not intentional and that the beekeeper has employed corrective actions that will probably be effective to cure the violations alleged, then he may issue a warning in lieu of ordering the bees destroyed or removed. Upon failure of the beekeeper to comply with the order, the chief of police may cause the bees to be destroyed and the hive structures to be removed. In each instance in which a bee colony is destroyed, all usable components of the hive structure that are not damaged or rendered unhealthy by the destruction of the bees shall, upon the beekeeper's request, be returned to the beekeeper, provided that the beekeeper agrees to bear all transportation expenses for their return. 
(4)  The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, and any appeal thereof to a court of competent jurisdiction shall be tried under the substantial evidence rule. 
(5)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to require the conduct of a hearing for the destruction of: 
a.  Any bee colony not residing in a hive structure intended for beekeeping; 
b.  Any swarm of bees; or 
c.  Any colony residing in a standard or manmade hive which, by virtue of its condition, has obviously been abandoned by the beekeeper. 
(Code 1966, § 5-72; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 1, 6-28-04)  
ARTICLE V. - WILD PARROTS 
 
Sec. 14-114. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Active nest is defined to mean a nest inhabited by wild parrots, that contains eggs or birds less than one year in age. 
Wild parrot is defined to mean a self-sufficient, free-ranging, social, surviving independent of human care, non-caged bird, classified scientifically within the taxonomic order Psittaciformes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § I, 2-24-14)  
Sec. 14-115. - Acts prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person(s) with the city limits of the City of McAllen to knowingly injure, capture, remove from their night roosts or their nests, or kill a wild parrot. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person(s) within the city limits of the City of McAllen to knowingly remove young wild parrots from a nest or in any manner take, remove, or destroy any eggs of the wild parrot. 
(c)  It is unlawful for a person(s) to knowingly cut down or in any other way harm a tree in which there exists an active nest of the wild parrot within the city limits of the City of McAllen. 
(d)  It is a defense to a violation of subsection (c) of this section if a tree is cut down in compliance with the city's landscaping ordinances (chapter 110 of the city Code of Ordinances) at the direction of the owner of the tree and any eggs or young wild parrots found in the tree are protected from capture or injury. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § I, 2-24-14)  
Sec. 14-116. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article (or any subsequent amendments hereto), or who shall fail to comply herewith, or with any of the requirements hereof, may be prosecuted in municipal court for a class C misdemeanor and upon a finding of guilt shall be liable for a fine of up to $500.00 for each offense; provided, however, that such fine shall not exceed the maximum fine allowed by both state and the city Charter for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § I, 2-24-14)  
Sec. 14-117. - Enforcement. 
The Police Department of the City of McAllen is hereby authorized to issue citations and/or arrest any person(s) who violates any provision of this article. The director of public health or the director's representative is hereby authorized to issue citations to any violator of this article. Any citation issued shall state the alleged violation and the date of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § I, 2-24-14)  
Secs. 14-118—14-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - LARGE AND EXOTIC ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 14-141. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Large animal means any animal that weighs 125 pounds or more, excluding domesticated dogs. 
Exotic animal means any nonhuman primate or animal that is not native to the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2020-29, § I, 6-22-20)  
Sec. 14-142. - Permit required. 
Any circus, exhibition or event that uses large animals or exotic animals for entertainment purposes shall apply for an animal exhibition permit. 
(Ord. No. 2020-29, § I, 6-22-20)  
Sec. 14-143. - Application. 
The city manager or his designee shall create an animal exhibition permit application and may establish a reasonable application fee. The applicant must obtain written approval prior to the date of the exhibition. The city manager shall notify the applicant of approval or denial of the permit, in writing, within ten business days after the receipt of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2020-29, § I, 6-22-20)  
Sec. 14-144. - Public notice. 
Notice of each animal exhibition permit approved shall be given by publication one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and on the city's website stating the name of the applicant and the dates and location of the event for which an animal exhibition permit was approved. 
(Ord. No. 2020-29, § I, 6-22-20)  
Sec. 14-145. - Appeals. 
(a)  An applicant whose application is denied by the city manager may appeal the decision to the city commission. To appeal, the applicant must submit a written notice of appeal in writing to the city manager's office within three business days of the city manager's denial. 
(b)  An individual, group or organization can appeal the city manager's approval of an animal exhibition permit to the city commission. To appeal, a petition with the signature of 25 McAllen residents must be submitted to the city manager's office within three business days of the public notice described in section 12-144 above. The City shall provide written notice to an applicant whose permit approval has been appealed. The notice shall include a copy of the petition submitted and the date, time and location the city commission will hear the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2020-29, § I, 6-22-20)  
Sec. 14-146. - Objective criteria. 
The city manager and city commission shall base the approval or denial of an animal exhibition permit on objective criteria, including, but not limited to, the size of the event, expected attendance, threat to public health and safety, traffic hazards, and the applicant's compliance with the Animal Welfare Act, Title 7 USC § 2131, et. seq. 
(Ord. No. 2020-29, § I, 6-22-20)  
Sec. 14-147. - Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any circus, exhibition or event to use large animals or exotic animals for entertainment purposes without a valid animal exhibition permit. Violations of this subchapter are a Class C Misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2020-29, § I, 6-22-20)  
Chapter 18 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Noise, § 46-141 et seq.; zoning, ch. 138; airport zoning regulations, app. A. 
State Law reference— Aeronautics generally, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 46c-1—46e-15; municipal airports, arts. 46d-1—46d-22. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Minimum altitude for aircraft; stunt flying prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator of any airplane or aircraft to operate such airplane or aircraft within 1,000 feet of the ground level of any part of the city or to operate any airplane or aircraft in any manner commonly known as "stunt flying" while over the city. This section shall not apply to airplanes or aircraft operated over the McAllen-Miller International Airport. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1)  
Sec. 18-2. - Operation of searchlights. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a searchlight or any other equipment in the city in a manner that could interfere with the vision of a pilot operating on approach to, departure from, or in the traffic pattern of the airport.  
Sec. 18-3. - Responsibility for removal of disabled or wrecked aircraft; notification of operations; required prior consent; equipment. 
(a)  The pilot or operator of any aircraft involved in any accident or similar incident on the aircraft operations area, which includes but is not limited to runways, taxiways, or parking ramp areas at the McAllen-Miller International Airport of McAllen, shall be responsible for the prompt removal or disposal of any disabled or wrecked aircraft and/or parts thereof from the aircraft operations area under the supervision of and as directed by the director of aviation or his duly authorized representative. In the event of the pilot's or operator's failure or inability to comply with the manager's directions, such wrecked or disabled aircraft and parts thereof may be removed by the city at the owner's or operator's expense and without liability to the city or to the person who removes such aircraft for damage which may result in the course of such removal. 
(b)  Federal Aviation Administration air traffic control personnel shall be immediately informed of plans for moving aircraft removal equipment onto the aircraft operations area and shall be kept informed of the progress of removal operations. 
(c)  No vehicles and no equipment involved in the aircraft removal process shall be permitted in the airport operations area without the prior consent of the director of aviation or his duly authorized representative. 
(d)  All vehicles operating on runways or taxiways must be equipped with two-way radios, flashing beacon, and be in continuous communication with the air traffic control tower, or other authorized agent in control thereof, or must be escorted by an authorized airport vehicle equipped with such equipment. 
(Code 1966, § 3-2)  
Sec. 18-4. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(b)  In addition to penalties otherwise provided, any person operating or handling any aircraft or vehicle in violation of this chapter, or otherwise refusing to comply therewith, may be promptly removed or ejected from the airport by or under the authority of the director of aviation and, upon the order of the director of aviation, may be deprived of further use of the airport and its facilities for such period of time as may be required to ensure safeguarding of persons and property. 
(Code 1966, § 3-19)  
Secs. 18-5—18-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - McALLEN-MILLER INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94; airport zoning, app. A. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advisory board means the advisory board for the McAllen-Miller International Airport, as created by section 18-36. 
Airport means the McAllen-Miller International Airport of McAllen, Texas. 
Director of aviation means the director of aviation or his duly authorized representative unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1966, § 3-12) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-27. - Revenue policy for the operation of the McAllen-Miller International Airport established. 
There is hereby established for the operations of the McAllen-Miller International Airport a revenue and expenditure plan. The director of finance is hereby required to establish an entry in the city's accounts for the purposes of accounting for all revenues generated by the operation of the McAllen-Miller International Airport, including, but not limited to, the revenues generated from all fees, rentals, permits and charges, relating to the main terminal building, any cargo facilities, fixed base operators or other aeronautical operations of the city or use of airport property. 
The director of aviation is hereby directed to, on a regular basis, but not less than in three-year intervals, verify that the charges, rentals, and fees for the operation and use of the McAllen-Miller International Airport facilities are within industry standards for like-kind airports. This report shall be given to the city commission within 60 days after finalization. Revenues generated under airport operations as provided for herein shall be utilized solely for the purposes of expenditures related to the airport operations. 
The city manager is directed to establish an operating budget for McAllen-Miller International Airport. Such expenditures shall include reasonable allocations of indirect overhead for administrative purposes, debt service requirements, depreciation accounts, and all other reasonable expenditures to the maintenance and operation of the McAllen-Miller International Airport. Such budget shall be approved annually by the city commission along with the approval of the general fund and other budgets of the City of McAllen. 
(Ord. No. 1999-105, § 1, 12-14-99)  
Secs. 18-28—18-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AIRPORT BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-76 et seq.; procedure for appointment and terms and qualifications of board members, § 2-77; substantial evidence rule in effect regarding appeals from decisions of boards, commissions and committees, § 2-82; airport zoning regulations, app. A. 
 
Sec. 18-36. - Created; official name. 
There is hereby created and established an advisory board for the McAllen-Miller International Airport, such board to be officially designated as the "airport board." 
(Code 1966, § 3-22)  
Sec. 18-37. - Composition. 
The airport board shall consist of at least 12 members. 
(Code 1966, § 3-23)  
Sec. 18-38. - Appointment; terms. 
Members of the airport board shall be appointed and serve pursuant to sections 2-76 through 2-82. 
(Code 1966, § 3-22.1)  
Sec. 18-39. - Ex officio members. 
The board of commissioners may designate the mayor or one of its members to serve as an ex officio member of the airport board, who shall act in a liaison or advisory capacity. The city manager or director of aviation, either or both, shall serve as an ex officio member of the board. Ex officio members shall have no voting privileges. 
(Code 1966, § 3-25)  
Sec. 18-40. - Members to serve without pay. 
No salary, fees or compensation shall be paid to the members of the airport board for their services thereon. 
(Code 1966, § 3-28)  
Sec. 18-41. - Selection of secretary or treasurer. 
The airport board may elect a secretary and/or treasurer. The terms of office shall be for one year. 
(Code 1966, § 3-29)  
Sec. 18-42. - Meetings generally. 
The airport board shall meet at least once a month, or whenever necessary, on call by the chairman, to consider all matters pertaining to the business, operation, conduct and use of the airport and/or all of its facilities and improvements. 
(Code 1966, § 3-30)  
Sec. 18-43. - Presiding officer. 
It shall be the duty of the chairman of the airport board to preside at all meetings of the board and the vice-chairman to preside in the event of the absence of the chairman to preside. If both the chairman and vice-chairman are absent, a quorum of the airport board can elect a temporary chairman for such meeting. 
(Code 1966, § 3-32)  
Sec. 18-44. - Functions. 
The airport board shall be an advisory board to the board of commissioners. One of the specific functions of the airport board is to study, prepare and present, after advice and consultation with the acting city engineer, to the board of commissioners, a master plan for the operation of the airport, improvements to be made thereon, a plan of utilization of facilities and hangar space by owners of private airplanes, and rules, conditions and regulations under which such private owners shall use and operate their private facilities and the airport facilities in general, taking into consideration maximum and best use of all land areas, facilities and improvements. 
(Code 1966, § 3-33)  
Sec. 18-45. - Adoption of rules and regulations; records or minutes of proceedings. 
At its organizational meeting, the airport board shall adopt rules and regulations pertaining to its meetings, organizational setup, time and place of meetings, and related matters. Records shall be kept of all proceedings, or minutes shall be delivered to the board of commissioners as soon after each meeting as possible. 
(Code 1966, § 3-34)  
Sec. 18-46. - Appointment of subcommittees. 
The airport board may appoint and establish subcommittees from or outside of its membership for specific purposes or functions pertaining to the airport and its use and operation. 
(Code 1966, § 3-35)  
Sec. 18-47. - Recommendations to board of commissioners. 
The airport board will, on a majority vote of a quorum present at any meeting, make recommendations to the board of commissioners concerning supervision, regulation and control of the airport, its facilities and improvements, and it shall promulgate and recommend to the board of commissioners reasonable rules and regulations for the operation of the airport and shall make such other recommendations as it sees fit. 
(Code 1966, § 3-36)  
Secs. 18-48—18-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - AIRPORT SECURITY POLICE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-196 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 62. 
 
Sec. 18-61. - Creation of airport security police division. 
The provision of airport security shall be provided by commissioned police officers of the city police force who shall be under the jurisdiction and control of the chief of police. The chief of police and the director of aviation are hereby authorized and directed to promulgate internal standard operating procedures for the purposes of coordinating interdepartmental policies for the provision of security for the McAllen-Miller International Airport. 
(Code 1966, § 3-18(a))  
Sec. 18-62. - Composition; duties. 
(a)  The airport security police division shall have as its immediate supervisor the sergeant in charge thereof, and be staffed by as many security police officers as set by the board of commissioners in the budget approval process on an annual basis by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The airport security police division shall carry out and enforce all rules, regulations and ordinances relating to the operation and use of the McAllen-Miller International Airport and all other duties imposed upon peace officers, occurring within the grounds known as McAllen-Miller International Airport. 
(Code 1966, § 3-18(b), (c))  
Secs. 18-63—18-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - OPERATION OF AIRCRAFT AND OTHER VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 102; stopping, standing and parking, § 102-226 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-76. - Airport operations manual. 
(a)  The airport operations manual, McAllen-Miller International Airport of McAllen dated May 15, 1996, is hereby adopted and all of its contents, rules, regulations and requirements are hereby confirmed, ratified, and adopted for the operation of the McAllen-Miller International Airport. A copy of the airport operations manual shall be filed in the office of the director of aviation of McAllen, Texas, and that it shall be available for inspection by interested persons. 
(b)  The airport operations manual establishes general airport rules and regulations, and specifies minimum standards for the conduct of commercial aeronautical activity at McAllen-Miller International Airport. 
(c)  Distribution of the airport operations manual shall be made in accordance with the requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(d)  The airport operations manual is available to the public through the city department of aviation. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the terms of the manual herein adopted, including the failure to do anything mandated therein and such violation shall constitute a class C misdemeanor. 
(Code 1966, § 3-12.1; Ord. No. 1996-38, § I, 5-28-96)  
Sec. 18-77. - Trespass on airport, runway/taxiways. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a trespass for any person to enter, or be present at any time, within the confines of the security fence at McAllen-Miller International Airport without first obtaining authorization from the department of aviation or unless such person is under the escort of one who is authorized by the department of aviation to be within the confines of the security fence. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a trespass for any person to enter, walk upon, drive upon, cross over, or be present at any time upon the runway and/or taxiways of the airport, or within an unreasonable distance therefrom, taking into consideration the use of such runways and taxiways by aircraft, the rule of reason as to the distance being the point that a normally prudent person would stay beyond, under the circumstances, considering the use of such areas by aircraft, and keeping in mind and taking into consideration the various factors that might cause such aircraft to deviate from the paved portion of such areas due to various weather conditions, poor lighting and visibility, aircraft defects and failures, errors of human judgment and other similar causes. 
(c)  Any parent or guardian of any child who is not punishable under the laws of the state for an offense because of such child's age who permits such child to violate this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. It shall be no defense to such parent or guardian that he had no knowledge of such child's trespass or that he had not given permission or authorization to such child to be upon such areas. 
(d)  There are excepted from the provisions of this section persons who are authorized by the city or other proper governmental agency to enter upon such areas for necessary and authorized purposes, such as for inspection, supervision or patrol, provided that the same is done at reasonable times and under such circumstances that there is no danger to life or property from airplanes landing, taking off, or using the runways and/or taxiways. 
(Code 1966, § 3-13)  
Sec. 18-78. - Signs to indicate where trespassing prohibited. 
Appropriate signs and markers shall be placed upon the airport designating the areas where trespassing is prohibited, such as, but not limited to no trespassing, prohibited area, do not enter, and other appropriate signs and markers. It shall be no defense to a person charged for a violation of section 18-77 that he did not see such a sign or that one was not located at the location where he entered upon such area. 
(Code 1966, § 3-14)  
Sec. 18-79. - Vehicles restricted to designated roads, parking areas, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, station or move any vehicle upon the airport except on areas or parts thereof clearly marked, designated or defined as public roadways, streets or vehicle passageways or parking areas without the permission of the director of aviation. 
(b)  Appropriate signs and markers in connection with the provisions and intent of this section shall be placed at the airport to designate roadways, streets, passageways and parking areas, and to designate areas therefor where vehicles or the use of such areas are prohibited. 
(c)  No person shall park or cause to be parked any vehicle on any ramp or in front of any hangar, other than in an area specifically designated by the director of aviation for vehicular parking, except when such vehicle is actively engaged in loading or unloading of persons or cargo into or from an aircraft, or is actively engaged in fueling operations. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To park a vehicle or cause a vehicle to be parked and left unattended immediately in front or within 300 feet of either side of the McAllen-Miller International Airport terminal building; or 
(2)  To park a vehicle or cause a vehicle to be parked and left attended, without engaging in loading or unloading of passengers and luggage, immediately in front or within 300 feet of either side of the McAllen-Miller International Airport terminal building, unless such vehicle is that of a law enforcement agency, fire department, ambulance service or authorized taxi driver and the driver is at the airport acting in an official capacity and the official activity at the airport necessitates parking on the access drive instead of at the designated parking location. All such vehicles shall be marked to show agency affiliation. In any prosecution charging a violation of any ordinance or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such ordinance or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Code 1966, § 3-15; Ord. No. 1996-72, § I, 11-25-96; Ord. No. 2010-43, § I, 7-12-10)  
Sec. 18-80. - Parking lot traffic and parking rules and regulations. 
(a)  Rules established. Special rules are hereby established for the regulation of traffic and parking of motor vehicles on the parking lot of McAllen-Miller International Airport. These are special rules applicable only to such parking lot, and are not intended to vary or alter any other provisions of the traffic ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Parking of rent-a-car vehicles. The director of aviation is hereby authorized to designate and establish certain areas of the airport for the parking of rent-a-car vehicles by companies which have a permit and contract with the city for renting automobiles at such point. Rent-a-car vehicles shall not be parked in any other parking areas of the airport without the written consent of the director of aviation. 
(c)  Limited public parking areas. The director of aviation is hereby authorized to establish and designate for public parking certain areas on the parking lot where parking is limited by time. 
(d)  Long-term public parking area. The director of aviation is hereby authorized to establish and designate for public parking certain areas on the parking lot as long-term parking areas. Vehicles may be parked in such areas for a period not to exceed 14 days unless prior permission is obtained from the director of aviation. 
(e)  Reserved parking areas. The director of aviation is hereby authorized to designate and establish certain areas on such parking lot as reserved parking areas for V.I.P., F.A.A., federal inspections, taxicab or other uses as the necessity arises. 
(f)  Employee parking. The director of aviation is hereby authorized to designate and establish certain areas on the parking lot for employee parking. No vehicle shall be permitted to park in the employee parking area unless such vehicle bears an unexpired employee parking permit. All employees of the airport shall park in the area designated for employee parking while working, unless they have been authorized to park in a private parking lot or they have been authorized by the director of aviation to park in a reserved parking area. Airport employees shall not park in public parking spaces while on duty. 
(g)  Marking of specific parking areas. The director of aviation is authorized on behalf of the city to clearly sign, mark and define the areas established for rent-a-car, limited public, long-term public, reserved and employee parking on the airport. 
(h)  Removal of vehicles. The director of aviation is authorized to require the driver or other person in charge of any vehicle parked, stopped or standing in violation of any of the provisions of this section to move such vehicle. If the driver or person in charge of the vehicle is not available, the director of aviation may move or cause to be moved such vehicle to an authorized parking space or to a garage or other place of safety at the expense of the vehicle owner. 
(i)  Conflict and applicability. Where this section is in conflict with any other traffic ordinance of the city, this section shall prevail and be controlling. All other traffic ordinances of the city shall be applicable to the airport parking lot. 
(j)  Violations; penalties. 
(1)  Any person who parks a vehicle or causes a vehicle to be parked on the parking lot of McAllen-Miller International Airport in a limited public parking area as defined in this section shall, upon conviction, be punished pursuant to section 1-14 if such person causes or allows such vehicle to remain in such parking area for a period longer than the limited period provided for such area. 
(2)  Any person who parks a vehicle or causes a vehicle to be parked in an area designated as an employee parking area as defined in this section shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor if such vehicle does not bear an unexpired employee parking permit. 
(3)  Any on-duty employee who parks a vehicle or causes a vehicle to be parked in an area other than the employee parking lot, unless otherwise authorized in accordance with subsection (f) of this section, shall be deemed guilty a class C misdemeanor. "Employee" is described as a person employed by an agency authorized to do business on airport property. 
(4)  Any person who parks a vehicle or causes a vehicle to be parked in a long-term public parking area as defined in this section without permission of the director of aviation and causes or allows such vehicle to remain in such area for a period exceeding 14 days shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor. 
(5)  Any person who parks a vehicle or causes a vehicle to be parked in a reserved parking area as defined in this section shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor if such person fails to establish that he has parked such vehicle as a member of the class of individuals for whom such parking area has been reserved. 
(k)  Issuance of citations by non-police officer personnel. Any parking violation citation authorized to be issued by a police officer in this chapter or in chapter 102, article VI ("stopping, standing and parking"), may also be issued by other designated and authorized personnel of the department of aviation. 
(Ord. No.2010-43, § II, 7-12-10)  
Secs. 18-81—18-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED AIRCRAFT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Junked, wrecked, abandoned property, § 46-86 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-101. - Prohibited without written consent; taking of aircraft into custody. 
It shall be against airport policy for owners or operators of aircraft to allow such aircraft to remain on any runway, taxiway, parking ramp or any other area within McAllen-Miller International Airport for more than 30 days without the express written consent of the director of aviation. Any such aircraft which remains upon airport property for more than 30 days may be taken into custody by the director of aviation. 
(Code 1966, § 3-40)  
Sec. 18-102. - Notice to owner; contents. 
(a)  Within ten days after taking any aircraft into custody, the director of aviation shall notify, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, the last known registered owner of the aircraft and all lienholders of record that the aircraft has been taken into custody. The notice shall describe the year, make, model, registration and serial numbers of the aircraft; set forth the location of the aircraft; inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the aircraft within 20 days after the date of notice; and their responsibility to remove such aircraft from airport property or make arrangements for its storage. Such notice shall state that the failure of the owner to lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the aircraft within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner and all lienholders of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and their consent to the sale of the aircraft at a public auction. 
(b)  If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, or if the registration contains no current address for the owner, or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of all lienholders, notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the aircraft is located shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice pursuant to this article. Such notice by publication can contain multiple listings of aircraft. Any such notice shall be within the time requirements prescribed for notice by registered or certified mail and shall have the same contents required for notice by registered or certified mail. 
(c)  The consequences and effect of failure to reclaim an aircraft shall be as set forth in a valid notice given pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1966, § 3-41)  
Sec. 18-103. - Auction of unclaimed aircraft; notice; disposition of proceeds of sale. 
If an abandoned aircraft has not been reclaimed as provided for in section 18-102, the director of aviation shall declare the aircraft abandoned and sell the aircraft at a public auction. Proper notice of the public auction shall be given. The purchaser of the aircraft shall take title to the aircraft and shall receive a bill of sale signed by the auctioneer, and shall be entitled to register the aircraft with the federal government. From the proceeds of the auction, the airport shall reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to section 18-102. Any remainder from the proceeds of the sale shall be held for the owner of the aircraft or any entitled lienholder for 90 days, and if unclaimed shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 3-42)  
Chapter 22 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; regulations regarding proximity of alcoholic beverage establishment to church, school or hospital, § 6-2; beekeeping regulations and restrictions, § 14-111 et seq.; alarm systems, § 42-26 et seq.; fire prevention code, § 50-66 et seq.; smoking prohibited in certain public places, § 54-122; emergency water conservation, § 106-116; flood hazard reduction standards for structures, § 118-57; sign construcion specifications, § 130-136; no permit shall be issued for buildings, repairs, plumbing or electrical installation in a subdivision until the final subdivision plat has been approved and filed for recording, § 134-5; additional requirements for application for building permits, § 138-27; site plans required for conditional use permits, § 138-114; site plan required in the R-3 multifamily residential districts, § 138-210; conditional uses in the R-4 mobile home and modular home district, §138-223. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Fire zones established. 
(a)  Generally. This section shall be deemed to be an ordinance creating and establishing a fire district. There are hereby established within the city two fire zones known as the first fire zone and the second fire zone. 
(b)  First fire zone. The first fire zone is hereby established and declared to be as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the north right-of-way line of Missouri Pacific Railroad and 18th Street; thence south along 18th Street to Dallas Avenue; thence east along Dallas Avenue to alley between 18th and South Guerra Street; thence south along alley to Houston Avenue; thence east to alley between South Guerra and 16th Street; thence north in alley to Dallas Avenue; thence east to the alley between 15th and Main Streets; thence south in alley to Houston Avenue; thence east along Houston Avenue to the alley between Broadway and 12th Street; thence north in alley to Chicago Avenue; thence east on Chicago Avenue to Tenth Street; thence north on Tenth Street to the north boundary line of Missouri Pacific Railroad right-of-way; thence west along north boundary line of said Missouri Pacific Railroad right-of-way to 18th Street, the point of beginning. 
(c)  Second fire zone. The second fire zone is hereby established and declared to be as follows: 
Parcel No. 1. Beginning at north boundary line of Missouri Pacific Railroad right-of-way and 16th Street; thence west along boundary line of said railroad right-of-way to east line of 18th Street; thence south along east line of 18th Street to north line of Dallas Avenue; thence east along north line of Dallas Avenue to alley between Guerra and 18th Streets; thence south along said alley to north line of Houston Avenue; thence west along north line of Houston Avenue to east line of 22nd Street; thence north along east line of 22nd Street to Dallas Avenue; thence west along Dallas Avenue to 24th Street; thence north along 24th Street to Beaumont Avenue; thence west along Beaumont Avenue to southeast corner of Lot 3, Block 18, Alta Mira Addition; thence north along east boundary line of Lots 1, 2 and 3, Block 18 to southeast corner Wardlow Addition; thence north along east boundary line Lots 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 in Wardlow Addition to northeast corner of Lot 3 in Wardlow Addition; thence west along south boundary line of Lots 1 and 2, Wardlow Addition, to Samano (26th St.); thence north along Samano (26th St.) to Highway Avenue; thence west along Highway Avenue to Leslie Street (27th St.); thence south along Leslie Street (27th St.) to northeast corner of Lot 4, Block 13, Alta Mira Addition; thence west along north boundary line of Lot 4, Block 13 to northwest corner of said Lot 4; thence south along west boundary line Lots 4, 5 and 6 of Block 13 to southwest corner of Lot 6 in said Block 13; thence west to Division Street (28th St.); thence north along Division Street (28th St.) to southeast corner of Lot 6, Gentry Addition; thence west along south boundary line of said Lot 6, Gentry Addition to South Rooth Road; thence north along Rooth Road crossing Missouri Pacific Railroad right-of-way to a point 100 feet from center of main line of Missouri Pacific Railroad; thence east and paralleling the center main line of Missouri Pacific Railroad to a jog in the right-of-way of said railroad on the south line of Lot 97, Hammond Addition, Block 2; thence north along said jog in right-of-way to north corner of said right-of-way on south line of said Lot 97; thence east along south line of Lots 97 and 98 and north line of said right-of-way to a southeast corner of said Lot 98; thence north along east line of said Lot 98 and west line of Lot 99 to northwest corner of Lot 99 in said Hammonds Block 2; thence east along north boundary line of Lots 99, 100 and 101 of Hammond Block 2 to 23rd Street; thence south along 23rd Street to Cedar Avenue; thence east along Cedar Avenue to 20th Street; thence north along 20th Street to Hackberry Avenue; thence east along Hackberry Avenue to 19th Street; thence south along 19th Street to Beech Avenue; thence east along Beech Avenue to a point south of a line between Bryan and Poorbaugh Addition; thence north along said projected line to Date Palm Avenue; thence east along Date Palm Avenue crossing Second Street and continuing along jog in Date Palm Avenue to a northeast corner of the 7.5 acre tract belonging to McAllen Waterworks; thence south along east boundary line of said 7.5 acre tract to a point 150 feet north of center main line of Missouri Pacific Railroad; thence east paralleling center main line of said railroad to east boundary line of Lot 4, Section 12, Steele and Pershing survey; thence south along east boundary line of said Lot 4 crossing railroad and Highway Avenue and continuing south along alley dividing Cathay Courts and Betty Rose Subdivision to southeast corner of Lot 2, Block 3, Cathay Courts Subdivision; thence west along south boundary line of Lots 1 and 2, Block 3, Cathay Courts Subdivision and continuing west along south boundary line of Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4, Block 2 and continuing west along south boundary line of Lots 1 and 2, Block 1, Cathay Courts Subdivision, to southwest corner of said Lot 1, Block 1 on east boundary of 2.5 acre tract; thence south along east boundary line of said 2.5 acre tract to a point east of south boundary line Block B, Cathay Courts Annex; thence west across said 2.5 acre tract and a 1.5 acre tract crossing First Street; thence west along south boundary line of Block B, Cathay Courts Annex, and continuing west crossing Hidalgo County Water and Improvement District No. 2 main canal to Second Street; thence south on Second Street to a point directly east of south boundary line of Lot 6, Block 4, Best Addition; thence west crossing a ten acre tract and continuing west along south boundary line of said Lot 6, Block 4, Best Courts, and along south boundary line of Lot 6, Block 3, Best Courts Addition, and along south boundary line of Lot 6, Block 2, Mary Gordon Addition, and along south boundary line of Blocks 2 and 3 of Leavell Addition and Blocks 5 and 6 of Kehm Addition to Seventh Street; thence north along Seventh Street to Beaumont Avenue; thence west on Beaumont Avenue to Tenth Street; thence north on Tenth Street to north boundary line of Missouri Pacific Railroad right-of-way; thence west along north boundary line Missouri Pacific Railroad right-of-way to 16th Street, the place of beginning. And 
Parcel No. 2. Beginning at 18th and Houston Avenue; thence west along Houston Avenue to northwest corner of Block 3, D. Guerra Addition; thence south along west boundary line of Block 3, D. Guerra Addition and continuing south along west boundary line of Block 2, Southern Pacific Industrial Subdivision to Oakland Avenue; thence east crossing Hidalgo County Water and Improvement District No. 3 main canal to 18th Street; thence north along 18th Street to Houston Avenue, the place of beginning. And 
Parcel No. 3. Beginning on Maple Avenue at southeast corner of Block 1, Milmor Addition; thence north along east boundary line of Block 1 to northeast corner of Lot 14, Block 1; thence west along north boundary line of Lots 14 and 19, Block 1, Milmor to northwest corner of Lot 19; thence south along west boundary line of Lots 19, 18 and 17, Block 1, Milmor to southwest corner thereof; thence east along south boundary line Block 1, Milmor to southeast corner thereof, the place of beginning. 
(Code 1966, § 8-1; Ord. No. 2009-07, § IX, 1-26-09) 
Cross reference— Electrical wiring, § 22-108; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Authority to establish and designate fire limits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.012.  
Sec. 22-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person found guilty of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished pursuant to section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 1992-80, § XXX, 10-12-92)  
Sec. 22-3. - Office of building official created. 
The office of the building official in and for the City of McAllen is hereby established. The building official shall carry out all duties prescribed for such office under the provisions of the city's Code of Ordinances. The building official shall be well versed in all the provisions of the city's Code of Ordinances and all the rules and regulations of the various codes adopted thereunder, for which that office is responsible. 
(Ord. No. 2006-80, § 1, 7-24-06)  
Sec. 22-4. - Powers and duties of building official. 
(a)  The building official shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and any other provisions of this Code for which that office is responsible, including, without limitation, Chapter 122 and Chapter 130, and is hereby authorized to issue citations for violations of any such provisions. 
(b)  Upon presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any property, and with their consent, may enter any land, lot, building, structure, dwelling, or premises during reasonable hours, except in cases of emergency where extreme hazards may exist which involve the potential loss of life or severe property damage, in which case the above limitations shall not apply. Should the building official be denied entry, an application may be made for a search warrant to allow entry, such warrant to be issued by a municipal court judge of the city upon proper application therefor. 
(c)  Neither the building official nor any duly authorized representative of the same, nor any officer, agent or employee of the city, nor any member of the board of adjustments and appeals nor any of its members, which are charged with enforcement of the building official's responsibilities, shall thereby render themselves personally liable, and are hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of such duties. Any suit brought against any of the aforementioned employee because of the discharging of such duties shall be defended by the city until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2006-80, § 1, 7-24-06)  
Sec. 22-5. - Permits—Time limits. 
Any permits issued under this chapter, unless indicated otherwise, shall not extend for more than one year from the time of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-82, § I, 11-26-12)  
Secs. 22-6—22-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; sign construction specifications, § 130-136. 
 
Sec. 22-26. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for and by the city, the International Building Code, 2012 edition, including appendices B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J and K, prepared by the International Code Council, published in booklet form, which is referred to, incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes. A copy of such code shall be filed in the office of the building official. 
(Code 1966, § 8-12; Ord. No. 1992-80, § III, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 1995-13, § I, 3-13-95; Ord. No. 1999-72, § 1, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-86, § 1, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2009-07, § I, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 2012-84, § I, 11-26-12)  
Sec. 22-27. - Building permit and moving permit fees. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall consider, after recommendation by the building official, and approve a schedule setting forth all fees to be assessed for the issuance of building permits for all buildings, structures, or alterations required by the International Building Code, as adopted in section 22-26. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall establish a schedule setting forth all fees to be assessed for the issuance of permits for the moving of any structure located within the city. 
(c)  The board of commissioners may modify the permit fee schedules required under subsections (a) and (b) of this section from time to time as deemed necessary. 
(Code 1966, § 8-13; Ord. No. 2009-07, § I, 1-26-09)  
Sec. 22-28. - Amendments. 
The building code adopted in section 22-26 is hereby amended as follows: 
(a)  Section 3109 ("swimming pool enclosures and safety devices") is amended at subsection 3109.3 ("public swimming pools") and at subsection 3109.4.1 ("barrier height and clearances") to require enclosure by a fence or barrier at least five feet in height above grade. 
(b)  In the event any provision in appendix H ("signs") of the International Building Code appears to conflict with any provision of chapter 130 ("Signs") of this Code, unless they may reasonably be reconciled, the provision in chapter 130 shall prevail. 
(Code 1966, § 8-14; Ord. No. 1992-80, §§ III—V, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 1995-13, § II, 3-13-95; Ord. No. 2001-54, § 1, 8-13-01; Ord. No. 2001-86, § 2, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2009-07, § I, 1-26-09)  
Sec. 22-29. - Structures in rights-of-way prohibited. 
No structure, including but not limited to temporary or permanent fences or buildings, may be placed or erected on or in any city street or alley right-of-way without the express written consent of the board of commissioners. This section is intended to cover all such rights-of-way whether paved, curbed or guttered, or in front of or behind any lot or any other structure on any lot in the city. No variance may be granted to the provisions of this section other than by the board of commissioners, any other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding. The provisions of this section do not apply to mailboxes. 
(Code 1966, § 8-19) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94.  
Sec. 22-30. - Reinspections. 
For any permit obtained from the building official in accordance with this chapter, including any standard or national codes adopted herein the minimum fee for reinspections shall be $40.00, except that where a higher inspection fee is provided for elsewhere in this chapter, it shall control over this general provision. 
(Code 1966, § 8-20; Ord. No. 2002-57, § 5, 9-11-02; Ord. No. 2006-123, § 1, 12-11-06; Ord. No. 2009-07, § I, 1-26-09)  
Sec. 22-31. - Procedure for revocation of construction permits. 
(a)  This section shall govern the procedure for the revocation of the following construction permits required by the applicable ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners: swimming pool, building, curb cut, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, sign and removal and demolition. 
(b)  The express purpose for requiring and issuing permits is to enforce compliance with the applicable construction code requirements for which the permit was issued and to require that qualified personnel are utilized in meeting these requirements. The issuance of any of the permits listed in this section does not raise any legal right or remedy in any person that does not exist without the requirement of such permits. 
(c)  The owner of any property for which a construction permit has been issued may request that the building inspection department revoke such permit by following the procedures as set out in subsection (e) of this section. 
(d)  The general contractor on any construction project may request that the building inspection department revoke any or all permits held by any or all subcontractors responsible to the general contractor on such construction project by following the procedures as set out in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  The party requesting that a permit be revoked shall give written notice thereof to the holder of such permit and a copy of such notice shall be forwarded to the building inspection department. Upon receipt thereof, the building official or his authorized representative shall send a notice of revocation to the permit holder by certified mail, return of receipt requested. Such notice shall be sent to the applicable address as on record in the building inspection department and shall state that such permit shall be revoked seven days from the date posted on the written notice. 
(f)  Upon the completion of the procedures as set out in subsection (e) of this section, the building official shall revoke such permit and cause a notation of such revocation to be entered upon the records of the building inspection department office. 
(g)  This section only applies to the procedure for and authorization for revocation of construction permits under the criteria set out in this section and does not act to repeal any ordinance setting out procedures for the issuance of construction permits or revocation thereof as set out in applicable ordinances. 
(Code 1966, § 8-21)  
Sec. 22-32. - Authority to revoke or suspend permits and certificates. 
If the building official determines that a building or structure or any portion thereof is in violation of any provision of the International Building Code, ordinance, regulation, or local, state or federal law, the building official is authorized to suspend or revoke any city-issued permits or certificates, including but not limited to certificates of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2018-48, § I, 7-9-18)  
Secs. 22-33—22-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; sign construction specifications, § 130-136. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-56. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-80, § 1, adopted July 24, 2006, repealed § 22-56, which pertained to office created; appointment and qualifications. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 22-57. - Electricians to be furnished a copy of this article. 
Upon registration with the city as required by this article all contractors shall be furnished a copy of this article at a cost which is on file in the building official's office. 
(Code 1966, § 13-20; Ord. No. 2005-76, § 1, 9-26-05)  
Secs. 22-58—22-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES; REGISTRATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-76, § 1, adopted Sept. 26, 2005, amended the title of Div. 2 to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 2 was entitled, "Licenses." 
 
Sec. 22-71. - Requirements. 
(a)  Unless exempted under state law, all persons who perform electrical work in the city, including electrical contractors and electrical sign contractors, must hold a currently valid license issued by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation. 
(b)  Electrical contractors and electrical sign contractors who perform electrical work in the city, must register with the building official on a form supplied by that official, provide all necessary documentation, and pay the requisite fee. Registered contractors are under a continuing obligation to immediately update the information and documentation provided at the initial registration or renewal of the same. 
(c)  A journeyman may be employed or contracted for work in the city only by a contractor registered hereunder. The contractor shall be responsible for having at least one currently licensed journeyman on the job site for every ten apprentices when electrical work is being performed during the master electrician's absence from such site. The registered contractor shall be responsible for journeyman electricians employed or whose services are hired, and assumes all liability for their work. 
(Code 1966, § 13-4; Ord. No. 2005-76, § 1, 9-26-05)  
Sec. 22-72. - Registration fees. 
The fee for an initial registration under this article shall be $75.00, and the annual fee for renewal of such registrations shall be $50.00. 
(Code 1966, § 13-5; Ord. No. 2005-76, § 1, 9-26-05)  
Secs. 22-73—22-76. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-76, § 2, adopted Sept. 26, 2005, repealed §§ 22-73—22-76, which pertained to electrical examining board; examination of applicant for journeyman and master electrician license; insurance requirements; and fees. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 22-77. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1996-42, § II, adopted June 24, 1996, repealed § 22-77, which pertained to display of master electrician licenses and derived from Code 1966, § 13-9.  
Sec. 22-78. - Term; renewal. 
The initial registration under this article shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year current on the date of issuance. Each renewal thereafter shall expire on December 31st next following the date of issuance of the renewal. 
Renewals shall be processed after the filing of such form as the building official shall provide, and submission of the required fees and documentation. 
(Code 1966, § 13-10; Ord. No. 2005-76, § 1, 9-26-05)  
Sec. 22-79. - Revocation of registration. 
A registration under this article may be revoked or suspended at any time by order of the building official for violation of any of the provisions of this article or of any Texas law or rule regulating electrical contractors or electrical sign contractors, and the offending person shall be prohibited from engaging in electrical work in the city. Any order of revocation or suspension may be appealed to the building board of adjustments and appeals within 20 days of such action. 
(Code 1966, § 13-11; Ord. No. 2005-76, § 1, 9-26-05)  
Sec. 22-80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-76, § 2, adopted Sept. 26, 2005, repealed § 22-80, which pertained to revocation. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Secs. 22-81—22-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
Sec. 22-91. - Permit required; application; exceptions. 
(a)  Only contractors registered pursuant to Division 2 hereof may obtain permits or perform electrical work in the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, alter or wire any electrical work, either outside or inside of any building, prior to the issuance of a permit to do so from the building official. Application for such permit shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the building official and shall contain a description, by street and number or by street, lot and block, as may be necessary to locate the premises upon which the work is to be done. Upon making such application and the payment of the fees prescribed by section 22-92, the building official shall issue a permit for the construction, installation or alteration of the electrical work. 
(b)  No permit shall be required for maintenance work done by any person through an employee regularly employed to do such work solely on or within the premises or property owned or controlled by such person, provided that such employee shall not be allowed to install any new wiring, conduit, apparatus or equipment. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  The installation of meters or other registering devices by any utility company engaged in the business of supplying electrical service and operating under a franchise from the city. 
(2)  The installation of telephone and telegraph equipment by any utility company engaged in the business of supplying communications service and operating under a franchise from the city. 
(Code 1966, § 13-15; Ord. No. 2005-76, § 1, 9-26-05)  
Sec. 22-92. - Fees. 
(a)  The fee for the permit required by section 22-91 shall be in accordance with the following schedule, such fee to be paid to the building official's office and a permit obtained before electrical work of any nature shall be started: 
(1)  Base fee .....$15.60 
(2)  Service as defined in the National Electrical Code, service re-do, and temporary pole, each .....15.60 
(3)  Circuits or feeders as defined by the National Electrical Code, each .....2.40 
(4)  Minimum permit reinspections .....48.00 
(5)  Working clearance controls by one meter, per meter .....39.60 
Plus other applicable deposits or sureties 
(b)  For any electrical work being reconstructed, renewed, altered, overhauled, repaired, moved, rewired or taken over, the permit fee shall be $39.60. 
(c)  If an inspection is made and the resultant discovery is that work for which a permit is required by this article has been started or done but the required permit has not been issued, then the discovery fee shall be equal to the permit fee, but not less than $39.60 in any event, and this will not alleviate the requirement to obtain a permit or prevent legal action for work done without a permit. 
(d)  The building official shall have the right to declare a permit null and void if there has been a misrepresentation of facts or any violation of the provisions of this article, and after such declaration of facts or any violation of the provisions of this article, no work shall be performed until a new permit is issued and all fees have been paid. 
(Code 1966, § 13-16; Ord. No. 2002-57, § 6, 9-11-02; Ord. No. 2002-67, § 3, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 2006-123, § 2, 12-11-06; Ord. No. 2016-67, § II, 10-10-16)  
Sec. 22-93. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-76, § 2, adopted Sept. 26, 2005, repealed § 22-93 which pertained to expiration upon failure to commence or complete work. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 22-94. - Inspection of work. 
(a)  The building official or designee shall inspect all work covered by a permit required by this article during and after its completion. If the work appears to be constructed in accordance with all rules and requirements governing such work, the building official shall issue a certificate approving the work. Such certificate shall be issued only to the master electrician who ordered the permit. The approval by the building official relating to any such electrical work shall not constitute a guarantee or warranty to anyone by the city or the building official that such work is in compliance with code requirements or is otherwise safe or without default, and the city and building official shall never be liable for any damage of whatsoever nature caused by any defect in any electrical work installed or repaired under any permit issued under this article. 
(b)  No concealed wiring for which a permit is issued or required by this article shall be lathed over or in any manner concealed from sight until inspected and accepted by the building official. 
(c)  All wiring must be completed before the wiring shall be allowed to be concealed from view. All cabinets, cutouts, flush switches and all other fittings shall be permanently installed before final inspection and acceptance, except the lighting or other fixtures themselves, and a separate permit shall be required for any alteration or changes thereafter. 
(d)  When electrical work has been reported to the building official as ready for final inspection, and when upon such inspection the work is found to be defective, a permit reinspection fee shall be paid at the time of the new application for final inspection and before such work is again inspected for final approval. 
(e)  Any person having charge of the construction, alteration or repair of buildings or any person who covers or conceals or causes to be concealed or covered any wiring for which a permit has been issued or required before the wiring has been inspected and approved, without having officially notified the building official at least two whole business days before (Monday through Friday), shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1966, § 13-18; Ord. No. 2005-76, § 1, 9-26-05)  
Sec. 22-95. - Records to be kept by building official. 
The building official shall keep in his office a complete record of all master and journeyman electricians working in the city. He shall also keep on file in his office a copy of this article and a copy of the National Electrical Code adopted by section 22-106. Such copies shall be open to inspection by any person. 
(Code 1966, § 13-19)  
Secs. 22-96—22-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 22-106. - National Electrical Code amended. 
The 2011 National Electrical Code adopted by the State of Texas for statewide applicability is amended as follows: 
(1)  Annex H ("Administration and Enforcement") is not adopted hereunder. 
(2)  Section 310.106(B) is amended to read: Aluminum conductors will not be permitted for permanent interior wiring for any type of occupancy, except that stranded aluminum conductors 1/0 AWG through 1,000 kcmil marked as type RW, RHW, XHHN, THW, THWN, THHN may be used for service entrance conductors or feeders ONLY. Type SE Style U and SE Style R shall be made of an AA-8000 series electrical grade aluminum alloy conductor material. 
(Code 1966, § 13-43; Ord. No. 1993-84, § I, 11-24-93; Ord. No. 1996-42, § I, 6-24-96; Ord. No. 1999-72, § 2, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 1, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2005-76, § 1, 9-26-05; Ord. No. 2009-07, § II, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 2012-89, § I, 11-26-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-07, § II, adopted Jan. 26, 2009, changed the title of § 22-106 from 2005 national electrical code amended to national electrical code amended.  
Sec. 22-107. - Use of type NM and NMC cables. 
Type NM and NMC cables shall not be used in the construction of buildings within the city, except in single-family residential buildings. Type NM and NMC cables may be permitted in multifamily residential buildings provided all of the walls and ceilings thereof are constructed of two sheets of five-eighths-inch gypsum wall board (one-hour total fire-rated). All floors of such building shall have a subfloor of two sheets of five-eighths-inch gypsum wall board (one-hour total fire-rated) or shall be made of 1 5/8 -inch lightweight concrete. The thickness of a floor which provides adequate fire protection, as described in this section, has no relation to and is not to be interpreted as being adequate for the load-bearing requirements of such floor. 
(Code 1966, § 13-43.2)  
Sec. 22-108. - When metallic conduit required. 
(a)  All of the following electrical wiring for lights, heat, power or other purposes installed within the city shall in all cases be contained and encased in metallic conduit: 
(1)  All electric wiring in buildings of any description situated in the first fire zone. 
(2)  All electric wiring in buildings of a construction known in the building trade as "fireproof" or "slow burning." 
(3)  All electric wiring on all service installations, and such wiring shall be continuous from entrance to main line switch and from main line switch to distribution cabinet, unless approved S.E. cable is used. 
(b)  A nonmetallic conduit is permitted if the building is not located in a fire zone district. 
(Code 1966, § 13-44) 
Cross reference— Fire zones, § 22-1.  
Sec. 22-109. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1996-42, § II, adopted June 24, 1996, repealed § 22-109, which pertained to maximum number of outlets per circuit and derived from Code 1966, § 13-51.  
Sec. 22-110. - Location of main service switch for lighting. 
Where the service switch and/or distribution panels are not located immediately adjacent to the meter box or "back to back" (outside/inside), an approved switch and fuses or circuit breaker shall be installed at the outer end of the run by the meter box on the load side. 
(Code 1966, § 13-60)  
Sec. 22-111. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1996-42, § II, adopted June 24, 1996, repealed § 22-111, which pertained to motor feeder overcurrent protection and derived from Code 1966, § 13-62.  
Sec. 22-112. - Application of article to preexisting wiring. 
Whenever the service wires or interior wiring in a building existing prior to September 9, 1946, and which do not meet the requirements of this article, are disconnected, the service shall not again be connected until the entire wiring has been made to comply with this article, except that the building official may waive this requirement whenever a registered contractor certifies in writing, following the contractor's on-site inspection, that the wiring is in a good and safe condition and does not represent a hazard to the property in question nor to the surrounding properties. This provision shall likewise apply to any and all outdoor electrical signs attached to or connected with any building situated within the city. 
(Code 1966, § 13-63; Ord. No. 2005-76, § 1, 9-26-05)  
Sec. 22-113. - Use of aluminum conductors not permitted. 
Aluminum conductors will not be permitted for permanent interior wiring for any type occupancy. 
(Code 1966, § 13-64)  
Sec. 22-114. - Interpretation of electrical code. 
The building official, or his designated representative, shall interpret the provisions of the electrical code, as amended in section 22-106, any provision in any other ordinance or resolution notwithstanding. Such interpretation shall be final and conclusive, except that an appeal may be taken as provided in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 13-100; Ord. No. 2005-76, § 1, 9-26-05)  
Sec. 22-115. - Board of adjustments and appeals. 
Whenever a party is aggrieved by an interpretation of the electrical code made by the building official or his designated representative, such party may appeal such interpretation to the building board of adjustments and appeals. Such board of adjustments and appeals shall have the same powers and duties regarding the interpretation of the provisions of the electrical code that it has in interpreting the building code. Further, such board shall also operate under the same procedures in hearing and deciding appeals regarding the interpretation of the electrical code as it does in hearing and deciding appeals regarding the interpretation of the building code. 
(Code 1966, § 13-101; Ord. No. 2009-07, § II, 1-26-09) 
Cross reference— Appointment, terms and procedures for boards, committees, commissions of the city, § 2-76 et seq.; substantial evidence rule applies in appeals from city officer or employee decisions, § 2-196.  
Sec. 22-116. - Effect of appeal on orders of the building official. 
An appeal to the board of adjustments and appeals complaining of an interpretation of the electrical code made by the building official or his designated representative shall not operate as a stay of any order regarding such interpretation. 
(Code 1966, § 13-102)  
Secs. 22-117—22-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; utilities, ch. 106; water, § 106-51 et seq.; sanitary sewer system, § 106-141 et seq. 
State Law reference— Requirement that cities prescribe rules and regulations relating to plumbing, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243-101, § 15. 
 
Sec. 22-136. - Plumbing code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for and by the city, the International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, including appendices, prepared by the International Code Council, published in booklet form, (with the exception that section 312.3 is hereby amended to allow the use of an air pressure test on plastic piping when in the discretion of the building official inclement weather would interfere in the effectiveness of a water test,) which is referred to, incorporated in this article, and made a part of this article for all purposes. A copy of such code shall be filed in the office of the building inspector. 
(Code 1966, § 24-12; Ord. No. 1992-80, § XVII, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 1995-13, § III, 3-13-95; Ord. No. 1999-72, § 3, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-86, § 3, 12 10-01; Ord. No. 2009-07, § III, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 2012-86, § I, 11-26-12)  
Sec. 22-137. - Permit fee schedule. 
The following schedule of fees shall be assessed for the issuance of all plumbing permits by the building inspection department of the city: 
(1)  Permit fees: 
For issuing each permit (base fee) .....$39.60 
(2)  In addition: 
For each plumbing fixture, floor drain or trap (including water and drainage piping) .....4.80 
For each new sewer .....15.60 
For each sewer plug .....39.60 
For each sewer having to be replaced or repaired .....15.60 
For each cesspool .....8.40 
For each septic tank and seepage pit or drain field .....15.60 
For each water heater and/or vent .....24.00 
For installation, alteration or repair of water piping and/or water treating equipment .....8.40 
For repair or alteration of drainage or vent piping .....39.60 
For vacuum breakers or backflow protective devices installed subsequent to the installation of the piping or equipment served: 
One to five .....4.00 
Over five, each .....2.40 
(3)  Gas permits: 
Gas permit (minimum) per outlet .....15.60 
Gas line (new or repair) .....15.60 
All fees shall be paid to the building official and by him paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 24-13; Ord. No. 2002-57, § 7, 9-11-02; Ord. No. 2002-67, § 4, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 2006-123, § 3, 12-11-06; Ord. No. 2009-07, § III, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 2016-67, § III, 10-10-16)  
Sec. 22-138. - Required license, registration and insurance. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of plumbing, or perform any task or work regulated by V.T.C.A., Texas Occupations Code ch. 1301 unless they have complied with all the applicable requirements of that code. 
(b)  Master plumbers who perform work in the city must register annually with the building official on a form supplied by that official, provide all necessary documentation, and pay the requisite fee. Registered master plumbers are under a continuing obligation to immediately update the information and documentation provided at the initial registration or last renewal of the same. The fee for an initial registration under this article shall be $75.00, and the annual fee for renewal of such registrations shall be $50.00. 
(c)  Before being granted any permit a master plumber must have on file with the building official or designee a copy of a certificate of insurance that meets the requirements of V.T.C.A., Texas Occupations Code § 1301.552. 
(Code 1966, § 24-14(b); Ord. No. 1992-80, § XLIV, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 2009-07, § III, 1-26-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-07, § III, adopted Jan. 26, 2009, changed the title of § 22-138 from master plumber's license, insurance requirements to required license, registration and insurance.  
Secs. 22-139, 22-140. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-07, § III, adopted Jan. 26, 2009, deleted §§ 22-139 and 22-140 which pertained to appliance installation mechanics and state plumbing license law adopted, and derived from the Code of 1966, §§ 24-15 and 24-11.  
Secs. 22-141—22-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - GAS CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
Sec. 22-161. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-07, § IV, adopted Jan. 26, 2009, deleted § 22-2161, which pertained to definitions and derived from the Code of 1966, § 24-27.  
Sec. 22-162. - Purpose of and compliance with article. 
The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe installation of consumer gas piping and gas appliances. All such gas piping and gas appliances installed, replaced, maintained or repaired within the corporate limits of the city shall conform to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 24-28)  
Sec. 22-163. - Standard Gas Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for and by the city, the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, including appendices, prepared by the International Code Council, published in booklet form, which is referred to, incorporated in this article and made a part of this article for all purposes. A copy of such code shall be filed in the office of the building official. 
(Code 1966, § 24-30; Ord. No. 1992-80, § XXI, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 1995-13, § IV, 3-13-95; Ord. No. 1999-72, § 4, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-86, § 4, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2009-07, § IV, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 2012-85, § I, 11-26-12)  
Secs. 22-164, 22-165. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-07, § IV, adopted Jan. 26, 2009, deleted §§ 22-164 and 22-165 which pertained to insurance required and use of existing piping; converting piping, and derived from the Ord. No. 1992-80, § XXII, 10-12-92 and the Code of 1966, § 24-32.  
Sec. 22-166. - Permits. 
(a)  No person shall install a gas conversion burner, floor furnace, central heating plant, vented wall furnace, water heater, boiler, consumer's gas piping, or convert existing piping to utilize natural gas without first obtaining a permit to do such work from the building official. Permits will not be required, however, for setting or connecting other gas appliances, or for the repair of leaks in house piping. 
(b)  When only temporary use of gas is desired, the building official may issue a permit for such use, for a period of not to exceed 60 days, provided the consumer's gas piping to be used is given a test equal to that required by this article for a final piping inspection. 
(Code 1966, § 24-33; Ord. No. 2009-07, § IV, 1-26-09)  
Sec. 22-167. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-07, § IV, adopted Jan. 26, 2009, deleted § 22-32, which pertained to trench excavation and derived from the Code of 1966, § 8-22.  
Sec. 22-168. - Disconnection of defective piping, fixtures and appliances. 
The building official is authorized to disconnect any gas piping, fixture or appliance for which a certificate of approval is required but has not been issued with respect to such gas piping, fixture or appliance, or which, upon inspection, shall be found defective or in such condition as to endanger life or property. In all cases where such a disconnection is made, a notice shall be attached to the piping, fixture or appliance disconnected by the building official, which notice shall state that such gas piping, fixture or appliance has been disconnected by the building official, together with the reason or reasons therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove such notice or reconnect such gas piping, fixture or appliance without authorization by the building official, and such gas piping, fixture or appliance shall not be put in service or used until the building official has attached his certificate of approval in lieu of his prior disconnection notice. 
(Code 1966, § 24-36)  
Sec. 22-169. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-07, § IV, adopted Jan. 26, 2009, deleted § 22-169, which pertained to enforcement of article; building official's right of entry and derived from the Code of 1966, § 24-37.  
Sec. 22-170. - Article does not impose liability on city. 
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the city any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by any defect in any gas piping or appliance mentioned in this article, or by installation thereof, nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the inspection authorized under this article or the certificate of approval issued by the building official. 
(Code 1966, § 24-38)  
Sec. 22-171. - Amendments. 
The International Fuel Gas Code adopted in section 22-163 is hereby amended by deleting Sections 404.14 and 404.14.1. 
(Ord. No. 2001-86, § 5, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2009-07, § IV, 1-26-09)  
Secs. 22-172—22-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL CODE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
State Law reference— Licensing of air conditioning contractor, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8861, § 9. 
 
Sec. 22-191. - Standard Mechanical Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for and by the city the International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, including appendices, prepared by the International Code Council, published in booklet form, which is referred to, incorporated in this article and made a part of this article for all purposes. A copy of such code shall be filed in the office of the building official. 
(Code 1966, § 8-41; Ord. No. 1992-8, § IX, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 1995-13, § V, 3-13-95; Ord. No. 1999-72, § 5, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-86, § 6, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2009-07, § V, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 2012-87, § I, 11-26-12)  
Sec. 22-192. - Required license, registration and insurance. 
(a)  No person shall engage in business as an air conditioning and refrigeration contractor, or perform any task or work regulated by V.T.C.A., Texas Occupations Code ch. 1302 unless they have complied with all the applicable requirements of that code. 
(b)  Air conditioning and refrigeration contractors who perform work in the city must register annually with the building official on a form supplied by that official, provide all necessary documentation, pay the requisite fee, and provide proof that all persons who assist the contractor in performing air conditioning and refrigeration maintenance work are air conditioning technicians registered with or certified by the state department of licensing and regulation. Registered air conditioning and refrigeration contractors are under a continuing obligation to immediately update the information and documentation provided at the initial registration or last renewal of the same. The fee for an initial registration under this article shall be $75.00, and the annual fee for renewal of such registrations shall be $50.00. 
(c)  Before being granted any permit an air conditioning and refrigeration contractor must have on file with the building official or designee a copy of the certificate of insurance required by state law. 
(Code 1966, § 8-41.2; Ord. No. 1992-80, § X, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 2001-86, § 7, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2009-07, § V, 1-26-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-07, § V, adopted Jan. 26, 2009, changed the title of § 22-192 from amendments to required license, registration and insurance.  
Secs. 22-193—22-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - IRRIGATION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-07, § VI, adopted Jan. 26, 2009, deleted Art. VII, §§ 22-216, 22-217 which pertained to swimming pool code and enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art. VII derived from Code 1966, §§ 26¾-1, 26¾-2; Ord. No. 1992-80, § XXVI, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 1997-3, § I, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 1999-72, § 6, 8-9-99. 
 
Sec. 22-201. - Irrigation systems; license, permit, registration; fees. 
(a)  As required by V.T.C.A., Texas Water Code § 401.006, and unless exempted by state law, every person who engages in the business of irrigation systems within the territorial city limits or its extraterritorial jurisdiction must hold a current irrigation technician license issued under V.T.C.A., Texas Occupations Code § 1903.251. 
(b)  As required by V.T.C.A., Texas Water Code § 401.006, and unless exempted by Texas law, no person shall install an irrigation system within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction before obtaining an irrigation permit issued by the building official. Permits shall be issued only to currently licensed persons who have registered with the building official as provided in subsection (c) hereof. Permit applications shall be submitted to the building official on a form supplied by that official, provide all necessary documentation, and include payment of a fee of $67.60. Issuance of a permit shall be conditioned upon full compliance with all applicable rules, standards and specifications as may have been adopted by the V.T.C.A., Texas Occupations Code § 1903.053 relating to the design, installation, and operation of irrigations systems, including those contained in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 344. 
(c)  Licensed irrigation technicians who perform work in the city or its ETJ must register annually with the building official on a form supplied by that official, provide all necessary documentation, and pay the requisite fee. Registered irrigation technicians are under a continuing obligation to immediately update the information and documentation provided at the initial registration or last renewal of the same. The fee for an initial registration under this article shall be $75.00, and the annual fee for renewal of such registrations shall be $50.00. 
(d)  Before being granted a permit for the installation of a system an installer must have on file with the building official or designee a bond of not less than $10,000.00. The bond must: 
(1)  Be written by a company licensed to do business in this state; 
(2)  Provide for commercial general liability insurance for the irrigation technician for any claim for property damage or bodily injury, regardless of whether the claim arises from negligence or on a contract; 
(3)  Provide coverage for all claims arising in a one-year period; and 
(4)  Provide coverage of all irrigation technicians who assist the contractor in performing the installation work, and provide proof of each such technician's registration with the state department of licensing and regulation. 
(e)  This section shall have no applicability when the system involved is either an onsite sewage disposal system, as defined by V.T.C.A., Texas Health and Safety Code § 366.002, or an irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by V.T.C.A., Texas Agriculture Code § 251.002, or connected to a groundwater well used by the property owner for domestic use. 
(Ord. No. 2016-67, § IV, 10-10-16)  
Secs. 22-202—22-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - HOUSING CODE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; unsafe building abatement code, § 22-271 et seq.; nuisances, § 46-26 et seq.; littering, § 46-61 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 106; landscaping, § 110-26 et seq.; supplementary zoning district regulations, § 138-346 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-241. - Title; code remedial. 
The provisions embraced within this article shall constitute and be known and may be cited as the housing code for the city. This article is hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of residential buildings. 
(Code 1966, § 8-28)  
Sec. 22-242. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings or structures or portions thereof presently located within the city at the time of adoption of this article, used or designed or intended to be used for human habitation, regardless of when such building may have been constructed. This article establishes minimum standards for occupancy, and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for construction, replacement or repair of buildings, except such as are contrary to the provisions of this article. All buildings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction of the city shall comply with the requirements for new buildings in the building code, adopted by section 22-26. 
(b)  All buildings or structures, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this article in a building when erected, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises and all other requirements of this article. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 8-29)  
Sec. 22-243. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alter or alteration means any change or modification in construction or occupancy. 
Building official means the officer, or other person, charged with the administration and enforcement of this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
Dwelling, when used in this article without other qualifications, means a structure occupied exclusively for residential purposes, including multiple dwelling unit structures. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Floor area means the total area of habitable space in a building or structure. 
Habitable room means a space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable space. 
Multiple dwelling means any building, or portion thereof, which is occupied as the home or residence of more than two families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in such building, and shall include flats and apartments. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple, and any person in whose name tax bills on the property are submitted. It shall also mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner, executor, executrix, administrator, trustee, guardian of the estate of the owner, mortgagee or vendee in possessions, or assignee of rents, lessee, or other person in control of a building; or their duly authorized agents. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. It is his responsibility to notify the actual owner of the reported infractions of this article pertaining to the property, which apply to the owner; 
(3)  Shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
Plumbing means the practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: Sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities; the venting system and the public or private water supply systems, within or adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of stormwater, liquid waste or sewerage, and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point of public disposal or other acceptable terminal. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon. 
Repair means the replacement of existing work with the same kind of material used in the existing work, not including additional work that would change the structural safety of the building, or that would affect or change required exit facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring or heating installations, or that would be in violation of a provision of law or ordinance. The term "repair" or "repairs" shall not apply to any change of construction. 
Required means required by some provision of this article. 
Residential buildings means buildings in which families or households live, which include dwellings or dwelling units, or in which sleeping accommodations are provided, and all dormitories, shall be classified as "residential occupancy." Such buildings include, among others, the dwellings, multiple dwellings and roominghouses. 
Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
Stairway means one or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one story to another in a building or structure. 
Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and upper surface of the floor or roof next above. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. The term "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." 
Supplied means paid for, furnished or provided by, or under control of, the owner or operator. 
Ventilation means the process of supplying and removing air, by natural or mechanical means, to or from any space. 
(b)  Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling units," "roominghouse," "rooming units" or "premises" are used in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
(Code 1966, § 8-30) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-244. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-80, § 1, adopted July 24, 2006, repealed § 22-244, which pertained to powers and duties of building official. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 22-245. - Minimum requirements. 
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let or sublet to another for occupancy, any dwelling, dwelling unit or residential building after notification from the building official that such structure is deemed unsafe for human occupancy as provided for in this article, nor shall any dwelling, dwelling unit or residential building be permitted to exist which does not comply with the following requirements, or which is defined as substandard under this article: 
(1)  Sanitary facilities required. Every dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, all in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks and obstructions. 
(2)  Location of sanitary facilities. 
a.  All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of such dwelling unit. The tub or shower and lavatory shall be located in a room affording privacy to the user and such room shall have a minimum floor space of 30 square feet (2.8 square meters), with no dimension less than four feet (1.2 meters). 
b.  Bathrooms shall be accessible from habitable rooms, hallways, corridors or other protected or enclosed areas, not including kitchens or other food preparation areas. 
(3)  Hot and cold water supply. Every dwelling unit shall have connected to the kitchen sink, lavatory and tub or shower an adequate supply of both cold water and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved distribution system connected to a potable water supply. 
(4)  Water heating facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have water heating facilities which are properly installed and maintained in a safe and good working condition and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower, at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit (49 degrees Celsius). Minimum storage capacity of the water heater shall be 30 gallons (140 liters). Apartment houses may use a centralized water heating facility capable of heating an adequate amount of water, as required by the Standard Plumbing Code, to not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit (49 degrees Celsius). 
(5)  Electric lights and outlets required. Every habitable room or space shall contain at least two separate and remote convenience outlets, and bedrooms shall have, in addition, at least one wall-switch-controlled ceiling or wall-type light fixture. In kitchens, three separate and remote convenience outlets shall be provided, and a wall or ceiling type light fixture controlled by a wall switch shall be required. Every hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one electric fixture. In bathrooms the electric light fixture shall be controlled by a wall switch. In addition to the electric light fixture in every bathroom and laundry room, there shall be provided at least one convenience outlet. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner. Improperly insulated electrical wires or excessive multiple connections per outlet are specifically prohibited. 
(6)  Minimum requirements for electrical systems. Every electrical outlet and fixture required by this article shall be installed, maintained and connected to a source of electric power in accordance with the provisions of the electrical code of the city. 
(7)  Foundation. The building foundation system shall be maintained in a safe manner and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. A foundation is substandard if: 
a.  The unit has a dirt floor; 
b.  The floor moves under normal stress, due to improper reinforcement; or 
c.  Supporting piers are not of one solid-piece construction. 
(8)  Exterior walls. Every exterior wall of a dwelling unit shall be free of holes, breaks, or loose or rotting boards or timbers, to the extent that such conditions might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. 
(9)  Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and maintained in a safe manner and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. 
(10)  Means of egress. Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress, with minimum ceiling height of seven feet, leading to a safe and open space at ground level. 
(11)  Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every inside and outside stairway, porch and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(12)  Windows and doors. Every intended opening in a structure shall be covered with a window, exterior door, basement or cellar door, or hatchway, as applicable, which shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(13)  Interior floor, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(14)  Structural supports. Every structural element of the dwelling shall be maintained structurally sound and show no evidence of deterioration which would render it incapable of carrying loads which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(Code 1966, § 8-32)  
Sec. 22-246. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Minimum standards. The standards as set out in section 22-245 for dwellings, dwelling units or residential buildings are the minimum standards required for all such dwellings or dwelling units or residential buildings located within the corporate limits of the city. All buildings and structures which have any of the defects as provided for in section 22-245 are hereby declared substandard buildings and are declared to be public nuisances and shall be ordered to be vacated, repaired or demolished, as provided in this article. It shall be the duty of the owners of all such buildings to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Inspections. 
(1)  The building official or code enforcement director shall inspect or cause to be inspected any dwelling, dwelling unit or residential building which is or may be unsafe. 
(2)  After the building official or code enforcement director has inspected or caused to be inspected a dwelling, dwelling unit or residential structure and has determined that such structure is not in compliance with the provisions of this article, he may initiate proceedings to cause the abatement of the unsafe condition by repair, vacation or demolition, or a combination thereof. 
(c)  Notice to repair, demolish or vacate. 
(1)  Whenever the building official or code enforcement director determines that there has been a violation of any provision of this article, he shall give notice of such alleged violations to the person or persons responsible therefor, and such alleged violations shall constitute a nuisance. Such notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  Street address; 
b.  A statement of the reasons why it is being issued; 
c.  Allow ten days from receipt for the application of a building permit and allow 90 days' time for the performance of any act it requires; 
d.  Such notice shall further state that if an application for such building permit of such repairs, reconstruction, alterations, removal or demolition are not completed within the stated time as set forth in the notice, the building official or code enforcement director shall institute such legal proceedings charging the person or agent with a violation of this article and that the city may secure the structure at the owner's expense; 
e.  State that the recipient of such notice has the right of appeal from the decision of the building official or code enforcement director, to the housing board of adjustments and appeals. Such notice of appeal must be written, and must be delivered to the health and code compliance department of the city within ten working days from the date on the notice to repair, demolish or vacate, or in the case of notice of publication, within ten working days of the date of publication. Upon timely receipt of such notice of appeal, the building official or code enforcement director shall notify the appellant of the date upon which a hearing will be held on such appeal. 
(2)  Service of notice shall be as follows: 
a.  By posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the structure to be repaired; and 
b.  By depositing the notice in the United States Post Office addressed to the owner at his last known address from the property tax records, with postage prepaid thereon; or 
c.  If the owner resides within the city, by delivery to the owner personally, or by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode of the owner, with a person of suitable age and discretion; however, only one such attempt at delivery need be made; 
d.  If, through the exercise of all due diligence an owner of such property cannot be determined, or if determined, cannot be located, service may be had by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(d)  Recording of notice. 
(1)  If the notice is not complied with nor an appeal filed within the allotted time, the building official will file, with the office of the city secretary, a certificate describing the property and certifying that the building or structure is unsafe and that the owner of record has been served. A copy of the certificate shall be forwarded to the housing board of adjustments and appeals to be placed on the agenda of such board for the purposes of determining whether or not an order of demolition shall be issued. 
(2)  If the building or structure poses an immediate hazard to life or to the safety of the public, the building official or code enforcement director shall issue an order vacating the premises immediately, which such notice of vacation shall be served as set out in subsection (c)(2) of this section. The building official or code enforcement director may take immediate action to secure or repair the structure to prevent injury or harm, the costs of which shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(3)  Every notice to vacate, in addition to complying with subsection (c)(2) of this section, shall be posted at each exit and entrance to the building or structure and shall state: "This building is unsafe and its use or occupancy has been prohibited by the building official." 
Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs are made or demolition is completed. It shall be unlawful for any person or his agent to remove such notice without written permission of the building official, or for any person to enter the building or structure, except for the purposes of making the required repairs or demolishing the building or structure. 
(4)  The city attorney is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions relating to the vacation and repair of structures by enforcement in municipal court or by writ of injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)  Repair of structure. If, after a notice of repair is issued by the building official or code enforcement director, the responsible person takes out a building permit for the purposes of repairing the structure, such repairs shall be accomplished within 90 days from the date of the issuance of the building permit for such repairs. If such person fails to obtain a building permit or diligently pursue the repair of such structure to completion or abandons the repair of such structure, then the building official or code enforcement director may secure the structure and make necessary repairs to prevent immediate harm or injury, at the owner's expense, and place the structure on the next agenda of the housing board of adjustment. 
(Code 1966, § 8-33; Ord. No. 2014-30, § I, 6-23-14; Ord. No. 2015-47, § I, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 2019-54, § I, 9-9-19; Ord. No. 2020-23, § I, 6-8-20)  
Sec. 22-247. - Board of adjustments and appeals. 
(a)  The building board of adjustments and appeals of the city shall also serve as the housing board of adjustments and appeals for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of the housing code. The existing procedures for the building board of adjustments and appeals, except to the extent of conflict with this article, shall be followed in all proceedings before such board when such board is exercising its jurisdiction under this article. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an appeal or a certificate of demolition and repair, as provided for in section 22-247, the board of adjustments and appeals shall, as soon as practicable, fix a date, time and location for the hearing of the appeal or consideration of the certificate. The hearing date shall not be more than 30 days from the date of appeal or date of delivery of the certificate. Written notice of the time and location of the hearing and the subject matter thereof shall be delivered personally or mailed to each affected person, being any tenants and owners of the structure, at the address of such persons by certified mail, postage prepaid and return receipt requested. Failure of any person to appear at the hearing set in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of his right to an administrative hearing on the notice. 
(c)  The hearing concerning a certificate issued by the building official under the provisions of section 22-247 shall be conducted for the purposes of determining whether or not to uphold the decision of the building official, as set out in the certificate issued by the building official under section 22-247. The board of adjustments and appeals shall hear applicable evidence of the building official and the owner of the dwelling unit concerning such order. The board shall make a determination as to the occupancy, repair or demolition of such dwelling unit. The board shall issue an order setting out its final determination, which shall be served as provided for in subsections 22-247(c)(2)a, and b. If the board orders demolition of the structure, then the order shall require that the owner of the dwelling unit demolish the structure within 30 days from the date of issuance of such order. If the owner fails to demolish the structure within such 30-day period, then the city may demolish or cause the demolition of such structure, and the owner shall be responsible for reimbursing the city for all costs relating to such demolition, for which the city shall have a lien on the property for such costs until payment. The city attorney is authorized to enforce the orders of the board by municipal court prosecution or by injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The hearing based on an appeal of an owner of a structure shall be conducted according to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. The board of adjustments and appeals, after hearing the evidence of the building official and the owner, shall make a ruling either upholding the decision of the building official or may require additional repairs, demolition or vacation of the structure, extend any necessary time limits involved, or not require repair or demolition or vacation of the premises, in the discretion of the board. The board shall issue an order stating its findings and deliver the same to the building official personally and deliver the order to the owner and tenants, if applicable, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The board shall follow the same procedure as provided for in subsection (b) of this section relating to demolition of dwelling units, if applicable. The city attorney is hereby authorized to enforce the orders of the board by prosecution in municipal court or by writ of injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)  Final decision of the board. 
(1)  The board of adjustments and appeals shall issue an order after any hearing, within five days from the date of such hearing. Notice of such order shall be accomplished within two days of the issuance of the board's order. 
(2)  The effective date of the board's final decision shall be as stated therein. 
(3)  If the owner of a structure is aggrieved by the decision by the board, nothing in this article shall be construed as depriving him of seeking redress in the civil or other applicable court. Such appeal must be filed within 15 days from the effective date of the board's final decision. 
(f)  The board of adjustments and appeals is hereby authorized to issue orders in the alternative. If the board shall order repair of the structure within a certain time limit, it shall also have the authority to include in such order an order of demolition if the repair of the structure is not accomplished or diligently carried out according to the order of the board. In such case the order of the board requiring demolition shall not require an additional hearing. 
(Code 1966, § 8-34) 
Cross reference— Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-76 et seq.; substantial evidence rule in effect regarding appeals from decisions of boards, commissions and committees, § 2-82; substantial evidence rule in effect for appeals from decisions of officers and employees, § 2-196.  
Sec. 22-248. - Owner-occupied dwelling unit. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section an "owner-occupied dwelling unit" means that the owner resides within the dwelling unit and is the holder of title in fee simple of the interest in the land on which the dwelling unit is situated. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, where the building official has determined that an owner-occupied dwelling unit is in a substandard condition, as defined in this article, an initial determination shall be made by the building official to see if the owner of such dwelling unit is qualified for the purposes of receiving financial assistance through the city's housing program, for the purposes of repair of such dwelling unit. The criteria established according to the federal government or any other criteria established by the city shall be used in determining qualification. 
(c)  The building official is authorized to grant extensions to time limits and exceptions to the building code or the housing code necessary to ensure that the dwelling unit meets the minimum standards, as set out in this article, without an undue financial hardship on the owner of the owner-occupied dwelling unit. 
(Code 1966, § 8-35)  
Sec. 22-249. - Building code enforcement provisions not applicable, exceptions. 
The provisions of the building code of the city shall not be applicable to the enforcement of this article, unless the dwelling unit is being remodeled or has been damaged, as those terms are defined under the building code of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 8-36)  
Secs. 22-250—22-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - UNSAFE BUILDING ABATEMENT CODE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Housing code adopted, § 22-241 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-271. - Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code adopted. 
The Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, 1985 edition, prepared by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., and as such code may in this article be amended, is hereby adopted for the city, and such edition is referred to, incorporated in this article and made a part of this article for all purposes. A copy of such code shall be on file in the office of the building official. 
(Code 1966, § 8-24; Ord. No. 1992-80, § VII, 10-12-92) 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-76 et seq.; substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196 et seq.; nuisances, § 46-26 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 106; supplementary zoning district regulations, § 138-346 et seq.  
Sec. 22-272. - Amendments. 
The unsafe building abatement code adopted in section 22-271 is hereby amended as follows: 
Sections 101.4, Alterations, Additions and Repairs, and 103.3, Requirements Not Covered by Code, are hereby deleted in the adoption of such code and shall not be adopted as part of the code adopted in this article. 
Section 105, Board of Adjustments and Appeals, consisting of subsections 105.1 through and including 105.5, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 105, Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
The building board of adjustments and appeals of the city shall also serve as the board of adjustments and appeals for the purpose of providing for the final interpretation of the provisions of this code and for providing for the carrying out of all the duties imposed on the board of adjustments and appeals by this code. The existing procedures for the building board of adjustments and appeals shall be followed in all proceedings before such board when such board is exercising its jurisdiction under this article. However, when any procedure specified in this code provides for additional or contradictory procedures from existing procedures followed by such board, then in that event, the procedures set out in this code shall be followed. 
(Code 1966, § 8-24)  
Secs. 22-273—22-289. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - RESIDENTIAL CODE 
 
Sec. 22-290. - International Residential Code for One- and Two-family dwellings adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for and by the city, the International Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings, 2012 edition, including appendices E, F, H, J, K, M, O, and P (except as amended by section 22-291) prepared by the International Code Council, published in booklet form, which is referred to, incorporated in this article and made a part of this article for all purposes. A copy of such code shall be filed in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2001-86, § 8, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2009-07, § VII, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 2012-83, § I, 11-26-12)  
Sec. 22-291. - Amendments. 
The Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings adopted in section 22-290 is hereby amended as follows: Appendix P is amended at Section P2904 to remove all requirements to include any sprinklers or sprinkler systems in any One- and Two-family Dwellings, and other previous section 22-291 amendments are replaced by the adoption of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. 
(Ord. No. 2001-86, § 9, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2009-07, § VII, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 2012-83, § I, 11-26-12)  
Secs. 22-292—22-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - SWIMMING POOL CODE 
 
Sec. 22-301. - International Swimming Pool and Spa Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for and by the city, the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 edition, prepared by the International Code Council, published in booklet form, which is referred to, incorporated in this article and made a part of this article for all purposes. A copy of such code shall be filed in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2012-88, § I, 11-26-12)  
Sec. 22-302. - Amendment. 
The Swimming Pool and Spa Code, is hereby amended as follows: 
(a)  Section 305 (Barrier Requirements) is amended at sections 305.2.1 (Barrier height and clearances), 305.2.5 (Closely spaced horizontal members), 305.2.6 (Widely spaced horizontal members) and 305.4 (Structure wall as a barrier) to require barrier height of at least 5 feet (60 inches) from grade. 
(Ord. No. 2012-88, § I, 11-26-12)  
Secs. 22-303—22-349. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 
 
Sec. 22-350. - International Energy Conservation Code adopted. 
The International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 edition, including appendices, prepared by the International Code Council, published in booklet form, is hereby adopted for the city, and such edition is referred to, incorporated in this article and made a part of this article for all purposes. A copy of such code shall be on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § VIII, 1-26-09)  
ARTICLE XIII. - IMAGINE TOMORROW 
 
Sec. 22-351. - Authority and purpose. 
Pursuant to V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, § 380.001, authorizes the city to establish and provide for the administration of one or more programs, including programs for making loans and grants of public money and providing personnel and services of the city, to promote local economic development and to stimulate business and commercial activities in the city. Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 380, and subject to available funding and the conditions of this program as set out in this section and Chapter 98 of the McAllen Code of Ordinances, the city may, on a case-by-case basis, provide economic development incentives equivalent to a multiple of any increase in the ad valorem taxes assessed by the city against an eligible residential structure or a residentially zoned undeveloped lot located following completion of the development, improvements to or the remodeling of such residence or undeveloped lot and as may be provided in an executed incentive contract agreement. The economic incentives established in this article shall be known as the Imagine Tomorrow Program. 
(Ord. No. 2020-23, § II, 6-8-20)  
Sec. 22-352. - Economic incentive programs. 
(a)  Empty lots. 
(1)  New construction on an undeveloped lot zoned R-1 Single-Family Residential may be eligible for the following incentives: 
a.  Ten percent rebate of eligible investment, not to exceed $5,000.00; 
b.  Waiver of administrative building permit fees; 
c.  Waiver of city park development fees; 
d.  Release of city mowing liens; 
e.  Landscape and irrigation reimbursement up to $500.00. 
(2)  New construction on an undeveloped lot zoned R-2 Duplex-Fourplex may be eligible for the following incentives: 
a.  Ten percent rebate of eligible investment, not to exceed $7,500.00. 
b.  Release of city mowing liens 
c.  Landscape and irrigation reimbursement up to $1,000.00. 
(3)  Eligibility for the Imagine Tomorrow Program for undeveloped residential lots is subject to the following requirements and conditions: 
a.  Minimum investment of $20,000.00 in new construction on an undeveloped lot located in the corporate limits of the city and zoned for residential use. 
b.  The lot must be a full lot of record. 
c.  Improvements that require a variance to city ordinances or regulations are not eligible. 
d.  Individuals that owe taxes or fees to the city are not eligible. 
e.  The applicant must provide the details of the proposed residential development project, including total project costs, to the health and code compliance director or his designee. 
f.  The project must be completed within 24 months from the date the building permit is issued. 
g.  Only native plants, native trees, and approved lawn irrigation systems are eligible for reimbursement. 
(b)  Renovation of certain single-family residences. 
(1)  Exterior renovation of structures zoned R-1 Single Family Residential may be eligible for the following incentives: 
a.  Twenty-five percent rebate of eligible investment, not to exceed $5,000.00. 
b.  Landscape and irrigation reimbursement up to $500.00. 
(2)  Eligibility for the Imagine Tomorrow Program for home renovation is subject to the following requirements and conditions: 
a.  Minimum investment of the greater of $10,000.00 or ten percent of the property's most recent appraisal improvement value on file with the Hidalgo County Appraisal District. 
b.  The investment must be for exterior renovation of a single-family residence zoned as R-1 that was originally constructed at least 50 years prior to the date of application. 
c.  Eligible homes are limited to one incentive agreement per year. 
d.  The project must be completed within three months from the date the building permit is issued. This deadline may be extended for good cause. Requests for extensions must be submitted in writing to the health and code compliance director prior to the project completion deadline. 
e.  Only native plants, native trees, and approved lawn irrigation systems are eligible for reimbursement. 
f.  The following improvements are not eligible for reimbursement: 
1.  Improvements that require a variance or special exception; 
2.  New pools, hot tubs, spas and water features; 
3.  Detached accessory structures; 
4.  Garage enclosures; 
5.  Carports. 
(c)  Rehabilitation of substandard structures. 
(1)  Rehabilitation of a substandard structure on a lot zoned R-1 Single-Family Residential may be eligible for the following incentives: 
a.  Ten percent rebate of eligible investment, not to exceed $5,000.00; 
b.  Waiver of administrative building permit fees; 
c.  Temporary placement of roll-off garbage containers at no cost; 
d.  Release of city mowing liens; 
e.  Landscape or irrigation reimbursement up to $500.00. 
(2)  Rehabilitation of a substandard structure on a lot zoned R-2 Duplex-Fourplex may be eligible for the following incentives: 
a.  Ten percent rebate of eligible investment, not to exceed $7,500.00; 
b.  Temporary placement of roll-off garbage containers at no cost; 
c.  Release of city mowing liens; 
d.  Landscape or irrigation reimbursement up to $1,000.00. 
(3)  Eligibility for the Imagine Tomorrow Program for substandard structures is subject to the following requirements and conditions: 
a.  Minimum investment of $20,000.00 in the rehabilitation of an unoccupied, substandard structure zoned R-1 single family or R-2 duplex-fourplex at the time of application. 
b.  The structure must be identified as substandard by either the building inspector, his designee, or the director of health and code compliance, or his designee. 
c.  A property owner may request an inspection at no cost if he believes the structure might qualify for the Imagine Tomorrow Program. The health and code compliance director or his designee may limit each property to no more than one no-cost inspection every two years. 
d.  The investment must result in a unit that can be occupied in accordance with all applicable codes as adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2020-23, § II, 6-8-20)  
Sec. 22-353. - Application procedures. 
(a)  The health and code compliance director shall create an application for the Imagine Tomorrow Program and has the authority to amend the application as necessary to request additional information for the administration of the Imagine Tomorrow Program. The health and code compliance directory may request additional information not included on the application in order to determine eligibility for the program or verify costs. 
(b)  Property owners must complete an Imagine Tomorrow Program application and, if approved, execute an Incentive Agreement prior to receiving a building permit. A property owner that is issued a building permit prior to execution of the incentive agreement is no longer eligible for the Imagine Tomorrow Program. 
(1)  The health and code compliance director, or his designee, shall review imagine tomorrow applications and notify the applicant notified via mail or electronic mail to the address or email address provided on the application within 15 business days of submission. 
(2)  If an application is incomplete, or if additional information is required, the applicant shall be notified via mail or electronic mail to the address or email address provided on the application. 
(3)  A property owner shall have 15 business days to remedy the defects in the notice described in section (b)(2) above or the application is considered withdrawn. The health and code compliance director shall have 15 business days after the date of submission of all requested information to issue a decision 
(4)  If approved, the property owner must execute an incentive agreement as prepared and approved by the city attorney within 15 business days of receiving the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2020-23, § II, 6-8-20)  
Sec. 22-354. - Consent to periodic inspections. 
Property owners accepted to the Imagine Tomorrow Program consent to the city conducting periodic inspections of the interior and exterior of the structure during the construction or rehabilitation process. 
(Ord. No. 2020-23, § II, 6-8-20)  
Chapter 24 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 24-1—24-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION 
 
Sec. 24-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Affiliated programmer means a programmer with an ownership interest of five percent or more including general partnership interests, direct ownership interests, and stock interests in a corporation where such stockholders are officers or directors or who directly or indirectly own five percent or more of the outstanding stock, whether voting or nonvoting. Such interests include limited partnership interests of five percent or greater. 
Basic service tier means, at a minimum, all signals of domestic television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system); any public, educational, and governmental programming required by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier; and any additional video programming signals or service added to the basic tier by the cable operator. 
Cable operator means any person or group of persons who provides cable service over a cable system within the city under a franchise issued by the city and who directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
Cable programming service includes any video programming provided over a cable system, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than: 
(1)  Video programming carried on the basic service tier as defined in this section; 
(2)  Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program basis; or 
(3)  A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program video programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted basis so long as the combined service: 
a.  Consists of commonly identified video programming; and 
b.  Is not bundled with any regulated tier of service. 
Commission means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Small system means a cable television system that serves fewer than 1,000 subscribers. The service area of a small system is determined by the number of subscribers that are served by a system's principal headend, including any other headends or microwave receive sites that are technically integrated to the system's principal headend. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 2, 9-27-93) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 24-27. - Governing law; venue. 
This article shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of the state and the Charter and city codes to the extent that such Charter and codes are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas. All obligations of the parties under this article are performable in Hidalgo County, Texas. If any proceeding is brought to enforce the terms of this article, it shall be brought in Hidalgo County, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 21, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-28. - Information provided by cable operator on monthly subscriber bills. 
A cable operator must provide the following information to subscribers on monthly bills: 
(1)  A statement substantially the same as the following: The basic service tier rates and related equipment and installation charges are regulated by the city. If you have any questions or comments regarding these rates, you may call or write the city, attn. city manager, P.O. Box 220, McAllen, TX 78505; and 
(2)  The FCC community unit identifier for the cable system. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 3, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-29. - Negative option billing. 
A cable operator shall not charge a subscriber for any service or equipment that the subscriber has not affirmatively requested by name. This provision, however, shall not preclude the addition or deletion of a specific program from a service offering, the addition or deletion of specific channels from an existing tier of service, or the restructuring or division of existing tiers of service that do not result in a fundamental change in the nature of an existing service or tier of service, provided that such change is otherwise consistent with applicable regulations. A subscriber's failure to refuse a cable operator's proposal to provide such service or equipment is not an affirmative request for service or equipment. A subscriber's affirmative request for service or equipment may be made orally or in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 4, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-30. - Subscriber bill itemization. 
(a)  Cable operators may identify as a separate line item of each regular subscriber bill the following: 
(1)  The amount of the total bill assessed as a franchise fee. 
(2)  The amount of the total bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the cable operator by the franchise agreement to support public, educational, or governmental channels or the use of such channels. 
(3)  The amount of any other fee, tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by any governmental authority on the transaction between the operator and the subscriber. In order for a governmental fee or assessment to be separately identified under this section, it must be directly imposed by a governmental body on a transaction between a subscriber and an operator. 
(b)  The charge identified on the subscriber bill as the total charge for cable service should include all fees and costs itemized pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 5, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-31. - Basic service tier rates. 
(a)  Generally. Basic service tier rates are subject to regulation by the city in order to ensure that they are in compliance with the requirements of 47 USC § 543. Rates that are demonstrated, in accordance with this article, not to exceed the initial permitted per channel charge or the subsequent permitted per channel charge, as described in this section, or the equipment charges as specified in section 24-32, will be accepted as in compliance. The maximum monthly charge per subscriber for the basic service tier offered by a cable operator shall consist of a permitted per channel charge multiplied by the number of channels on the tier, plus a charge for franchise fees. The maximum monthly charges for the basic service tier shall not include any charges for equipment or installations. Charges for equipment and installations are to be calculated separately pursuant to section 24-32. 
(b)  Initial permitted per channel charge. 
(1)  For purposes of this section, the initial date of regulation for the basic service tier shall be the date on which the city gives written notice to the cable operator that the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier and that Ordinance No. 1993-69, from which this article is derived, has been adopted by the city. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, rates in effect on the initial date of regulation or in effect on September 30, 1992, shall be the rates charged to subscribers for service received on that respective date. 
(3)  The permitted per channel charge on the initial date of regulation shall be, at the election of the cable operator, either a charge determined pursuant to a cost-of-service proceeding or the charge specified in subsection (b)(3)a, b, or c of this section, as applicable: 
a.  If the operator's per channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is equal to or below the benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the date of initial regulation, then the permitted per channel charge shall be the per channel charge in effect on the date of initial regulation, adjusted for equipment. 
b.  If the operator's per channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is above the benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation, and the operator's per channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on September 30, 1992, was above the benchmark per channel charge, then the permitted per channel charge is 0.9 of the per channel charge in effect on September 30, 1992, but no lower than the benchmark per channel charge, additionally adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the initial date of regulation, for equipment, and for any changes in the number of channels offered on the basic service tiers. 
c.  If the operator's per channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is above the benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation, and the operator's per channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on September 30, 1992, was below the benchmark per channel charge, then the permitted per channel charge is the benchmark rate per channel adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the initial date of regulation, for equipment, and for any changes in the number of channels offered on the basic service tier. 
(c)  Subsequent permitted per channel charge. After the initial date of regulation, the permitted channel charge for the basic service tier shall be, at the election of the cable operator, either: 
(1)  A per channel rate determined pursuant to a cost-of-service showing; or 
(2)  The prior permitted per channel charge previously approved by the city, adjusted for inflation and external costs in accordance with the price cap requirements set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Price cap requirements. 
(1)  Inflation adjustments. Permitted per channel charges for the basic service tier may be adjusted periodically on account of inflation. Adjustments to permitted per channel charges on account of inflation shall be based on changes in the Gross National Product Price Index (GNP-PI) published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the United States Department of Commerce. 
(2)  External costs. Permitted per channel charges for the basic service tier may also be adjusted for changes in external costs measured on a per channel per subscriber basis. To the extent external cost increases are greater or less than the GNP-PI for the relevant period, the per channel charge will be adjusted accordingly. Per channel charges may not be increased if external costs other than franchise fees increase at a rate less than inflation. Permitted per channel charges also shall be decreased on account of external costs to the extent such costs decrease from previous levels. 
a.  External costs shall consist of costs in the following categories: 
1.  State and local taxes applicable to provision of cable television service; 
2.  Franchise fees; 
3.  Costs of complying with franchise requirements, including costs of providing public, educational, and governmental access channels as required by the city; 
4.  Retransmission consent fees; and 
5.  Programming costs. 
b.  The permitted per channel charge for the basic service tier shall be adjusted on account of programming costs and retransmission consent fees only for programming or broadcast signals offered on that tier. 
c.  The permitted per channel charge shall not be adjusted for costs of retransmission consent fees or charges in those fees incurred prior to October 6, 1994. 
d.  The starting date for adjustments on account of external costs for the basic service tier shall be the initial date of regulation or 180 days from September 1, 1993, if the initial date of regulation occurs on or after 180 days from September 1, 1993. 
e.  Changes in franchise fees shall not result in an adjustment to permitted per channel charges, but rather shall be calculated separately as part of the maximum monthly charge per subscriber for the basic service tier. 
f.  Adjustments to permitted per channel charges on account of increases in costs of programming obtained from affiliated programmers shall be the lesser of actual increases or the previous permitted rate level increased by the amount of inflation. 
g.  Adjustments to permitted per channel charges on account of increases in costs of programming shall be further adjusted to reflect any revenues received by the operator from the programmer. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 6, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-32. - Rates for equipment and installation used to receive basic service tier. 
(a)  Scope of section. The equipment regulated under this section consists of all equipment in a subscriber's location that is used to receive the basic service tier, regardless of whether such equipment is additionally used to receive other tiers of regulated programming service and/or unregulated service. Such equipment shall include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Converter boxes; 
(2)  Remote control units; 
(3)  Connections for additional television receivers; and 
(4)  Other cable home wiring. 
Subscriber charges for such equipment shall not exceed charges based on actual costs in accordance with the requirements set forth in this section. 
(b)  Unbundling. A cable operator shall establish rates for remote control units, converter boxes, other customer equipment, installation, and additional connections separate from rates for the basic service tier. In addition, the rates for such equipment and installations shall be unbundled one from the other. 
(c)  Equipment basket. A cable operator shall establish an equipment basket, which will include all costs associated with providing customer equipment and installation under this section. Equipment basket costs shall be limited to the direct and indirect material and labor costs of providing, leasing, installing, repairing, and servicing customer equipment, as determined in accordance with the cost accounting and cost allocation requirements of section 24-33. The equipment basket shall not include general administrative overhead including general marketing expenses. The equipment basket may include a reasonable profit. 
(d)  Hourly service charge. A cable operator shall establish charges for equipment and installation using the hourly service charge (HSC) methodology. The HSC shall equal the operator's annual equipment basket costs, excluding the purchase cost of customer equipment, divided by the total person hours involved in installing, repairing, and servicing customer equipment during the same period. The purchase cost of customer equipment shall include the cable operator's invoice price plus all other costs incurred with respect to the equipment until the time it is provided to the customer. The HSC is calculated according to the following formula: 
HSC  	=  	EB - CE 
_____
   H 
 
Where 
EB 	= 	annual equipment basket cost; 
CE 	= 	annual purchase cost of all customer equipment; and 
H 	= 	person hours involved in installing and repairing equipment per year. 
 
(e)  Installation charges. Installation charges shall be either: 
(1)  The HSC multiplied by the actual time spent on each individual installation; or 
(2)  The HSC multiplied by the average time spent on a specific type of installation. 
(f)  Remote charges. Monthly charges for rental of a remote control unit shall consist of the average annual unit purchase cost of the type of remote leased, including acquisition price and incidental costs such as sales tax, financing and storage up to the time it is provided to the customer, added to the product of the HSC times the average number of hours annually repairing or servicing a remote, divided by 12 to determine the monthly lease rate for a remote according to the following formula: 
Monthly Charge 	= 	UCE + (HSC × HR)     
_____      
    12 
 
Where 
HR 	= 	average hours repair per year; and 
UCE 	= 	average annual unit cost of remote. 
 
Separate charges shall be established for each significantly different type of remote control unit. 
(g)  Other equipment charges. The monthly charges for rental of converter boxes and other customer equipment shall be calculated in the same manner as for remote control units. Separate charges shall be established for each significantly different type of converter box and each significantly different type of other customer equipment. 
(h)  Additional connection charges. The costs of installation and monthly use of additional connections shall be recovered as charges associated with the installation and equipment cost categories, and at rate levels determined by the actual cost methodology presented in subsections (e), (f), and (g) of this section. An operator may recover additional programming costs and the costs of signal boosters on the customer's premises, if any, associated with the additional connection as a separate monthly unbundled charge for additional connections. 
(i)  Charges for equipment sold. A cable operator may sell customer premises equipment to a subscriber. The equipment price shall recover the operator's cost of the equipment, including costs associated with storing and preparing the equipment for sale up to the time it is sold to the customer, plus a reasonable profit. An operator may sell service contracts for the maintenance and repair of equipment sold to the subscribers. The charge for a service contract shall be the HSC times the estimated average number of hours for maintenance and repair over the life of the equipment. 
(j)  Promotions. A cable operator may offer equipment or installation at charges below those determined under subsections (e) through (g) of this section, as long as those offerings are reasonable in scope in relation to the operator's overall offerings in the equipment basket and not unreasonably discriminatory. Operators may not recover the cost of a promotional offering by increasing charges for other equipment basket elements or by increasing programming service rates above the maximum monthly charge per subscriber prescribed by this article. As part of a general cost-of-service showing, an operator may include the cost of promotions in its general system overhead costs. 
(k)  Franchise fees. Equipment charges may include a properly allocated portion of franchise fees paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 7, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-33. - Cost accounting and cost allocation requirements. 
(a)  Applicability of section. The requirements of this section are applicable for purposes of rate adjustments on account of external costs and for cost-of-service showings. 
(b)  Generally accepted accounting principles. Cable operators shall maintain their accounts in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, except as otherwise directed by the city. 
(c)  Accounts required. Cable operators shall maintain accounts in a manner that will enable identification of appropriate costs and application of the city's cost assignment and allocation procedures, to cost categories necessary for rate adjustments due to changes in external costs and for cost-of-service showings. Such categories shall be sufficiently detailed and supported to permit verification and audit against the company's accounting records. 
(d)  Accounting level. Except to the extent indicated in subsection (e) of this section, cable operators shall aggregate expenses and revenues at either the franchise, system, regional, or company level in a manner consistent with practices of the operator as of April 3, 1992. However, in all events, cable operators shall identify at the franchise level their costs of franchise requirements, franchise fees, local taxes, and local programming. 
(e)  Cost allocation requirements. 
(1)  For purposes of establishing expenses at the franchise level, cable operators shall allocate expenses and revenues aggregated at higher levels to the franchise level based on the ratio of the total number of subscribers served at the franchise level to the total number of subscribers served at the higher level. 
(2)  Except to the extent indicated in subsections (e)(3) and (4) of this section, all categories of costs allocated to, or identified at, the franchise level shall be allocated to the basic service tier based on the ratio of channels in the basic tier to the total number of channels offered in the franchise area, including nonregulated and leased commercial access channels. These costs shall be allocated to each tier of cable programming services based on the ratio of channels in that tier to the total number of channels offered in the franchise area. 
(3)  Costs of programming and retransmission consent fees, however, shall be allocated only to the tier on which the programming or broadcast signal at issue is offered. 
(4)  Costs of franchise fees shall be allocated among equipment and installations, program service tiers and subscribers in a manner that is most consistent with the methodology of assessment of franchise fees by the city. 
(5)  Costs of public, educational, and governmental access channels carried on the basic tier shall be directly assigned to the basic tier where possible. 
(f)  Common costs. Expenses which cannot be assigned to any single expense or service category shall be described as common costs. Common costs shall be allocated to expense categories as follows: 
(1)  Wherever possible, common costs are to be allocated to service cost categories based on direct analysis of the origin of the costs themselves. 
(2)  When direct analysis is not possible, common costs shall, if possible, be allocated to service cost categories based on an indirect, cost-causative linkage to other costs directly assigned or allocated to the service cost category. 
(3)  When neither direct nor indirect measures of cost allocation can be found, common costs shall be allocated to each service cost category based on the ratio of all costs directly assigned and attributed to a service cost category over total costs directly assignable and attributable. 
(g)  Unrelated expenses and revenues. Cable operators shall exclude from cost categories used to develop rates for the provision of basic service tier and equipment any direct or indirect expenses and revenues not related to the provision of such services. Common costs of providing basic service tier and equipment and unrelated activities shall be allocated between them in accordance with subsection (f) of this section. 
(h)  Part-time channels. In situations where a single channel is divided on a part-time basis and is used to deliver service associated with different tiers or with pay per channel or pay per view service, a reasonable and documented allocation of that channel between services shall be required along with the associated revenues and costs. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 8, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-34. - Costs of franchise requirements. 
(a)  The costs of satisfying franchise requirements to support public, educational, and governmental channels shall consist of the sum of: 
(1)  All per channel costs for the number of channels used to meet franchise requirements for public, educational, and governmental channels; 
(2)  Any direct costs of meeting such franchise requirements; and 
(3)  A reasonable allocation of general and administrative overhead. 
(b)  The costs of satisfying any other requirement under the franchise shall consist of the direct and indirect costs, including a reasonable allocation of general and administrative overhead. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 9, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-35. - Charges for customer changes. 
(a)  This section shall govern charges for any changes in service tiers or equipment provided to the subscriber that are initiated at the request of a subscriber after the initial service installation. 
(b)  The charge for customer changes in service tiers effected solely by coded entry on a computer terminal or by other similarly simple methods shall be a nominal amount, not exceeding actual costs, as defined in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  The charge for customer changes in service tiers or equipment that involve more than a coded entry on a computer or other similarly simple method shall be based on actual cost. The actual cost charge shall be either the HSC, as defined in section 24-31, multiplied by the number of person hours needed to implement the change or the HSC multiplied by the average number of person hours involved in implementing customer changes. 
(d)  A cable operator may establish a higher charge for changes effected solely by coded entry on a computer terminal or by other similarly simple methods, subject to approval by the city, for a subscriber changing service tiers more than two times in a 12-month period, except for such changes ordered in response to a change in price or channel line-up. If a cable system adopts such an increased charge, the cable system must notify all subscribers in writing that they may be subject to such a charge for changing service tiers more than the specified number of times in any 12-month period. 
(e)  Downgrade charges that are the same as or lower than upgrade charges are evidence of the reasonableness of such downgrade charges. 
(f)  For 30 days after notice of retiering or rate increases, a customer may obtain changes in service tiers at no additional charge. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 10, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-36. - Notification of proposed rate increase. 
(a)  A cable operator shall provide written notice to a subscriber of any increase in the price to be charged for the basic service tier or associated equipment at least 30 days before any proposed increase is effective. The notice shall include a provision stating that protests to such prices may be filed with the city, attn. city manager, P.O. Box 220, McAllen, Texas 78505. The notice shall also include a statement that such protests must be filed with the city no later than 30 days after the notice is received by the subscriber. 
(b)  In addition to the notice required in subsection (a) of this section, the cable operator shall give the city a minimum of 30 days' advance written notification of any changes in rates for cable programming service or associated equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 11, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-37. - Initiation of review of basic cable service and equipment rates. 
A cable operator shall file its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment with the city within 30 days of receiving written notification from the city that the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier, or by November 15, 1993, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 12, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-38. - City review of basic cable rates and equipment costs. 
(a)  After a cable operator has submitted to the city for review its existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment costs or a proposed increase in these rates (including increases in the baseline channel charge that results from reductions in the number of channels in a tier), the existing rates will remain in effect or the proposed rates will become effective after 30 days from the date of submission to the city. However, the city may toll this 30-day deadline for an additional time by issuing a brief written order as described in subsection (d) of this section within 30 days of the rate submission explaining that it needs additional time to review the rates. The city may, at any time, require the cable operator to produce additional information, including proprietary information, that the city deems necessary in order to make a rate determination. If proprietary information is provided, the provisions of section 24-39 will apply to such information. 
(b)  Upon receipt by the city, the cable operator's submittal shall be available for public inspection and copying. Comments on the submittal by interested persons may be submitted in writing or orally at a city council meeting held at any time during the initial 30-day review period. Written comments shall be addressed to the city manager, and must be received prior to the end of the 30-day review period. 
(c)  If a cable operator submits a proposed rate increase for review that appears to exceed the presumptively reasonable level and does not include a cost-of-service showing to justify the rate, the city will permit the cable operator to cure this deficiency and submit a cost-of-service showing. 
(d)  If the city is unable to determine, based upon the material submitted by the cable operator, that the existing or proposed rates are within the permitted basic service tier charge or actual cost of equipment, as defined in sections 24-31 and 24-32, or if a cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing pursuant to sections 24-33 and 24-40, seeking to justify a rate above the basic service tier charge, as defined in sections 24-31 and 24-32, the city may toll the 30-day deadline in subsection (a) of this section to request and/or consider additional information or to consider the comments from interested parties as follows: 
(1)  For an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings; or 
(2)  For an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. 
The order tolling the effective date of the proposed rate shall explain why the city could not make the necessary determination, and it shall also provide the cable operator an opportunity to cure any deficiencies in its original filing. During the additional time periods provided in this subsection, comments from interested persons may be submitted in writing, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, or orally during at least one city council meeting during the period of abatement. 
(e)  If the city has availed itself of the additional 90 or 150 days permitted in subsection (c) of this section, and has taken no action within these additional time periods, then the proposed rates will go into effect at the end of the 90- or 150-day periods, or existing rates will remain in effect at such times, subject to refunds if the city subsequently issues a written decision disapproving any portion of such rates. However, in order to order refunds, the city must have issued a brief written order to the cable operator by the end of the 90- or 150-day period permitted in subsection (c) of this section directing the operator to keep an accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose behalf such amounts were paid. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 13, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-39. - Proprietary information. 
(a)  If the city has required the cable operator to produce proprietary information under the provisions of this article, the cable operator may submit therewith a request that such information not be made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and shall cover all of the materials to which it applies and all copies of those materials. If feasible, the materials to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any materials to which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the materials to which the request applies shall be identified. 
(b)  Each such request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding the materials from inspection and of the facts upon which those reasons are based. If the request is that the materials be withheld from inspection for a limited period of time, that period shall be specified. 
(c)  Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section will not be considered. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a request in compliance with subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the city will not grant routine public access to the materials. A letter to that effect will be placed in a public file in lieu of the materials withheld from public inspection. 
(e)  However, if a written request for the materials is received by the city pursuant to the Open Records Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq., the city will notify the person providing the materials of the request for the materials. If the person providing the materials requests the city to do so, the city will request an opinion from the attorney general, pursuant to the Open Records Act, regarding the public availability of the materials. If the person providing the materials does not request the city to request an opinion from the attorney general, the city may, at its option, either request such an opinion or provide the materials to the public. 
(f)  If the attorney general issues an opinion or letter ruling requiring the city to make the materials available to the public, the materials will be made available for public inspection. 
(g)  If no request for confidentiality is submitted, the city assumes no obligation to consider the need for nondisclosure. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 14, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-40. - Burden of proof. 
(a)  A cable operator has the burden of proving that its existing or proposed rates for basic service and associated equipment comply with 47 USC § 543, and sections 24-31 and 24-32. 
(b)  For an existing or a proposed rate for basic service tier or associated equipment that is within the permitted tier charge and actual cost of equipment as set forth in sections 24-31 and 24-32, the cable operator must submit the appropriate FCC form to the city. 
(c)  For an existing or a proposed rate for basic service tier that exceeds the permitted tier charge as set forth in sections 24-31 and 24-32, the cable operator must submit to the city a cost-of-service showing to justify the proposed rates. The cost-of-service showing must be in conformance with accounting and cost allocation requirements as adopted and amended by the commission for cable system operators. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 15, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-41. - Small systems. 
(a)  Option 1. 
(1)  A small system, as defined in section 24-26, may certify that the small system's initial rates for basic service and associated equipment comply with section 24-31. A certification by a small system under this section shall be filed with the city within 30 days of receiving written notification from the city that the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier. The certification shall be in writing, shall be signed by the general manager of the system, and shall be verified. 
(2)  Such certification shall be subject to verification by the city on its own motion or upon complaint by a subscriber. The city may request additional information from the operator in order to verify the certification. If proprietary information is requested by the city, the provisions of section 24-39 shall control the availability of such information to the public. 
(3)  As used in this section, initial rates shall mean those rates charged by the small system operator on the date on which the city gives written notice to the cable operator that the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier and that Ordinance No. 1993-69, from which this article is derived, has been adopted by the city. 
(4)  If the city determines that the small system's certification is in error, it shall so notify the small system operator and shall require the small system to comply with all filing requirements in this article for systems that are not small. 
(5)  Subsequent rate filings by a small system operator shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Option 2. 
(1)  A small system, as defined in section 24-26, may certify that the small system's rates for basic service and associated equipment, and subsequent rate increases, comply with section 24-31. A certification by a small system under this section for its initial rates shall be filed with the city within 30 days of receiving written notification from the city that the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier. Certifications for subsequent rate increases shall be filed with the city at the same time that notice is given to the small system's subscribers of the proposed rate increase, in conformance with section 24-36. All certifications shall be in writing, shall be signed by the general manager of the system, and shall be verified. 
(2)  Such certification shall be subject to verification by the city on its own motion or upon complaint by a subscriber. The city may request additional information from the operator in order to verify the certification. If proprietary information is requested by the city, the provisions of section 24-39 shall control the availability of such information to the public. 
(3)  If the city determines that the small system's certification is in error, it shall so notify the small system operator and shall require the small system to comply with all filing requirements in this article for systems that are not small. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 16, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-42. - Written decision. 
(a)  The city shall issue a written decision in a ratemaking proceeding whenever it disapproves an initial rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment in whole or in part, disapproves a request for a rate increase in whole or in part, or approves a request for an increase in whole or in part over the objections of interested parties. The city is not required to issue a written decision that approves an unopposed existing or proposed rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment. 
(b)  Public notice shall be given of any written decision required in subsection (a) of this section, by making the text of any written decision available to the public, and by publication of the decision one time in the official newspaper of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 17, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-43. - Reduction of rates; prescription of rates. 
(a)  The city may order a cable operator to implement a prospective reduction in basic service tier or associated equipment rates where necessary to bring rates into compliance with the standards set forth in sections 24-31 and 24-32. 
(b)  The city may prescribe a reasonable rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment after it determines that a proposed rate is unreasonable. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 18, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-44. - Refunds. 
(a)  The city may order a cable operator to refund to subscribers that portion of previously paid rates determined by the city to be in excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment, unless the operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing which justifies the rate charged as reasonable. Before ordering a cable operator to refund previously paid rates to subscribers, the city shall give the operator notice and opportunity to comment. The operator's opportunity to comment upon the proposed refunds may be at any meeting of the city council during the city's period of review of the operator's rates. If the city has extended its review period under section 24-38, and has issued an accounting order under subsection 24-38(e), then the operator prior to refunds being ordered, may request an opportunity to appear before the city council to comment upon the proposed refunds. 
(b)  An operator's liability for refunds is limited to a one-year period, except that an operator who fails to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city shall be liable for refunds commencing from the effective date of such order until such time as he complies with such order. 
(c)  The refund period shall run as follows: 
(1)  From the date the operator implements a prospective rate reduction back in time to September 1, 1993, or one year, whichever is shorter; 
(2)  From the date the city issues an accounting order pursuant to subsection 24-38(d), and ending on the date the operator implements a prospective rate reduction ordered by the city or one year, whichever is shorter. 
(d)  The cable operator, in its discretion, may implement a refund in the following manner: 
(1)  By returning overcharges to those subscribers who actually paid the overcharges, either through direct payment or as a specifically identified credit to those subscribers' bills; or 
(2)  By means of a prospective percentage reduction in the rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment to cover the cumulative overcharge. This shall be reflected as a specifically identified, one-time credit on prospective bills to the class of subscribers that currently subscribe to the cable system. 
(e)  Refunds shall include interest computed at applicable rates published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, § 19, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-45. - Regulation of basic service chart. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, 9-27-93)  
Sec. 24-46. - Regulation of cable programming services chart. 
(Ord. No. 1993-69, 9-27-93)  
Chapter 26 - CEMETERIES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94. 
 
Sec. 26-1. - When open for authorized use. 
All cemeteries and burying grounds within the city limits, whether public or private, shall be officially open for any authorized use, such as visiting, care of graves, services for the burial of the dead, and other appropriate uses, from one-half hour before official sunrise, Central Standard Time, until one-half hour after official sundown, Central Standard Time, daily. 
(Code 1966, § 9-1)  
Sec. 26-2. - Use of, presence in, etc., during unauthorized hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in, enter into, trespass upon, make use of, attempt to gain access to, or otherwise be present in any cemetery within the city before the official opening hours or after the official closing hours fixed in section 26-1, except when authorized by the owner of such cemetery or his duly authorized agent. If any person wishes to gain access to any such cemetery after such official closing hours, for the purpose of conducting burial or religious ceremonies, the sexton or other authorized agent or officer of the cemetery in question may grant such authorization. 
(Code 1966, § 9-2)  
Sec. 26-3. - Vandalism, improper use of service roads, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found within or found loitering inside any cemetery or burial ground within the city, whether such cemetery or burial ground is public or private, for the purpose of or in the act of committing acts of vandalism or desecration or using the service roads therein as thoroughfares, at any time. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3)  
Sec. 26-4. - Signs, etc., to enforce chapter. 
Persons in charge of cemeteries within the city limits are hereby required to erect such signs, instructions or rules in and about the premises as are necessary to carry out the intentions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 9-4)  
Chapter 30 - CIVIC CENTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; smoking prohibited in certain public places, § 54-122; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Civic center means the McAllen International Civic Center and the entire premises thereof, including the auditorium, convention hall, tourist center, patio, and all other parts or portions thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 10-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-2. - Manager. 
The administrator in charge of the civic center shall be the civic center manager, who shall be employed and discharged by the city manager, subject to approval of the board of commissioners, and the terms, conditions and duties of his employment shall be prescribed by the city manager, subject to the approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2)  
Sec. 30-3. - Lease for use of facilities. 
Written lease contracts shall be required from all lessees of the civic center facilities and the manager of the center is hereby authorized to execute such contracts on behalf of the city. The use of the facilities of the civic center by any such lessee shall be subject to such special contractual agreements and requirements with such lessee as the board of commissioners shall make and prescribe from time to time. Verbal agreements to rent shall not be recognized under any circumstances, and the regulations contained in this chapter and the rental application, after acceptance, shall constitute the entire rental agreement and may not be varied or altered unless done so in writing and signed by authorized representatives of both parties. 
(Code 1966, § 10-4)  
Sec. 30-4. - Payments under lease due and payable to city. 
All payments under a lease contract for use of the civic center shall be due and payable to the city. 
(Code 1966, § 10-5)  
Sec. 30-5. - Sponsor's contract to be submitted with application for use. 
For the purpose of determining rental fees for use of the civic center, a certified copy of all contracts entered into by the sponsoring organization shall be submitted with the application for use. 
(Code 1966, § 10-6)  
Sec. 30-6. - Deposit required prior to use. 
At the time of signing a lease contract for the use or rental of any of the civic center premises, the lessee shall deposit a sum of money of not less than 25 percent of the basic rental for the lease period, which shall be credited on the final rental amount due. Failure of the lessee to use the premises during the contracted lease period shall constitute a breach of contract; however, if the lessee shall give notice of cancellation to the civic center manager six months or more prior to the date of the contracted lease period, the lessee shall be refunded 50 percent of the amount deposited with the city; but if the lessee gives notice less than six months prior to the date of the contracted lease period, the lessee shall receive no refund and the entire deposit shall be forfeited to the city. 
(Code 1966, § 10-7)  
Sec. 30-7. - City may refuse to rent. 
Acting through its agents, the civic center manager, the civic center advisory board, and the city manager, the city hereby reserves the right to refuse to rent the facilities of the civic center to any individual or group not acting in the best interest of the public or the city. 
(Code 1966, § 10-8)  
Sec. 30-8. - [Rental charges generally.] 
(a)  The rentals for the various attractions and purposes for which the civic center is rented shall be set by minute order of the city commission, from time to time. 
(b)  The charges for special services, equipment and personnel such as the sound system, spot lights, stage hands, pianos, billboards, multilingual equipment, electricians, security, and food service, and any other of such services as determined by the board of commissioners by minute order, from time to time, shall be established by the board of commissioners, from time to time. 
(c)  Prior to the establishment of any rentals for use of the civic center or charges for special services, etc., by the board of commissioners, the civic center advisory board shall consider the same and make recommendations to the board of commissioners as it relates to such rental and charges. 
(Code 1966, § 10-9; Ord. No. 2000-34, § 1, 4-24-00)  
Sec. 30-9. - Rental charge for use not covered by approved fees. 
In the case of a request for the use of any facilities of the civic center not covered by the approved rental fees, the civic center advisory board, subject to approval of the board of commissioners, will set the fee within the schedule of rates most nearly applicable. 
(Code 1966, § 10-11; Ord. No. 2000-34, § 2, 4-24-00) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-34, § 2, adopted April 24, 2000, repealed former §§ 30-9 and 30-13 and renumbered the remaining sections accordingly. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of said ordinance.  
Sec. 30-10. - Free use prohibited. 
The minimum actual cost of the operating fee for any and all events or attractions shall be determined and collected for use of the civic center and premises, and no free use thereof shall be permitted, extended or granted to any individual, organization or group. 
(Code 1966, § 10-12; Ord. No. 2000-34, § 2, 4-24-00)  
Sec. 30-11. - Renting on bids. 
An exception to the basic rates established in section 30-9 shall be made in the following circumstances: Any person or organization wishing to use any of the civic center facilities on special occasions, including but not limited to December 25 or December 31, designated as such by the board of commissioners, such designation or exception to be made a sufficient time in advance to enable compliance with this section, shall submit to the civic center advisory board a sealed bid for the use of such facilities on a form which will be available at the office of the civic center manager, which bid shall include a cashier's check for one-half of the amount of the bid, such check to be payable to the McAllen Civic Center, which check will serve as a deposit on and be applied against the total rental to become due. The check of any unsuccessful bidder will be returned to the bidder. All bids shall state, in addition to the amount of the bid, the name of the person or organization submitting the bid and the purpose and time for which the facilities are to be used. All bids must be received in the office of the civic center manager on or before 4:00 p.m. of the day preceding six months prior to the special occasion for which the facilities are sought to be rented. If the date immediately preceding such six-month period falls on a Sunday or a national or state holiday, such bid may be received on the day following such Sunday or holiday. The premises and facilities sought will be rented to the person or organization making the highest bid, provided such bid is not less than the basic rate established by section 30-9. The civic center advisory board will reserve the right to reject any and all bids and to accept the bid which it considers to be the most advantageous. If no bids are received as specified in this section, then the regular rates for the facilities will prevail and the facilities will be rented on a first come, first served basis. 
(Code 1966, § 10-13; Ord. No. 2000-34, § 2, 4-24-00)  
Sec. 30-12. - Broadcasting or television performances, lectures, etc. 
No lessee of civic center facilities shall broadcast or televise any performance, lecture, concert, and/or public or private meeting by radio or television without the written consent of the city manager. If the requisite consent is given, the lessee shall furnish and install all equipment necessary for the broadcast and for the control booth, other than that furnished by the city manager. The lessee shall remove all such equipment before 12:00 noon on the day following the performance, concert, lecture and/or public or private meeting, or before 12:00 noon on the day following the last concert, lecture, performance, and/or public or private meeting, if a series thereof is provided for by the lease. If possession of the premises is to be surrendered by the lessor to some other tenant before 12:00 noon on the day following the termination of the lease referred to in this section, the lessee shall remove all such equipment immediately and before the time fixed for the surrender of the premises to such other tenant. Installation and removal of all such equipment shall be at the expense of the lessee and subject to the supervision of the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 10-15; Ord. No. 2000-34, § 2, 4-24-00)  
Sec. 30-13. - Sale of merchandise generally. 
(a)  The use of any portion of the civic center by any individual, firm or corporation for the purpose of selling merchandise is hereby prohibited, except that the selling of merchandise by display, exhibit or presence of the merchandise under the sponsorship of the Home Show, Retail Grocers Association, Antique Club, arts clubs and associations, charitable organizations such as the YWCA and YMCA and other similar organizations and hotel conventions, restaurant shows, and activities of a similar nature shall be excepted from such prohibition and shall be permitted upon the approval of the civic center manager. 
(b)  Any person selling programs, novelties, souvenirs, records, tapes or literature in relation to, or in conjunction with, a function at the civic center shall pay to the civic center a commission of ten percent of the gross sales of such items. 
(c)  Any exception to the provisions of this section must be approved by the majority of the civic center advisory board and an appropriate rental shall be set by such board not to be less than ten percent of gross sales. 
(Code 1966, § 10-16; Ord. No. 2000-34, § 2, 4-24-00)  
Sec. 30-14. - Concessions. 
(a)  No person renting any part of the civic center at the rates established by this chapter shall acquire any right to any of the concessions or sales of any nature, excepting admission tickets only. The lease contract shall reserve to the city and its assigns the exclusive right to operate concessions for the sale of food, drinks, programs, novelties, souvenirs, etc. 
(b)  No person attending a function at the civic center shall be permitted to bring any food, beverage or ice into the rented area. 
(c)  When and if the city rents the buildings of the civic center or any parts thereof to a lessee for noncommercial functions where no admission charge or registration fee is collected by such lessee, the lessee shall be permitted to furnish to its guests food and other items, except those types of food and drink sold by the concessionaire. 
(Code 1966, § 10-17; Ord. No. 2000-34, § 2, 4-24-00)  
Sec. 30-15. - Time limit on occupancy. 
All lessees shall limit their occupancy of the civic center by persons or property to the time set out in the lease contract. 
(Code 1966, § 10-18; Ord. No. 2000-34, § 2, 4-24-00)  
Sec. 30-16. - Establishment of insurance requirements. 
The board of commissioners shall establish all insurance requirements pertaining to the use of the civic center and its premises. 
(Code 1966, § 10-19; Ord. No. 2000-34, § 2, 4-24-00)  
Sec. 30-17. - Tenants to indemnify city. 
All tenants of the civic center shall hold the city harmless from any and all liabilities for any claims resulting from their rental or use of the premises and shall indemnify the city in case of any claims resulting from their operations or occurring during their occupation of the premises, and all rental contracts shall specifically include such provisions. 
(Code 1966, § 10-20; Ord. No. 2000-34, § 2, 4-24-00)  
Secs. 30-18—30-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADVISORY BOARD[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-76 et seq.; procedure for appointment and terms and qualifications of board members, § 2-77; substantial evidence rule in effect regarding appeals from decisions of boards, commissions and committees, § 2-82. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advisory board means the civic center advisory board created by section 30-42. 
Executive board means the executive board of the advisory board, as created by section 30-66. 
(Code 1966, § 10-31) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-42. - Created; official name. 
There is hereby created and established the civic center advisory board. Such board shall be officially designated as the "McAllen Civic Center Advisory Board." 
(Code 1966, § 10-32)  
Sec. 30-43. - Composition, etc. 
(a)  The civic center advisory board shall be composed of 12 members. 
(b)  Eleven members of the advisory board shall be appointed and serve pursuant to sections 2-76 through 2-82. The president of the chamber of commerce, upon his election as such president, and while he holds such office, shall be automatically a member of the advisory board, and he shall have all rights, privileges and duties of other members of the board. 
(Code 1966, §§ 10-33, 10-34)  
Sec. 30-44. - Ex officio members. 
The board of commissioners may designate such officer or commissioner of the city as it sees fit to serve as an ex officio member of the advisory board, without voting privilege, who shall act in an advisory capacity. The civic center manager shall also be an ex officio member of the advisory board, without voting privilege. 
(Code 1966, § 10-37)  
Sec. 30-45. - Compensation. 
No salary or compensation shall be paid to the members of the advisory board for its services. 
(Code 1966, § 10-38)  
Sec. 30-46. - Secretary. 
The manager of the civic center shall be secretary of the advisory board and shall keep permanent records of all of the proceedings of the board, which proceedings and records shall be available to the board of commissioners, and a copy of such proceedings shall be delivered to the board of commissioners after each proceeding occurs. 
(Code 1966, § 10-40)  
Sec. 30-47. - Quorum. 
Seven of the members of the advisory board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1966, § 10-41)  
Sec. 30-48. - Time and place of regular meetings. 
The advisory board shall meet each three months in regular session, the time and place of the meeting to be set by the advisory board, to consider all matters pertaining to the business, operation and use to be made of the civic center and premises. 
(Code 1966, § 10-42)  
Sec. 30-49. - Call of special meetings. 
The civic center manager or chairman of the advisory board shall have the right to call such special meetings of the advisory board as may be necessary. 
(Code 1966, § 10-44)  
Sec. 30-50. - General duties. 
The advisory board shall work in close cooperation with the civic center manager and shall keep informed as to all aspects of the civic center operation, including but not limited to management, regulations, rules, purposes, maintenance, and policies and ordinances established by the board of commissioners, and it shall stimulate use of the civic center facilities. It shall, from time to time, transmit information, reports, suggestions, recommendations, and advice to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 10-45)  
Sec. 30-51. - Recommendations to board of commissioners. 
Any and all recommendations made by the advisory board to the board of commissioners shall be by a majority of a quorum. A minority of the advisory board members shall have a right to make a minority recommendation in writing to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 10-46)  
Sec. 30-52. - Subcommittees. 
The advisory board is authorized to establish subcommittees for specific operational functions, with a chairman for each subcommittee. 
(Code 1966, § 10-47)  
Sec. 30-53. - Contracts. 
The advisory board may make agreements for proper use of the civic center and premises, taking into consideration the board of commissioners' standing policy that the civic center and premises shall be self-supporting and that the largest possible reasonable use be made of the buildings and premises consistent with the public interest; provided however, that the advisory board shall make no contract of any character creating liability on the part of the city, the advisory board or its members individually, nor shall any guarantees ever be made for any attraction, exhibition or event which will in any manner create or impute any liability of any character to the city. 
(Code 1966, § 10-49)  
Secs. 30-54—30-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EXECUTIVE BOARD 
 
Sec. 30-66. - Created. 
There is hereby created an executive board to the civic center advisory board. 
(Code 1966, § 10-55)  
Sec. 30-67. - Composition; election of members. 
The executive board shall consist of five members elected by the advisory board annually from the members of the advisory board. The retiring chairman of the advisory board shall be automatically elected as one of such five members. In addition to such five executive board members, the civic center manager shall serve as an ex officio member of the executive board, without voting privilege. 
(Code 1966, § 10-56)  
Sec. 30-68. - Replacement of members. 
The advisory board shall have the right to replace any member of the executive board who resigns or who does not attend meetings or perform his duties in a satisfactory manner. 
(Code 1966, § 10-57)  
Sec. 30-69. - Selection of chairman. 
The executive board shall select its own chairman. 
(Code 1966, § 10-58)  
Sec. 30-70. - Time and place of regular meetings. 
The executive board shall meet on the third Thursday of each month, except for the months when the advisory board holds its quarterly meeting. Executive board meetings shall be held at 4:00 p.m. at the conference room of the civic center or some other designated place. 
(Code 1966, § 10-59)  
Sec. 30-71. - Call of special meetings. 
The executive board chairman may call special meetings of the executive board, in addition to the regular meetings, by written or oral notice. 
(Code 1966, § 10-60)  
Sec. 30-72. - Quorum; selection of temporary chairman. 
Four members of the executive board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. If the chairman is absent, and a quorum is present, a temporary chairman may be selected by those present. Any business transacted must receive the vote of at least four members. 
(Code 1966, § 10-61)  
Sec. 30-73. - Powers and duties. 
The executive board shall have the same powers, rights, duties and obligations as the advisory board, subject, however, to the approval of the advisory board. 
(Code 1966, § 10-62)  
Chapter 34 - COURT[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Courts, art. 6; legal department, art. 10. 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.001 et seq., Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.01. 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Created. 
There is hereby created a municipal court in and for the city. 
(Code 1966, § 12-1) 
Charter reference— Municipal court created, art. 6.  
Sec. 34-2. - Jurisdiction. 
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction within the city with the power to hear and determine all cases of violation of this Code, the ordinances of the city, and all other cases of which the municipal courts are given jurisdiction by the Charter and state law. 
(Code 1966, § 12-2) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003.  
Sec. 34-3. - Judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a judge to be known as the judge of the municipal court, who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners and who shall have all the power and authority as granted by, and shall perform the duties as required by, state law. The board of commissioners is authorized to appoint one or more temporary or relief judges to sit for the regular judge of the municipal court or for the presiding judge, or any of the associate judges of such court while such judge or judges, any or all, are temporarily unable to act for any reason. Such temporary or relief judge shall possess the same qualifications required of the judge for whom he is sitting. Any temporary or relief judge shall have all the powers and duties of the judge for whom he is sitting while so acting. 
(b)  The judge, prior to taking office, shall take the requisite oath of office required by the constitution and state law to be taken by the mayor. 
(Code 1966, §§ 12-3, 12-4) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-196 et seq. 
State Law reference— Temporary replacement of municipal judge, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.007(g); oath, Texas Const., art. 16, § 1.  
Sec. 34-4. - Clerks; appointment, duties. 
(a)  Appointment. There is hereby created by the board of commissioners the office and position of the municipal court clerk and municipal court deputy clerks of the municipal court, who shall be appointed by the judge of the municipal court. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The clerk, and deputy clerks, of the court shall perform all the duties and have all the powers bestowed upon clerks of municipal courts by state law and by the Charter. Any clerk or deputy clerk so appointed may act as the official clerk of the municipal court and perform all acts incident to such office. 
(Code 1966, § 12-5) 
State Law reference— Municipal court clerks, deputies, duties, etc., V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.010; vacancy in office, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.011.  
Sec. 34-5. - Prosecuting attorney. 
The city attorney shall be the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court. 
(Code 1966, § 12-6) 
Charter reference— City attorney, art. 10. 
State Law reference— Prosecutions, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.03.  
Sec. 34-6. - Sessions of court. 
The municipal court shall meet on each Monday morning at the McAllen Public Safety Building, and shall remain in session for one week. 
(Code 1966, § 12-7)  
Sec. 34-7. - Seal of court. 
The municipal court shall have a seal with a star of five points in the center and the words "Municipal Court in McAllen, Texas." 
(Code 1966, § 12-8)  
Sec. 34-8. - Rules of practice and procedure. 
The rules of practice and procedure as prescribed by state law governing trials in the state justice of the peace courts shall govern the procedure and practice of the municipal court; and the board of commissioners may prescribe such additional rules of practice and procedure as may not be inconsistent with state law. 
(Code 1966, § 12-10) 
State Law reference— Rules of practice and procedure, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.01 et seq.  
Sec. 34-9. - Bond—Authorized. 
The chief of police, or his assistant in charge of police headquarters, is hereby authorized to allow and fix the amount of bonds in accordance with state law, for any person who has been arrested and brought to the city police station, charged and accused with the commission of a misdemeanor. Such officer shall fix and set such bonds in such sum as will tend to ensure the appearance of the accused at the next call of the docket of the municipal court or at such time as may be agreed upon and determined. 
(Code 1966, § 12-11)  
Sec. 34-10. - Same—Type of bonds accepted. 
Any bond may be in writing, signed by one or more sureties and in statutory form, or may be in cash deposited with the police department, to be returned to the accused upon disposal of the charge against him, under terms and conditions entitling him to return thereof, or to be turned over to the judge of the municipal court. 
(Code 1966, § 12-12)  
Sec. 34-11. - Same—Issuance of receipt. 
At the time any cash bond is deposited, there shall be issued to the party so depositing such cash bond a receipt therefor, which receipt shall be returned to the department or judge of the municipal court whenever such money is returned to the accused or his bondsman; provided, however, the city shall have a first lien on such money for any fine and/or costs assessed against the accused or principal for whom such deposit was deposited. Such receipt shall be in the manner and form as prescribed by the municipal court judge of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 12-13)  
Sec. 34-12. - Same—Agreement to appear or forfeit. 
(a)  At the time the cash bond is deposited with the police department, the accused shall likewise sign and deliver to such department, or some police officer therewith, an agreement in writing to the effect that he will appear in the municipal court on a day certain, at the time set out in such agreement, for trial of the offense with which he may be charged in such court, and that in the event he fails to appear to answer such charge, judgment may be entered on the minutes of such court, without notice or service of citation, declaring such cash bond forfeited to the city. When such cash bond shall have been declared so forfeited, such cash bond shall be paid over to the city secretary by the judge or the police department. 
(b)  The written agreement provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall read substantially as follows: 
STATE OF TEXAS 	) 
COUNTY OF HIDALGO 	) 
 
I, the undersigned, having this day deposited the sum of $_____ as cash bail bond with the City of McAllen, Texas, on the _____ day of ________, 19___, to answer a complaint charging me with a misdemeanor, to wit: _____ the said court may, by an order or a judgment, without further notice to me of any kind, forfeit the cash bail deposited in my behalf as principal or enter a plea of nolo contendere to said complaint and apply said cash bail bond toward the payment of any fine and costs assessed against me. 
	_____
Name of Party Charged 
 
(Code 1966, § 12-14)  
Sec. 34-13. - Entering plea of guilty authorized. 
Any person who may be charged with a misdemeanor in the municipal court, when he does not or cannot make personal appearance to make a plea in such case, and when he desires to plead guilty to such charge, may, within the discretion of the judge of such court, by an instrument in writing, addressed to the court, plead guilty, and/or cause a plea of guilty to be entered in his behalf. After such plea of guilty has been accepted and entered by the court, the court shall render judgment on such plea and enter a fine or penalty for such violation as charged against the defendant. 
(Code 1966, § 12-15)  
Sec. 34-14. - Form of guilty plea. 
All pleas of guilty on behalf of any defendant, entered or accepted by the court during the absence from the court of the defendant, shall be by attorney duly representing such defendant or pursuant to an instrument in writing, substantially in the following form: 
To the judge of the municipal court of the City of McAllen, Texas, I hereby plead guilty to, and authorize this court to enter a plea of guilty in my behalf, to the offense of misdemeanor, to wit: 
_____
_____
_____
with which I am charged before said court. I further authorize said court to apply any cash bond money heretofore deposited by me towards the payment of said fine and costs assessed against me. 
	_____
Defendant 
 
(Code 1966, § 12-16)  
Sec. 34-15. - Municipal court funds. 
(a)  Municipal court building security fund. There is hereby created a municipal court building security fund. The McAllen Municipal Court Clerk shall deposit the court costs collected under (b) below into such fund. Such fund shall only be used to pay for those items otherwise authorized under city budget process and as set out under Art. 102.017(d), Code of Criminal Procedures. 
A defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall pay a $3.00 security fee as an additional cost of court. A person is considered to be convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed; 
(2)  The person receives community supervision including deferred adjudication; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition of the case. 
(b)  Municipal court technology fund. There is hereby created a municipal court technology fund. The McAllen Municipal Court Clerk shall deposit the court costs collected under this subsection into such fund. Such fund shall only be used to pay for those items otherwise authorized under City budget process and as set out under Art. 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedures. 
A defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall pay a $4.00 technology fee as an additional cost of court. A person is considered to be convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed; 
(2)  The person receives community supervision including deferred adjudication; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition of the case. 
(Code 1966, § 12-17; Ord. No. 1999-44, § 1, 4-26-99; Ord. No. 1999-82, § 1, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 2001-39, § 1, 6-11-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1999-44, § 1, adopted April 26, 1999, repealed § 34-15, which pertained to fees to be paid to peace officers. Said section also enacted provisions designated as a new § 34-15 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 34-16. - Warrant officer. 
There is hereby created the warrant office for the city, which office shall be comprised of the chief warrant officer and one or more deputy warrant officers as determined by the chief of police. The positions shall be staffed by city police officers and shall be under the direction and control of the chief of police. The chief warrant officer shall, in person or by deputy, promptly and faithfully execute all writs and processes issued from the municipal court and carry out all orders and requests from the municipal court judge. 
(Code 1966, § 12-18)  
Chapter 38 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 418.001. 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Office of emergency management director—Created. 
There is hereby created the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)  The mayor shall appoint an emergency management coordinator for the city in accordance with applicable law. 
(2)  The director shall be responsible for conducting a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in section 38-2. The director may delegate authority for execution of any and all of his duties to the emergency management coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(Code 1966, § 11-1; Ord. No. 2004-41, § 1, 5-24-04) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-196 et seq.; substantial evidence rule in effect regarding decisions of city officers and employees, § 2-196.  
Sec. 38-2. - Same—Powers, duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The powers and duties of the emergency management director shall include an ongoing survey of actual or potential major hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. As part of his responsibility in hazard mitigation, the director shall supervise the development of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend that plan for adoption by the board of commissioners along with any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of such emergency management plan. The duties of the director shall include the preparation of a survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for in this chapter, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan. 
(b)  The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  The direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the city's emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(2)  The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(3)  The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, federal, or other emergency management organizations. 
(4)  The marshaling, after declaration of a disaster as provided for in this section, of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(5)  The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a disaster and the immediate operational effectiveness of the city emergency management plan. 
(6)  The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city. Such rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall receive widespread publicity unless publicity would be of aid and comfort to the enemy. 
(7)  The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(8)  The supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(9)  The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(c)  The following procedure will be followed upon the event of disaster: 
(1)  The emergency management director may declare a state of disaster by proclamation if the director finds a disaster has occurred or that the occurrence or the threat of a disaster is imminent. The state of disaster continues until the director finds that the threat or danger has passed or the disaster has been dealt with to the extent that the emergency conditions no longer exist and upon such occurrence the director shall terminate the state of disaster by proclamation. Provided, however, any single state of disaster may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the board of commissioners. Any proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed as promptly with the city secretary as possible. 
(2)  The declaration of a state of disaster for the city shall activate the recovery and rehabilitation aspects of the emergency management plan and shall also authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance under any interjurisdictional emergency management plan. Preparedness and response aspects of the emergency management plan shall be activated as provided in the plan. 
The term "disaster" as used in this section means the occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, water contamination, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot, hospital, military or paramilitary action or other public calamity requiring emergency action. 
(Code 1966, § 11-2)  
Sec. 38-3. - Participation in countywide program authorized. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of an emergency management council for the county, and he shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as such program may affect the city. 
(Code 1966, § 11-3)  
Sec. 38-4. - Emergency management organization. 
The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as all organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. Such plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management and of the federal government. 
(Code 1966, § 11-4)  
Sec. 38-5. - Unauthorized operation or simulation of warning signal prohibited. 
Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 11-5)  
Sec. 38-6. - Emergency rules and regulations precedent over all others. 
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1966, § 11-6)  
Sec. 38-7. - Chapter shall not conflict with state or federal law. 
This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation. 
(Code 1966, § 11-7)  
Sec. 38-8. - Liability for damages. 
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of such activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Code 1966, § 11-8)  
Sec. 38-9. - Approval required for expenditure of funds. 
No person except the director of emergency management shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the board of commissioners, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 11-9)  
Sec. 38-10. - Violation; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. Such violations shall, upon conviction, be punished pursuant to section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 11-10)  
Sec. 38-11. - Affirmation required. 
Each employee or any individual that is assigned a function or responsibility under this chapter shall solemnly swear or affirm to support and defend the Constitution of the United States, laws of the state and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 11-11)  
Chapter 42 - EMERGENCY SERVICES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; law enforcement, ch. 62. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 42-26. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Burglary and Robbery and Related Emergency Alarm Ordinance of the City of McAllen." 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-1)  
Sec. 42-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm company means any person engaged in the activity of selling, leasing, renting, installing, inspecting, maintaining, repairing, monitoring and/or responding to alarm systems within the city. An alarm company, in this instance, shall not include any business which sells on a retail basis from a fixed location or that manufactures or distributes alarm equipment at wholesale, unless such businesses also install, service, monitor and/or respond to alarm systems within the city. 
Alarm notification means a notification intended to summon the police, which is designed either to be initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion. 
Alarm site means a single premises or location (one street address) served by an alarm system(s) that is (are) under the control of one owner. 
Alarm system means a device or system that emits, transmits or relays a signal intended to summon, or that would reasonably be expected to summon, police services of the city, including, but not limited to, local alarms. 
(1)  "Alarm system" does not include: 
a.  An alarm installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site; 
b.  An alarm designated to alert only the inhabitants of a premises, which, upon activation, cannot be seen or heard from a distance greater than ten feet from the protected premises; 
c.  An alarm system owned or operated by the city police department, including, but not limited to, alarm surveillance equipment used outside of police department facilities. 
(2)  "Alarm systems" are classified as follows: 
a.  Class "A" systems, upon activation, provide for signaling to an alarm monitoring facility owned, operated or utilized by an alarm company, regardless of its location. 
b.  Class "B" systems, upon activation, cause an external signaling device of any type to be seen or heard from beyond ten feet of the protected premises, or any other type of alarm system which, upon activation, has as its purpose the summoning of police response. 
c.  Class "C" systems, upon activation, provide for direct signaling to a console or other receiving equipment located for such purposes at any emergency department of the city. 
Chief means the chief of police of the city, or his authorized representative. 
Criminal offense means a criminal offense as defined in the state penal code. 
False alarm notification means an alarm notification responded to by the police department within 30 minutes from the alarm notification to the police department, when the responding officer after the inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises finds no evidence of unauthorized intrusion, attempted unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, or an attempt to take a person hostage, unless a false alarm notification is caused by a power outage or an act of God which is beyond the control of the permit holder and such conditions are verified by the permit holder. 
Permit holder means the person designated in the permit application, who shall be the owner or lawful tenant of the alarm site or his authorized representative. 
Special trunkline means a telephone line leading into the communications center of the police department that is for the primary purpose of receiving emergency messages that originate from automatic protection devices and are transmitted directly or through an intermediary. 
User's responding agent means persons designated in the alarm permit application, as provided for in section 42-41(c)(7). 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 42-28. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he violates by commission or omission any provision of this article that imposes upon him a duty or responsibility. 
(b)  A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted, and each offense is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, but not less than $50.00 upon first conviction and not less than $75.00 upon second and subsequent convictions. 
(c)  In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of individuals, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation, partnership, or an aggregate of individuals criminally responsible for acts or omissions performed by an agent acting on behalf of the corporation, partnership, or an aggregate of individuals, and within the scope of his employment. 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-16)  
Sec. 42-29. - Civil liability. 
The police department of the city shall not be under any obligation or duty to a permit holder or alarm company or any other person by reason of this article. The city specifically disclaims liability for any damages which may be caused by the failure of the police department of the city to monitor and/or respond to an alarm notification, transmitted by any means, or for any damage as a result of any unreasonable delay in response to any such alarm notification. 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-17)  
Secs. 42-30—42-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND REGISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
Sec. 42-41. - Permit required; application; fees; renewal; transferability. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without an alarm permit, or does not comply with the terms and conditions of the permit or application therefor issued by the chief. A separate permit is required for each alarm site. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a completed application form, the chief shall issue an alarm permit to an applicant, unless the applicant has failed to pay a service fee assessed under section 42-50 or has had an alarm permit for an alarm site revoked, due to the violations enumerated in this article or for any other revocation or denial permitted under any other regulation granting or denying permits. 
(c)  Application for an alarm permit shall include the following: 
(1)  Any alarm permit fees, as provided for in this article under class "B" or class "C" permits. 
(2)  The name and relationship of each responsible person in control of the premises. 
(3)  The street address, location directions and a description of the protected premises. 
(4)  Information relative to the alarm system type and means of alarm notification. 
(5)  The nature of any business type account and information relative to the normal business hours of such business. 
(6)  The name, address and local telephone number of any alarm company. 
(7)  The names and local telephone numbers of a minimum of three users' responding agents, for class "A," "B" and "C" systems, who have agreed and are authorized to: 
a.  Receive notification of all respective alarm systems relative to such alarm site; 
b.  Respond, when summoned to do so by the police department of the city, within a 30-minute period of any such alarm notification; 
c.  Authorize and arrange for the repair of such alarm system, as required; 
d.  Other information required by the chief which is necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
For class "A" systems, the information relating to the user's responding agents shall be provided by the alarm company. 
(d)  Permit holder's fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  Under Class "A" alarm permits, where it shall be the duty and responsibility of the alarm company, upon contractual agreement between the permit holder and alarm company, to monitor, maintain, notify, coordinate, and/or provide for any requested alarm response relative to the duties of the user's responding agent, there shall be an annual fee of $25.00. Such annual class "A" holder's fee shall offset the city's additional administrative costs. 
(2)  Under Class "B" alarm permits, where the maintaining of current user's responding agent information, as well as where the notification and coordination of the user's responding agents during an alarm situation falls upon the police department of the city, an annual permit fee of $50.00 shall apply. Such annual class "B" holder's fee shall offset the city's additional administrative costs. 
(3)  Under class "C" alarm permits, where in addition to the duties relative to class "B" permits, the police department of the city is required to also monitor incoming alarm notifications for such class "C" alarm systems, an annual permit fee of $50.00 shall apply. Such annual class "C" permit holder's fee shall offset the city's administrative costs. 
(4)  Federal, state and city agencies shall not be required to pay the permit fee as a requirement for issuance; however, a permit must be obtained where applicable. 
(e)  All annual alarm permits shall expire on the last day of each year, regardless of the date of issuance, and shall be renewable from year to year as required by the chief, on or before the first day of each year thereafter. All alarm permits shall be nonrefundable, nontransferable and payable yearly in advance. Any alarm permit obtained subsequent to the first day of each year but before July 1 shall require payment of the full amount of the applicable permit fee, and any alarm permit obtained after July 1 shall require payment of one-half of the applicable permit fee. The city shall cause notice to be issued to each permit holder on or before December 1 of any calendar year notifying the permit holder that the city shall terminate such alarm permit for nonrenewal on January 1 of the following calendar year if such permit is not renewed before that date. 
(f)  Renewal of class "A" alarm permits shall be the responsibility of the alarm company and the permit holder. Renewal of class "B" or class "C" alarm permits, as well as the payment of pertaining fees, shall be the responsibility of the permit holder. 
(g)  Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a permit. 
(h)  An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person. A permit holder shall notify the chief, in writing, of any change that alters any information listed on the permit application within ten business days of the change. No fee will be assessed for such changes. 
(i)  All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before a permit may be issued or renewed. 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-3; Ord. No. 2001-16, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 42-42. - Registration of alarm companies required. 
(a)  All alarm companies wishing to operate within the city limits shall be required to be registered as such with the chief. 
(b)  All alarm company registrations shall require proof of being licensed to operate in the state as an alarm company under the provisions of the state board of private investigators and private security agencies act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4413(29bb). 
(c)  Any alarm company which violates this section shall be subject to a fine of $100.00 per occurrence, unless proper registration occurs within a ten-day period after receiving notification of any such violations. 
(d)  All alarm company registrations shall be made on forms provided by the chief, and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The full name, business address and telephone number of the alarm company. 
(2)  The license number, as issued to the alarm company by the state private investigators and private security agency board. 
(3)  The names, home addresses and telephone numbers of each owner, officer, partner or stockholder holding 25 percent or more interest in such alarm company. 
(4)  A description of services made available and offered to permit holders within the city, relating to the sale, installation, servicing, monitoring and/or alarm systems' alarm response services provided. 
(e)  Alarm company registrations shall be renewable yearly on the first day of each year and shall be nontransferable. Updating of information is required as it occurs, and such updating shall be the sole responsibility of the alarm company. No fees shall be required upon registration or on any renewal thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-4)  
Sec. 42-43. - Alarm system operation and maintenance. 
(a)  A permit holder shall: 
(1)  Maintain premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper operation of the alarm system. 
(2)  Maintain the alarm site in a manner that will minimize false alarm notification. 
(3)  Respond or cause a representative to respond within 30 minutes when notified by the city to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the alarm site, or to provide security for the alarm site. 
(b)  A person in control of a class "B" system shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal will sound for not longer than 15 minutes after being activated. 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-5)  
Sec. 42-44. - Reporting of alarm signals. 
A permit holder shall not allow alarm signals to be reported through a relaying intermediary that does not comply with the requirements of this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by the chief. 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-6)  
Sec. 42-45. - Indirect alarm reporting. 
A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the police department of the city shall: 
(1)  Report alarms only over special trunklines designated by the chief; 
(2)  Communicate alarm notifications to the police department in a manner and form determined by the chief. 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-7)  
Sec. 42-46. - Automatic telephone alarms not permitted. 
An alarm system which transmits a telephonic recorded message over telephone lines shall not be permitted and is in violation of this article; provided, that manually operated recording systems utilized by handicapped persons are hereby authorized, if such system is designated and approved in the alarm permit. 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-8)  
Sec. 42-47. - Alarm system operating instructions. 
A permit holder shall maintain at each alarm site a complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. Special codes, combinations or passwords need not be included in such instructions. 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-9)  
Sec. 42-48. - Alarm dispatch records. 
The police responding to a dispatch call resulting from a burglary, robbery, personal hostage or robbery alarm notification shall record such information as necessary to permit the chief to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Identification of the permit holder. 
(2)  Identification of the alarm site. 
(3)  Arrival time and dispatch received time. 
(4)  Time of day and date. 
(5)  Weather conditions. 
(6)  Area and subarea (business-residential). 
(7)  Name of permit holder's representative on premises, if any. 
(8)  The responding police officer shall indicate on this dispatch record whether the alarm notification was caused by a criminal offense. 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-10)  
Sec. 42-49. - System performance reviews. 
If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation, therefore avoiding false alarm notifications, the chief may require a conference with an alarm permit holder who is responsible for maintenance of the alarm system to review circumstances of each false alarm notification. If an alarm site emits multiple false alarm notifications within a 24-hour period, it will be the responsibility of the permit holder to arrange for repair of the alarm system. If the permit holder can prove and submits in writing, within four working days of repair, verification of a mechanical malfunction of the alarm system, then all multiple false alarm notifications will be combined and will be counted as one false alarm notification for the purposes of section 42-50. If the alarm site continues to emit more than five false alarms within the same 24-hour period, the police department may only respond to the first five such false alarm notifications and the sole responsibility for the security of the alarm site shall be by the permit holder. 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-11)  
Sec. 42-50. - Service fee. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the permit holder shall pay a service fee for each false alarm notification emitted from an alarm site that is in excess of five alarms during any calendar year or partial calendar year unless the alarm permit is valid of $50.00 per false alarm. 
(b)  No service fee will be assessed during the first 60 days on newly installed alarm systems, and alarm notifications during that period will not be counted in determining when a service fee will be assessed. 
(c)  No service fee will be assessed against a permit holder which is an agency of the federal government or the state, in which case the chief is authorized to take appropriate administrative remedies relating to the requirement of repair or deactivation or nonresponse to, or of, the alarm system. 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-12; Ord. No. 2001-16, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2001-16, § 2, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 42-51. - Revocation of alarm permit. 
(a)  The chief shall revoke an alarm permit if he determines that: 
(1)  There is a false statement of a material matter in the application for a permit; 
(2)  The permit holder has violated section 42-43, 42-44, 42-45, 42-46, 42-47, or 42-49; 
(3)  The permit holder has failed to make timely payment of a service fee assessed under section 42-50; 
(4)  Notwithstanding the above, the chief may not terminate police response to a permit holder because of excess false alarms if the false alarm fee as provided for in section 42-50 is paid in full. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during the period in which his alarm permit is revoked. 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-13)  
Sec. 42-52. - Appeal from denial or revocation. 
In denying or revoking a license or permit, the chief shall set out the reasons therefor in writing and deliver them to the applicant or permit holder within ten business days from the date of the chief's decision therefor. In the event of a denial of an application for license or permit or revocation thereof, the applicant or permit holder shall have the right to appeal to the city manager by filing written notice of appeal with the city secretary within ten days of written notification of any such action. The city manager shall review the action of the chief and may impose certain conditions to the granting or retention of the permit or license. In addition, the city manager may request that the permit holder or applicant furnish further information as required by the city manager in order to make a decision. The city manager may provide for the granting of the permit or license or the reinstatement of the license or permit and impose certain conditions to such action. In any event, the decision of the city manager shall be final and nonappealable. 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-14)  
Sec. 42-53. - Protection of financial institutions. 
(a)  A financial institution is required to have an alarm system pursuant to the provisions of the Bank Protection Act of 1968 (12 USC § 1882) and may install a special trunkline, with the permission of the chief, directly to the police department, for the purpose of reporting burglaries, robberies and other related emergencies. If such an arrangement is made, all other requirements of this article must be met. The financial institution shall execute a letter of agreement with the city permitting the installation of all necessary equipment on an indicator panel monitored in the communications division of the police department. The installation must be accomplished at the financial institution's expense. 
(b)  The chief shall have the right, at reasonable times and upon oral notice, to inspect the alarm system at a private or institutional alarm site and require necessary repairs or improvements. If the chief finds that the alarm system continually fails to operate properly or be operated properly, he may terminate the privilege to have equipment and indicators in the communications center of the police department and require prompt removal of the equipment at the expense of the financial institution. 
(c)  The financial institution, at the request of the chief, at its sole expense, shall make arrangements to provide service for the alarm system on a 24-hour basis, seven days a week. In no event shall the city become liable for charges for repairs and maintenance. 
(d)  The financial institution may cancel its special trunkline service with the city at any time by giving the city written notice through the chief, and at its expense, remove its equipment indicators from the monitor panel in the communications center within 30 days from notice. 
(e)  The chief may require any change, modernization or consolidation of alarm signaling equipment that is advisable according to sound practices of alarm system science or trade. In no event shall the city become liable for charges for these changes. Such changes will be effected within a reasonable time and at the expense of the alarm user. 
(Code 1966, § 3 ½-15)  
Secs. 42-54—42-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AMBULANCES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; traffic and vehicles, ch. 102; vehicles for hire, ch. 114. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 42-75. - Scope. 
Any ambulance service or transportation originating in the city shall comply with the provisions of this article, and it shall be unlawful for anyone to provide ambulance service or transportation originating in the city except when there is compliance with the provisions of this article. Ambulance service or transportation originates in the city when a patient is attended, or a patient's transportation begins, within the city's corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-14-11)  
Sec. 42-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ambulance means any vehicle used for the transportation of wounded, injured or sick persons to or from a destination within the corporate boundaries of the city, but specifically excludes funeral coaches and wheelchair vans. 
Emergency ambulance means an ambulance used to render emergency services, and which may also be used to render transport services. 
Emergency circumstances means the existence of circumstances in which the element of time in transporting the sick, injured or wounded for medical treatment is essential to the health or life of such person. 
Emergency service means any ambulance service rendered under emergency circumstances, including the trip to the place of emergency, rendering of first aid and assistance, and the trip to the hospital or other qualified emergency treatment destination. 
Permit officer means the fire chief and/or designees. 
Safety-sensitive position means one that presents a life threatening danger or risk of bodily injury to the employee, other employees, or the general public, or the risk of significant property or environmental damage, and that requires the exercise of discriminating judgment or a high degree of care and caution, including, without limitation, a position that requires the employee to carry a firearm, perform life-threatening procedures, work with confidential information or documents pertaining to criminal investigations, work with controlled substances or hazardous materials, or operate motor vehicles, machinery, or equipment. 
Transport ambulance means an ambulance used to render transport services. 
Transport service means the transportation of sick, injured or wounded persons under other than emergency circumstances. Such transport vehicles at all times during the transportation of a patient shall be staffed with the minimum certified personnel required by state law for the vehicle authorization. 
(Code 1966, § 4½-1; Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-14-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 42-77. - City may provide service. 
The city reserves the right to render emergency ambulance service in the event that a contractor under this article is unable to, or fails to, respond to an emergency call, or requires assistance at an emergency location. 
(Code 1966, § 4½-13; Ord. No. 1995-22, § I, 5-8-95)  
Sec. 42-78. - Penalty for violation of article; fines, suspensions, revocations, and appeals. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-14 of this Code. Each day any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any violation of the Emergency Health Care Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 773, or of any regulation applicable to emergency medical services providers, shall constitute a violation of this article. Upon conviction for any such violation the fine shall be $250.00 and $500.00 for any subsequent similar violation occurring within one year of the occurrence of the previous violation. 
(c)  If a licensee violates any provision in this article or of the Texas Emergency Health Care Act, the permit officer is authorized to suspend a license or permit for any period of time not to exceed 30 days or until the violation is abated. In the event of any repeat or a serious violation, the permit officer may revoke the license or permit, as the case may be. 
(1)  Every license or permit suspension or revocation shall be in writing, dated, and state the reason for the revocation or the period of the suspension, as the case may be. 
(2)  The suspension or revocation order shall immediately be personally served upon the licensee or any of its employees or agents, and mailed to the licensee addressed to the most recent address of record. 
(3)  Such order of suspension or revocation shall be effective immediately upon personal service. 
(4)  Whenever the license of a transport service licensee is suspended or revoked the licensee shall so notify in writing all of its patients requiring life-sustaining treatment or care, including but not limited to dialysis, no later than by the end of the day following its receipt of notice from the permit officer, and shall make adequate alternative arrangements for those patients. 
(5)  A decision or an order of the permit officer denying, suspending or revoking a license or permit may be appealed by the affected party in writing to the city manager or designee no later than within ten business days after the date such decision or order becomes effective. A hearing shall be scheduled to take place no later than five business days after receipt of the appeal, and a written decision shall be rendered no later than five business days following the hearing. The city manager's decision shall be final. 
(d)  In the event of a violation of this article or any of its provisions by any person or any other type of business entity, its agents, servants or employees, the city may, in addition to other remedies, institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such violation, including the right to restrain, enjoin, correct or abate such violation in any court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(Code 1966, § 4½-2; Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-14-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, adopted Mar. 14, 2011, changed the title of § 42-78 from penalty for violation of article to penalty for violation of article; fines, suspensions, revocations, and appeals.  
Sec. 42-79. - Permit officer; duties and powers; citation authority. 
There is hereby created the position of permit officer within the city's fire department. In addition to any other duties and powers granted under this chapter, the permit officer: 
(1)  Shall obtain a criminal background check of all individuals applying for any permit or license issued under this chapter, and may do so for anyone employed by any such individual. 
(2)  May investigate or verify any permit or license applicant's education and training, extent and quality of performance in previous ambulance-related jobs or businesses, or any other information required to be furnished in or with the application. 
(3)  Shall inspect the ambulance vehicles and equipment of every ambulance licensee prior to issuance of a vehicle permit and thereafter inspect such ambulance vehicles and equipment at least annually. Any deficiency found by the permit officer shall be forwarded to department of state health services. 
(4)  May, with or without prior notice, inspect permitted ambulance vehicles or the equipment contained therein at any time and at any reasonable location for the purpose of determining whether the requirements of this chapter or the rules and regulations of the department of state health services are being met, as well as inspect during regular business hours such books and records of each licensee as reasonably necessary to the same end. 
(5)  Shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. To aid in enforcement the permit officer is authorized to issue citations for violations of any such provision. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-14-11)  
Sec. 42-80. - Ambulance license. 
No person shall operate or allow the operation of any ambulance service or vehicle regulated by this article within the city until the permit officer verifies compliance with all rules and regulations prescribed by the city and with the applicable state statutes pertaining to the operation of ambulances, and issues any required licenses and permits. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-14-11)  
Sec. 42-81. - License application; duty to update information. 
(a)  Application for a transport ambulance license hereunder shall be made to the permit officer and shall contain such information and documentation as may reasonably be required, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The number and description of all ambulances, including the make, model, year of manufacture, state license number for the current year, motor and chassis number. 
(3)  The physical location and description of all places of business within the trauma service area "V" (T.S.A.V.). 
(4)  The names, age and sex of the person who will operate such vehicles along with the number and date of issue of all licenses held by each such persons pertaining to the ambulance business, as required by state laws. 
(5)  The maximum rates proposed to be charged for transport ambulance service by the operator, which shall not thereafter be raised with the prior approval of the city commission. 
(6)  A statement by the applicant agreeing to comply with this article, and all applicable state laws relating to ambulance service, vehicles, and required equipment, allowing inspections as provided for under subsection 42-79(4) hereof, agreeing to assist when requested by the city in the event of a disaster or emergency and to participate in emergency preparedness drills. Failure to comply with any of these representations will be cause for suspension or revocation of the license. 
(7)  Documentary proof that applicant implements and enforces a drug and alcohol policy for its employees that is equivalent to or stricter than what is required of the city under the Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. 701, et seq.). A certification shall be required from applicant's designated drug testing center that none of applicant's safety-sensitive employees has failed any drug test it has administered. Except when and to the extent it may be prohibited by law, these records shall be made available to the permit officer upon written request. 
(8)  Information as specified in the application form relating to whether any employee within the categories listed therein has ever been convicted of a felony at any time, or convicted of a misdemeanor in the past five years (including a traffic offense), and if so, when and where and for what cause. 
(9)  The initial and renewal ambulance license fees will be $500.00. 
(10)  A copy of every insurance policy or other proof of financial responsibility covering any vehicle owned or operated by the applicant for any liability imposed on such owner or operator, regardless of whether the vehicle is being driven by an employee, agent or lessee, which coverage shall be in at least the following amounts: 
i.  Liability for injury to any one person, $1,000,000.00. 
ii.  Liability arising out of one occurrence, for injury to one or more persons arising out of one occurrence, $1,000,000.00. 
iii.  Property damage, per occurrence, $1,000,000.00. 
iv.  Malpractice for injury to any one person, $500,000.00. 
(b)  Any change in the information required in a license application or a renewal thereof shall be reported by licensee to the permit officer within five working days after the change occurs, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Licenses and permits must be renewed annually and renewal applications must comply with all the requirements of an initial application, as per subsection (a) hereof. Ambulance vehicles shall be submitted for inspection before their permits are renewed. 
(d)  Every licensed ambulance service shall submit such quarterly reports to the permit officer as may be requested. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-14-11)  
Sec. 42-82. - Vehicle permits; inspections; suspension or revocation; appeals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate or allow the operation of an ambulance vehicle unless it has a valid, unexpired vehicle permit and has passed its most recent vehicle inspection. 
(b)  The ambulance licensee shall apply for a vehicle permit for each ambulance vehicle prior to placing the same in operation. Vehicle permit applications must be submitted on such form as the permit officer shall determine, together with an application fee of $25.00 per vehicle. Ambulance licensee shall submit each ambulance vehicle for inspection at the time of initial permit application, renewal and at all other times required by the permit officer pursuant to this article. Approval of a vehicle permit shall be contingent upon passing a vehicle inspection. Vehicle permits shall be valid for no more than one year, shall expire at the time the ambulance license expires, and shall be suspended if it fails any vehicle inspection. 
(c)  Vehicle permits may only be issued to licensees and are not transferable, except as authorized by the permit officer. It shall be unlawful for anyone to use an ambulance vehicle permitted to another or for anyone to allow another to use his permitted vehicle, without the specific, written authorization of the permit officer. 
(d)  Upon finding that a permitted ambulance vehicle is unsafe or otherwise in violation of any applicable ordinance, the permit officer is authorized to suspend a vehicle permit for any period of time not to exceed 30 days or until the violation is abated, or in the event of any repeat or serious violations, to revoke the same. To the full extent applicable, suspensions and revocations of vehicle permits shall be governed by the requirements and procedures as provided in subsection 42-78(c). 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-14-11)  
Sec. 42-83. - Operation of emergency lights and sirens. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the city-contracted emergency service provider, to operate an ambulance within the corporate limits of the city using emergency lights or siren, except with authorization from the city's 9-1-1 communications center, or when en route to a hospital with a patient. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-14-11)  
Secs. 42-84—42-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AMBULANCE EVALUATION COMMITTEE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-76 et seq.; procedure for appointment and terms and qualifications of board members, § 2-77; substantial evidence rule in effect for appeals to boards, committees and commissions of the city, § 2-82. 
 
Sec. 42-91. - Composition; terms; duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established an ambulance evaluation committee, to be composed of 11 members, eight to be appointed by the board of commissioners and three ex officio members: one to be a police department representative; one to be a fire department representative; and one to be a representative of the city manager's office. 
(b)  All members of the ambulance evaluation committee, including ex officio members, shall have the same powers as any other member, including the right to vote, on all matters before the committee. 
(c)  The terms of office, attendance requirements, procedures and standards for the ambulance evaluation committee shall be the same as those set forth in sections 2-76 through 2-82, except that attendance requirements and terms of office shall have no application to ex officio members of such committee. 
(Code 1966, § 4½-14(a), (c), (d); Ord. No. 1996-20, § I, 3-25-96)  
Sec. 42-92. - Purposes. 
The ambulance evaluation committee serves as the advisory board for the purposes of evaluating existing and proposed ambulance service including but not limited to such emergency ambulance service as the city may contract; hearing citizen complaints or input relating to any ambulance service; coordinating the communication between the medical communities and the city relating to ambulance service; and considering other applicable matters relating to ambulance service. 
(Code 1966, § 4½-14(a); Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-14-11)  
Sec. 42-93. - Duties. 
(a)  Within 15 days after the end of each quarter of the year, the ambulance evaluation committee shall meet to evaluate and report to the board of commissioners, if necessary, on all ambulance services operating within the city and any contractors rendering such service for the city. The committee shall review and investigate such ambulance services and shall make a report to the board of commissioners in regard to the following: 
(1)  The quality of service performed; 
(2)  Compliance with the terms of any contract with the city and all statutes and ordinances pertaining thereto. 
(b)  The ambulance evaluation committee's authority to review any service under this article shall in no way affect the independent contractor relationship between the city and any contractor under this article, and the review of such contracted service is to make inquiry as to whether or not adequate ambulance services are being provided to the citizens of the city but not for the purposes of controlling the duties or functions of the operation or specific means or manner of supplying such service by the contractor as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 4½-14(b); Ord. No. 1995-22, § II, 5-8-95; Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-14-11)  
Secs. 42-94—42-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONTRACT FOR CITY EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, adopted Mar. 14, 2011, set out provisions changing the title of Div. 3 from "Contract Required" to "Contract For City Emergency Ambulance Service." 
 
Sec. 42-106. - Emergency calls. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having management, ownership or control of any ambulance to operate or to suffer permitting such ambulance to be operated in the city in response to emergency calls initiated by the city police or fire departments or initiated by the city's 9-1-1 communications center or other appropriate entity, if applicable, unless such service is specifically contracted for with the city as provided for in this division, except where such service is specifically requested by the city or its contracted emergency service provider in the event of a disaster, emergency or mutual aid request. Proof of the following shall constitute prima facie evidence of violation of this section: 
(1)  That an ambulance which is owned or controlled by the person charged with an offense under this section provided emergency service within the city limits; 
(2)  That the police or fire departments of the city, city's 9-1-1 communications center or other appropriate entity dispatched some other ambulance to the scene of such emergency; and 
(3)  That the person or company charged did not operate under a valid contract with the city for emergency ambulance service pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this section that the emergency service in question was provided in response to a call or request from a private citizen. 
(Code 1966, § 4½-3; Ord. No. 1995-22, § V, 5-8-95; Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-14-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, adopted Mar. 14, 2011, set out provisions changing the title of § 42-106 from required to emergency calls.  
Sec. 42-107. - Contract proposals. 
Periodically, as directed by the city commission, the ambulance review committee, in conjunction with the city manager's office shall solicit proposals for contract for city emergency ambulance service. Such proposals shall require, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the owner of the ambulance service. If the owner is a corporation, the registered agent and the principal officers and the stockholders of the corporation shall be listed. 
(2)  The number and description of the ambulance utilized or to be utilized by the contractor. 
(3)  The location, description and location of the places from which the ambulance services will operate. 
(4)  Copies of the licenses or certificates of the persons who will operate such vehicles or treat patients or provide service in conjunction with the ambulance service as required by state law. 
(5)  A statement that the applicant agrees to comply with this article and all laws of the state applicable to ambulances and ambulance services and that the applicant has acquired and will agree to maintain throughout the period of the contract all such licenses or certifications. 
(6)  A statement that the applicant will render satisfactory and efficient ambulance service including service which is classified as advance life safety (ALF) or mobile intensive care service (MICS). 
(7)  Any other information deemed necessary by the ambulance review committee or city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 4½-4; Ord. No. 1995-22, § VI, 5-8-95)  
Sec. 42-108. - Contract award. 
The city commission may award the contract to the person whom in their sole discretion will best serve the public health needs of the community, taking into consideration the following criteria: 
(1)  The financial responsibility of the applicant. 
(2)  The number and type of equipment to be used. 
(3)  The number of employees and locations is sufficient to serve the area of the city. 
(4)  The past safety history of the applicant is sufficient to provide safe and efficient service to the citizens of the city. 
(5)  Whether a satisfactory method of communication between the licensee and the city police and fire departments and 9-1-1 emergency call service, if applicable, has been agreed to and may be implemented. 
(6)  Whether the applicant has the insurance policies or binders providing insurance coverage for each and every vehicle owned or operated by the applicant for injury to or death of persons and actions resulting from any cause for which the owner or operator of such vehicle would be held liable on account of any liability imposed by law in amounts required under the proposals. 
(7)  Any references or performance indicators from other jurisdictions. 
(8)  The financial assistance requested by the applicant. 
(9)  The contract and rates charged for services rendered. 
(10)  The proposed duration of the contract. 
(Code 1966, § 4½-5; Ord. No. 1995-22, § VII, 5-8-95)  
Sec. 42-109. - Cancellation of contract. 
Should any contractor fail to respond to an emergency call as provided for in this article, without justifiable cause, or fail to render satisfactory and efficient emergency ambulance service or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article, the board of commissioners shall have the right to cancel any such contract after notice unless an emergency exists justifying the immediate cancellation. The determination of the board of commissioners shall be final and conclusive and nonappealable. Provided, however, if any appeal should be allowed by any court of competent jurisdiction, then the substantial evidence rule as adopted and provided for under section 2-82 shall be applicable under such appeal. 
(Code 1966, § 4½-10; Ord. No. 1995-22, § VIII, 5-8-95) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1995-22, § III, adopted May 8, 1995, repealed § 42-109; § VIII of the same ordinance then renumbered § 42-113 as § 42-109. The former § 42-109 pertained to period of license and derived from Code 1966, § 4½-6.  
Sec. 42-110. - Quarterly report required. 
The contractor shall make a quarterly report to the ambulance review committee and the city manager within ten days prior to the date of the scheduled meeting of such committee thereof, setting out the statistical analysis of the operation of the licensee for the preceding quarterly period, including the number of emergency calls averaged; the elapsed time between receipt of call and completion of services; number of vehicles; certification process of operators and emergency medical technicians and other information as reasonably required by the committee. 
(Code 1966, § 4½-12; Ord. No. 1995-22, § IX, 5-8-95) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1995-22, § III, adopted May 8, 1995, repealed § 42-110; § IX of the same ordinance then renumbered § 42-114 as § 42-110. The former § 42-110 pertained to rate of license and derived from Code 1966, § 4½-7.  
Sec. 42-111. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1995-22, § III, adopted May 8, 1995, repealed § 42-111, which pertained to operation of ambulance and derived from Code 1966, § 4½-8.  
Sec. 42-112. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1995-22, § III, adopted May 8, 1995, repealed § 42-112, which pertained to response to city-originated emergency calls and derived from Code 1966, § 4½-9.  
Secs. 42-113—42-125. - Reserved.  
Chapter 46 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Abatement of nuisances, art. 10. 
Cross reference— Disposal of rabid animals, § 14-11; water wells, § 106-101 et seq.; emergency water conservation, § 106-111; deposit of sewage in the streets prohibited, § 106-146; landscaping, § 110-26. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The city health director or his designated representative shall, after proper notification, have the right and authority at any time to go onto any premises within the city at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to ascertain if the premises are free from weeds, rubbish or other noxious or unhealthful matter. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent such director or such of his employees from making such inspections or to interfere therewith in any manner. 
(b)  If any person shall refuse to allow the health director or his authorized representative to enter into any property in the city for the purposes of conducting the inspection as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the director shall make application in the municipal court in the city for an administrative search warrant to be issued by the judge thereof. Such application shall contain an affidavit from the director or his authorized representative stating the reason for entry upon the premises and shall also state the time and general conditions for the entry. The municipal judge of the city is hereby authorized to issue administrative search warrants to allow the director to enter any premises within the city under terms and conditions as declared by the municipal court judge. The judge may also request that the chief of police furnish police officers of the city to assist in the enforcement of any warrant issued under the provisions of this section. It shall be unlawful for any person having control of any premises for which an administrative search warrant has been issued to prohibit the entry onto the premises by the persons as authorized under the administrative search warrant. 
(Code 1966, § 17-13)  
Secs. 46-2—46-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; health director to enforce or delegate the enforcement of regulations regarding nuisances, § 2-251 et seq.; sanitary maintenance of premises where livestock kept, § 14-6; permitting dogs to create a nuisance prohibited, § 14-39; beekeeping regulations and restrictions, § 14-111 et seq.; housing code adopted, § 22-241 et seq.; unsafe building abatement standards and procedure, § 22-271; dangerous signs declared nuisance, § 130-7. 
 
Sec. 46-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Any and all other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature means and includes all uncultivated vegetation, grass and plant growth. This term shall apply to objects and matters not included within the meaning of the other terms as used in this section which are liable to produce or tend to produce an unhealthy, unwholesome or unsanitary condition to the premises within the general locality where the same are situated, and shall also include any species of weed, grass or vegetation and plant growth which might or may tend to be unhealthy to individuals residing with in the general locality of where the same are situated. 
Brush means and includes all trees or shrubbery under seven feet in height which are not cultivated or cared for by persons owning or controlling the parcel of real estate. 
Rubbish means and includes all refuse, rejected tin cans, old vessels of all sorts, and, in general, all litter and all other things usually included within the meaning of such term. 
Weeds means and includes all rank and uncultivated vegetation, grass or plant matter which has grown to more than 15 inches in height or which, regardless of height, is liable to become an unwholesome or decaying mass or a harboring place for mosquitoes or vermin. 
(Code 1966, § 17-12; Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 2-28-06) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-27. - Prohibited conditions and nuisances designated; stagnant water; accumulation of carrion, filth; grass, weeds, etc. 
For purposes of this article lots or parcels of real estate and other premises shall be held to include the grounds within their respective boundaries and to extend beyond such boundaries to the centerlines of adjacent or abutting streets or alleys. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful and it is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for the owner or occupant of any lot, parcel or other premises: 
a.  To allow or permit holes or places wherein water may accumulate and become stagnant, 
b.  To allow or permit the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or 
c.  To permit stagnant water to remain thereon. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful and it is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for the owner or occupant of any lot, parcel or other premises to allow or permit any carrion, filth or any other impure or unwholesome matter of any kind to accumulate or remain thereon. 
(3)  Whenever grass, weeds, brush, or any other plant that is not cultivated, rubbish and all other objectionable, unsightly and unsanitary matter of whatever nature shall exist, covering or partly covering the surface of any lot, parcel or other premises, the same is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, the prompt abatement of which is hereby declared to be a public necessity. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful and it is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any owner or occupant of any lot, parcel or other premises to allow or permit the existence of any tree thereon when such tree is dead or damaged and such condition poses a serious threat to property or to human life or safety on such lot, parcel or other premises or to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(5)  Whenever the city health officer ascertains the existence of any condition which constitutes a violation of subsections (1), (2), (3) or (4) hereof which in the city health officer's opinion causes an immediate and serious threat to property, human life or safety, or to the public health, safety or welfare, the health officer is hereby authorized to immediately abate such nuisance utilizing city personnel or private contractors. In such cases the health officer shall, within five business days of the decision to abate, and as provided in section 46-30 hereunder, notify the property owner of the findings and opinion leading to the action taken. The cost of abating such nuisance shall be charged against the property owner. The city shall have the right to file a lien for such charges upon following the procedures for city abatement and the charging of such costs as provided for after notification, as set out in sections 46-30 through 46-40, if such procedures are possible considering the immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare posed by the nuisance to be abated. 
(Code 1966, § 17-14; Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 2-28-06) 
State Law reference— Stagnant water and other unsanitary conditions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 342.001, 342.003, 342.004, 342.005, 342.006, 342.008.  
Sec. 46-28. - Grass, weeds or brush—Maximum height. 
It shall be unlawful and it is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any owner or occupant of any lot, parcel or any other premises or for their representative to allow grass, weeds or brush of any description to grow thereon or upon the sidewalks abutting any such property to a height greater than 15 inches from the surface of the ground. 
(Code 1966, § 17-15; Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 2-28-06)  
Sec. 46-29. - Same—Duty to cut. 
(a)  It shall be the primary duty of the owner of any premises within the city to cut and remove all weeds as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this Code. In any prosecution for a violation of this article, the owner shall not be permitted to plead or show evidence that the occupant or tenant of property is the person against whom the charges should be brought. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, as the owner, tenant or agent of any premises within the city, to leave any unsightly piles or windrows of debris or weeds, grass or brush which could serve as habitat for rodents or other vectors of disease on such premises after such weeds, grass or brush have been cut, and it shall be the duty of such owner, tenant or agent to remove or prepare for removal by city brush crews, if applicable, such weeds, grass or brush after such weeds, grass or brush are cut from premises to prevent insanitary conditions from occurring on such premises. 
(c)  Any grass, weeds or brush that are cut shall be removed from the premises promptly and be disposed of in an appropriate manner. If the brush is to be burned, such burning shall be done under the supervision of and with the permission of the fire marshal of the city. 
(Code 1966, §§ 17-16, 17-17) 
State Law reference— Weeds, rubbish and other unsightly conditions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.004.  
Sec. 46-30. - Notice to property owner. 
(a)  Whenever the health director ascertains the existence of any nuisance defined in this article on, adjacent to or abutting any lot, parcel or other premises, a written notice identifying the violation shall be issued to the owner of such property. 
(1)  For the purpose of complying with this section, it shall be sufficient if the health department places in the United States mail a certified or registered card or letter addressed to the owner at his last known address. The health official shall rely on the real property ownership records of the county appraisal district in determining the ownership of any property and the last known address of such owner for the purpose of notification. 
(2)  Such notice may either be mailed to such owner at the owner's last known address or may be served in person. Service shall be considered effective upon personal delivery or three days after mailing. If mailed notice is returned by the United States Postal Service as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice shall not be affected, and the notice shall be considered as being delivered. 
(3)  If service in person or by mail cannot be obtained, then notice shall be considered sufficient if it is published once in any newspaper of general circulation within the city; or by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates. Service shall be considered effective upon such publication or posting. 
(b)  Such notice shall require the abatement of such nuisance within seven days from the effective date of service of such notice. Such notice shall further state that, in default of the performance of the above condition, the city may, at once, cause such abatement to be done and charge the cost and expense incurred in doing or having such work done or improvements made, to the owner of such property, and that if not paid such expense shall be assessed as a lien on such real estate. The notice shall further state that any failure to comply with such notice shall be punishable as a Class "C" misdemeanor. 
(c)  The foregoing notice shall further inform the owner that another violation of the same kind or nature on or before the first anniversary day from the date of such notice may result, without further notice, in the city's abatement of the violation at the owner's expense and that if not paid the expense shall be assessed as a lien against such property. 
(Code 1966, § 17-18; Ord. No. 1994-23, § I, 4-11-94; Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 2-28-06) 
State Law reference— Notice of abatement of nuisance, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.006.  
Sec. 46-31. - Abatement by city generally. 
(a)  Whenever the owner of any premises upon which weeds, grass, brush, rubbish or other unsanitary matter or condition constituting a nuisance are found in violation of this article cannot be located after due diligence, and whenever a person who has been given the notice as provided for by this article shall fail to comply with such notice, it shall be the duty of the health director to cause the weeds, grass, brush, rubbish or other unsanitary matter or condition constituting a nuisance to be promptly abated, in a reasonable and prudent manner. 
(b)  Any weeds, grass, brush, rubbish or other insanitary matter abated by the city shall become the property of the city to be removed or disposed of in the manner prescribed by the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 17-19; Ord. No. 2007-86, § 1, 10-22-07) 
State Law reference— Abatement by city, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.006.  
Sec. 46-32. - Expenses and costs; method of computation. 
The health director or his duly authorized representatives shall charge all necessary expenses in connection with abatement of a nuisance under this article, including but not limited to work done and improvements made in abating such nuisance, to the owner of such premises. The city shall also be entitled to recover all reasonable costs incurred in enforcing the provisions of this article, including but not limited to: inspections, efforts to locate the owner and/or occupant of the premises, issuance, service and publication of notices, reinspections of such premises and all other reasonable costs incurred in abating such nuisance. All such expenses and costs shall be assessed at such rates as may be established by the board of commissioners from time to time by minute order. Such expenses and costs shall be certified by the health director to the finance department, which shall thereafter promptly prepare and issue an invoice to the owner. 
(Code 1966, § 17-20; Ord. No. 2007-86, § 2, 10-22-07) 
State Law reference— Assessment of expenses, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.021.  
Sec. 46-33. - Liability disclaimer. 
The city shall be held harmless from any and all liability from any claims resulting from the abatement or the failure to abate a nuisance on any property, including, but not limited to, destruction of shrubs, flowers, brush and small trees of any nature. The city has no duty nor does this article impose any duty on the director of health or any other employee to abate any nuisance existing on any private property. The provisions of this article neither change nor modify the responsibility of the owner or occupant of any premises in the city to keep the premises in a reasonably safe condition so as not to cause injury to any third party either on the property or adjacent to the property as provided for in the tort laws of the state. The adoption of this article does not, in any manner, change the responsibility under the tort law nor does it create a cause of action for liability not heretofore existing under the tort or statutory laws of the state. A decision of the city to abate a nuisance or not abate a nuisance is solely discretionary and any decision to abate a nuisance or not abate a nuisance shall not create any liability on the city in any manner to any party. 
(Code 1966, § 17-21)  
Sec. 46-34. - Notice of work done, preparing and mailing of notices. 
Whenever any work is done or improvements made by the city under the provisions of this article, the city shall notify the property owner of the work done and the cost thereof, such notice to be in writing to the last known post office address of the owner. Such costs shall be certified by the health director to the accounting department and the accounting department shall thereafter prepare an invoice to be distributed on the first of the following month in the amount of the total cost of removing such weeds, grass, brush, rubbish or other insanitary matter. The account shall become due and payable within 30 days after notice is given. 
(Code 1966, § 17-22)  
Sec. 46-35. - Penalty for nonpayment of invoice. 
(a)  If an invoice served under the terms of this article is not paid within 30 days of notice, then no services provided by the city's owned and controlled utilities shall be rendered to the property. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section nor any action taken by the city pursuant to this section shall relieve any person from any penalty which may be imposed in a prosecution of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 17-23)  
Sec. 46-36. - Penalty for failure to abate. 
(a)  Any owner, whether a natural person or a corporation, or any agent, servant, representative or employee of such owner, including any person having ownership of any premises or lot or parcel of real estate or any part thereof, or any interest therein, or improvements thereon, situated within the limits of the city, on which there exists any nuisance as defined in this article, who shall allow or permit any such nuisance to be created or to remain and continue if created and established, or who shall fail, refuse or neglect to remove or abate such nuisance by one of the methods provided in this article or otherwise regulating such premises, so as to prevent such nuisance, within ten days from the date of service of notice thereof as provided for in this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in subsection (b) of this section, and each day during which such failure, refusal or neglect shall continue to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any owner, or agent of any owner, violating any of the terms of this article shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14. Each and every day that the premises remain in violation of the terms of this article shall constitute a different and separate offense. If the owner of any lot, lots or premises under the provisions of this section shall be a corporation and shall violate any of the provisions of this article, the president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer of such corporation or any manager, agent, or employees of such corporation shall be also severally liable for the penalties provided for a violation of the Code. 
(Code 1966, § 17-24)  
Sec. 46-37. - Collection and disposition of money under article. 
(a)  The city finance department shall be responsible for collecting all monies due for abating nuisances under this article. 
(b)  Any payment or collection made under the terms of this article shall be received by and receipted for by the director of finance, or one of his duly authorized agents. Such sums of money so received by the director of finance shall be paid into the general fund of the city on the first of each month. Such sums of money, receipts therefor, and the necessary records in connection therewith shall be handled, prepared and maintained as a permanent record, all in the form and manner prescribed by the director of finance. 
(Code 1966, § 17-25)  
Sec. 46-38. - Procedures for collection of money due city. 
(a)  Whenever the city shall have performed the work and incurred costs or expenses in connection therewith as provided in this article, and the city shall have charges accrued against such property for a period of 30 days or more from the first billing, the director of finance, or his duly authorized agent, shall notify the city legal department. The legal department shall immediately prepare and file for record in the office of the county clerk an itemized statement of all the work performed and all costs and expenses incurred and paid by the city in connection therewith in the form of an affidavit duly sworn to, which affidavit or duly certified copy thereof, after having been recorded, shall be prima facie proof of the work done and performed and the amounts paid therefor. Such affidavit, among other things and provisions, shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name and address of owner, occupant or agent of owner of property, if known, and if unknown, recite that fact. 
(2)  Description of property sufficient to identify the property, and where property has been subdivided, a description by lot and block number of any particular subdivision shall be sufficient. 
(3)  Statement of the particular violation of this article. 
(4)  Statement including date that notice of violation was mailed or published to owner as to failure to comply therewith. 
(5)  Itemized statement of the work done and date such work was performed, together with costs thereof opposite each item. 
(6)  Statement of payment made by the city, the date of such payment, and to whom made if contracted out to private commercial enterprises. 
(7)  Statement that such affidavit is made for the purpose of fixing a lien upon the property therein described, in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq., with up to the maximum percent interest allowed by law on the aggregate amount to be paid to the city. 
(b)  The board of commissioners hereby finds and declares that the general legal work by the city legal department in conjunction with the filing of the lien and other associated necessary incidents of such filing requires a minimum charge for each lien that is assessed per lot, tract or parcel of real estate. The minimum charge for such legal work shall be set by the board of commissioners from time to time by minute order. 
(c)  The city manager is hereby authorized to execute any lien to be filed with the county clerk for the imposition of the lien on the property for which a nuisance was abated and the costs assessed by the city as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 17-26; Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 2-28-06) 
State Law reference— Lien, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007.  
Sec. 46-39. - Foreclosing lien. 
Upon the filing of the statements and affidavits provided for, the city shall have a lien for the repayment of the aggregate amount so expended and paid as therein set forth, with up to the maximum percent interest allowed by law thereon from the date of payment or incurrence of cost thereof by the city, upon the property described in such affidavit, and which lien shall have precedence over all other liens and encumbrances except tax liens and liens for street improvements; and for any such expenditures and interest as aforesaid, suit may be instituted, and recovery had, and such lien foreclosed by the city in the manner provided for by law. 
(Code 1966, § 17-27) 
State Law reference— Foreclosure of lien, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007(e).  
Sec. 46-40. - Authority to execute and release liens. 
The city manager or his designated authorized agent is hereby authorized to execute release liens on behalf of the city of all liens created under the provisions of this article. The city manager or his designated authorized agent shall have no right to execute such releases until he has satisfied himself that the debt or portion thereof secured by the lien and for which a release is requested has been paid in full to the city, and such lien shall be released only insofar as it affects the property for which the debt secured thereby has been paid in full. 
(Code 1966, § 17-28)  
Secs. 46-41—46-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LITTERING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; health director to enforce or delegate the enforcement of regulations regarding nuisances, § 2-251 et seq.; housing code, § 22-241 et seq. 
 
Sec. 46-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means any paper, trash, napkins, straws, cups, or containers made of paper, plastic, or other similar material, bottles, glass, candy or gum wrappers, remnants of food, goods or remnants or parts thereof, or any material of an insanitary or unsightly nature. 
Parking area means any area or premises in, at, or adjacent to a restaurant, drive-in restaurant, store, retail or wholesale business establishment, used, designed or intended for the parking of vehicles, and also means a privately owned or publicly owned accessway or parking area commonly used by the general public without charge, maintained for the convenience of customers, clients, patients, members or patrons of one or more business establishments, public offices and organizations. 
(Code 1966, § 19-14(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-62. - Acts prohibited. 
No person may throw or deposit any litter, or allow litter to come to rest on a parking area. 
(Code 1966, § 19-14(b))  
Sec. 46-63. - Owner or person in charge to clean parking area regularly. 
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, operator, or person in charge of any parking area to clean the premises and to remove all litter therefrom and place such litter in receptacles within 30 minutes after the daily closing time of the business utilizing such parking area for its customers. If the business operates continuously without closing, then the operator, owner, lessee, or person in charge of such business shall clean the premises and remove all litter therefrom and place it in receptacles at 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. of each day. It shall further be the duty of the owner, lessee, operator or person in charge to prevent any litter on the premises from being blown upon or come to rest upon the streets of the city, or upon any private property in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 19-14(c))  
Sec. 46-64. - Owner of parking area to provide trash receptacles. 
It is hereby declared to be the duty of the owner, lessee, operator, or person in charge of any business and adjacent parking area to provide on the premises not less than two receptacles for the receipt of litter to be used by its patrons and customers. If more than two receptacles are required to hold all the litter from the premises that may be placed therein, then it shall be the duty of the owner or operator to furnish such additional number of receptacles as are necessary to contain such litter. 
(Code 1966, § 19-14(d))  
Secs. 46-65—46-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED, WRECKED, ABANDONED PROPERTY[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; abandoned aircraft, § 18-101 et seq. 
State Law reference— Litter abatement, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 46-86—46-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - JUNKED VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Junked vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a, § 5.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 46-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antique auto means a passenger car or truck that was manufactured in 1925 or before, or which is 35 or more years old. 
Collector means the owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for his own use in order to restore, preserve and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
Demolisher means any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor vehicles. 
Junked vehicle means a motor vehicle as defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071 as amended: 
(1)  That is self-propelled; and 
(2)  That is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or that remains inoperable for a continuous period of more than 72 hours on public property or more than 30 days on private property. 
Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age which has not been altered or modified from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists. 
(Code 1966, § 17¼-2; Ord. No. 2003-57, § 1, 8-11-03; Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1, 1-8-18) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a, § 5.01.  
Sec. 46-97. - Junked vehicles as public nuisance. 
(a)  A junked vehicle that is located where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight, adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city and is a public nuisance. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if that person creates or maintains a public nuisance as determined under this section. 
(c)  A person who commits an offense under this section is, upon conviction, subject to a fine not to exceed $200.00. On conviction, the court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance. 
(Code 1966, § 17¼-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a, § 5.08.  
Sec. 46-98. - Notice by chief of police. 
Whenever it is brought to the attention of the chief of police that a public nuisance, as defined in this division, exists on private property or on a public right-of-way or public property in the city, the chief of police shall give or cause to be given to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, each lienholder of record, and the owner or occupants of the private premises or owner or occupant of private property adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public nuisance exists in writing, a notice, stating: 
(1)  The nature of the public nuisance; 
(2)  That it must be removed and abated within ten days; and 
(3)  That a request for a hearing must be made before the expiration of the ten-day period. 
The notice shall be personally delivered or sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate such nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days from the date of such return. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the vehicle is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, personally delivered. 
(Code 1966, § 17¼-4; Ord. No. 2003-57, § 2, 8-11-03) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a, § 5.09.  
Sec. 46-99. - Right of entry. 
The chief of police, or his duly authorized agent, may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this division and to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of vehicles and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance, in accordance with this division. The municipal court shall have authority to issue all orders necessary to enforce this division. 
(Code 1966, § 17¼-15)  
Sec. 46-100. - Public hearing. 
A public hearing shall be held prior to the removal of any vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance. Such hearing shall be held before a municipal judge of the city. Failure of any party notified under section 46-98 to request a hearing within ten days after service of notice or return of such notice undelivered by the United States Post Office shall be deemed a waiver of that party's attendance at such public hearing. If, at such hearing the municipal court finds that the vehicle in question is a public nuisance, the court may issue orders necessary to enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1966, § 17¼-5) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a, § 5.09.  
Sec. 46-101. - Exceptions. 
This division shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; 
(2)  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard; or 
(3)  Unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique and special interest vehicles stored by a collector on his property, provided that the vehicle and the outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate means. 
(Code 1966, § 17¼-6) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a, § 5.09.  
Sec. 46-102. - Administration of division. 
The administration of this division shall be by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city, except that the removal of vehicles or parts thereof from property may be by any other duly authorized person. 
(Code 1966, § 17¼-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a, § 5.09.  
Sec. 46-103. - Removal of vehicle. 
Upon the issuance of an order by the municipal court requiring the removal of a junked vehicle or part thereof, the chief of police, or any person acting under the direction of the chief of police, may, if such nuisance has not been abated, remove or cause to be removed the vehicle or part thereof which was the subject of such order. 
(Code 1966, § 17¼-8)  
Sec. 46-104. - Vehicles not to be made operable. 
(a)  After a vehicle has been removed in accordance with or under the terms and provisions of this division, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable. 
(b)  The relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location in the city after a proceeding for the abatement and removal of the vehicle has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(Code 1966, § 17¼-9; Ord. No. 2003-57, § 3, 8-11-03) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a, § 5.09.  
Sec. 46-105. - Notice to state highway department. 
Notice shall be given to the state department of highways and public transportation within five days after the date of removal identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed under this division. 
(Code 1966, § 17¼-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a, § 5.09.  
Sec. 46-106. - Sale or disposal of vehicles. 
When any junked vehicle has been removed as provided in section 46-103, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to dispose of such vehicle by removal to a scrap yard or by sale to a demolisher for the highest bid or offer received therefor, or to remove such vehicle to any suitable site operated by the city for processing as scrap or salvage. 
(Code 1966, § 17¼-11) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a, § 5.10.  
Sec. 46-107. - Chief of police may delegate authority. 
Wherever the chief of police is charged with the enforcement of this division, he may delegate such authority to any regularly salaried employee of the police department, except that he may authorize the removal of vehicles or parts thereof from public or private property by any person. 
(Code 1966, § 17¼-13)  
Secs. 46-108—46-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 46-121. - Adoption of State Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act. 
In addition to the provisions of division 2 of this article, the city hereby adopts and makes applicable to the city the State Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 683, as amended, and hereby grants and gives to its duly authorized agents the authority, right and privilege to do and perform all the necessary acts under such Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act to fully carry out and implement the purpose and intentions of such Act. 
(Code 1966, § 17¼-14; Ord. No. 2003-57, § 4, 8-11-03)  
Sec. 46-122. - Penalty for violation. 
A violation of any of the provisions of Ordinance No. 2003-57 shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2003-57, § 5, 8-11-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-57, § 5, adopted Aug. 11, 2003, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 46-122 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 46-123—46-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NOISE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; permitting dogs to create a nuisance prohibited, § 14-39; aviation, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 46-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business establishment means any place open for business, including but not limited to, restaurants, cafes, beer saloons, drive-in restaurants and dancehalls, whether private or open to the public. 
Disturbance means such volume of noise as offends the hearing sensibilities or the peace, rest, quiet and response of an ordinary, normal person, in the vicinity of the origin of the noise anytime while at a residence, or in the vicinity of the origin of the noise that is incompatible with the normal activity of a particular place at a particular time during the normal business hours of a business. 
Jukebox means a coin-operated phonograph permitting selection of the record to be played. 
Musical instrument means an instrument used in the production of music. 
Noise means a sound of any kind. 
Orchestra means three or more performers on musical instruments. 
Phonograph means any sound-reproducing machine using records, whether cylinders, disks, tape or wire, usually but not necessarily consisting in the main of a record changer, amplifier and a speaker. 
Public address system means a combination of electronic devices designed to transmit, amplify and reproduce speech and/or music so as to render it audible to many people at the same time. 
Radio means an apparatus for receiving radio broadcasts. 
(Code 1966, § 19-14.1(a); Ord. No. 2015-86, § I, 9-28-15) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-142. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, by the operation of a radio, jukebox, phonograph, musical instrument, orchestra, public address system or other means, to create a disturbance within the city, or to knowingly permit the creation of a disturbance at any place of business or premises owned, operated or under the control of such person. 
(Code 1966, § 19-14.1(b))  
Sec. 46-143. - Specific acts prohibited. 
The doing of any of the following acts within the city is hereby declared to be the creation of a disturbance and a violation of this article: 
(1)  Discharging or shooting fireworks except as may be permitted under section 50-93 or section 50-111 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Wilfully causing the backfire of the motor in any motor vehicle. 
(3)  Testing brakes on motor vehicle by causing the skidding of tires. 
(4)  Using an unmuffled internal combustion motor on any lawn mower. 
(5)  Using any internal combustion motor-driven lawn mower between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(6)  Sounding the horn on any motor vehicle, other than using such horn as a warning device. 
(7)  Operating a device emitting amplified music, either recorded or live, at the Palmer Pavilion located at 301 East Hackberry. 
(Code 1966, § 19-14.1(c); Ord. No. 1993-70, § I, 9-27-93; Ord. No. 1995-4, § I, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 2003-46, § 2, 6-23-03; Ord. No. 2015-86, § II, 9-28-15)  
Sec. 46-144. - Volume controls for mechanical devices in business establishments. 
In business establishments maintaining and operating mechanical devices emitting noise, there shall be maintained in working order thereon volume controls which shall be so set, either permanently or temporarily, as to prevent the emitting of noise amounting to a disturbance. When a volume control is not permanently set and a disturbance results from noise emitting from such mechanical device, the owner and/or operator or person in charge of such business shall be deemed in violation of this section, regardless of whether a customer or employee or other person regulated the volume of noise emitting from such device and creating a disturbance. 
(Code 1966, § 19-14.1(d))  
Sec. 46-145. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-86, § III, adopted Sept. 28, 2015, deleted § 46-145, entitled "General restrictions on use of loudspeakers" and derived from Code 1966, § 19-14.1(e).  
Secs. 46-146—46-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OIL AND GAS WELLS AND PIPELINES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
State Law reference— Oil and gas generally, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 6004—6066d. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-166. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Drilling block means one of the spaced areas into which the city is subdivided, as defined and exemplified in section 46-168, for the purpose of permitting the drilling of wells for oil and/or gas therein. 
Mineral owner means the owner or lessee of the mineral interests or estate in and to the particular real estate referred to, subject only to liens to secure debt. A lienholder shall not be considered an "owner." 
One well. Reference to "one well" refers to and shall mean one well for each reservoir or sand from which production is sought or obtained within a particular drilling block. 
Person means natural persons, husband and wife, joint tenants, tenants in common, corporation, partnerships, joint stock associations, municipal corporations, and the state. 
Surface owner means the person who owns the legal title in and to the surfaces estates of the subject property. The surface estate and mineral estate may be held jointly by the same owner where not reserved. 
(Code 1966, § 20-1; Ord. No. 1999-79, § 1, 9-13-99) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-167. - Purpose. 
The board of commissioners, having adopted a comprehensive drilling ordinance dated November 30, 1938, regulating the drilling of oil and/or gas wells in the city, parts of which have subsequently been amended from time to time, and it now appearing that time, conditions, city growth, increase of property values within the city, new drilling techniques, changes in pressures, development of new and improved drilling materials, a substantial part of the McAllen Field gas reserves underlies parts of the city as its corporate limits have been extended since 1938, and the 1938 drilling ordinance, as amended, having become the subject of controversy; and it appearing that such gas should be produced, but that the very minimum of wells should be drilled, consistent with proper drainage and conservation of such gas reservoirs; and it being deemed wise to redraft, amend, consolidate, and reenact the entire drilling ordinance so as to eliminate obsolescence, and improve its safety features, and regulate the drilling and operation of oil and/or gas wells to promote the public welfare and to guard and protect the persons, lives and properties of the people in the city, and of those passing through the city, from the dangers and hazards of the escape of gas, of fire, explosions, cratering and other dangers incident to fields and production of oil and gas, this article is, therefore, passed for the purpose of protecting health, life and property, to preserve and enforce good government, order and security of the city and its inhabitants, and for the purpose of preventing nuisances in the exploration, drilling for and production of oil and/or gas within the city limits, and to promote proper and orderly development and conservation of such natural resources. 
(Code 1966, § 20-2)  
Sec. 46-168. - City divided into drilling units or districts. 
(a)  The city shall be, and is hereby, spaced and subdivided into oil and/or gas drilling units or districts, and such subdivision of the city into such drilling units or districts is hereby ordained, declared, fixed and definitely shown by the map or plat hereby adopted, which map or plat is hereby referred to and made a part of this article for all purposes. A copy of such map shall be on file in the city secretary's office and available for inspection during regular business hours Monday through Friday. 
(b)  The map or plat adopted in subsection (a) of this section is hereby amended by adding drilling units 154, 155, 156 and 157 thereto; such units encompassing the following respective areas: All of Lot 2, Block 5, Hidalgo Canal Company Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas; Lot 14, Block 6, Hidalgo Canal Company Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas; and Lot 21, Block 3, C. E. Hammond Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas. 
(c)  The map or plat adopted in subsection (a) of this section is hereby amended by adding drilling unit 158 thereto; such unit encompassing the following respective area: Southwest ¼ of Block 6, Lot 10 of Hidalgo Canal Company Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas. 
(d)  The map or plat adopted in subsection (a) of this section is hereby amended by adding drilling unit 159 thereto; such unit encompassing the following respective area: Lot 3, Block 15, Steel and Pershing Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas. 
(e)  The map or plat adopted in subsection (a) of this section is hereby amended by adding drilling unit 160 thereto; such unit encompassing the following respective area: Lots 96 and 85 of the La Lomita Irrigation and Construction Company Subdivision of lands in Hidalgo County, Texas, and Lots 15, 16, 17 and 18 of Block 1 of the C. E. Hammond Subdivision of lands in Hidalgo County, Texas, and the adjacent irrigation canal which runs north and south on the east side of such Lots 15, 16, 17 and 18 of Block 1 of C. E. Hammond Subdivision of the land in Hidalgo County, Texas. 
(f)  The map or plat adopted in subsection (a) of this section is hereby amended by adding drilling unit 161 thereto, such unit encompassing the following respective areas: Lots 73, 74, 83, and the north 30 acres of Lot 84, La Lomita Irrigation and Construction Company Subdivision of lands in Hidalgo County, Texas, Block 1, and the lands underlying the irrigation canal that runs in a northerly and southerly direction between Lot 14, C. E. Hammond Lands, Block 1 and Lot 13, Block 12, C. E. Hammond Lands, Hidalgo County, Texas, comprising 271.85 acres of land, more or less. 
(g)  The map or plat adopted in subsection (a) of this section is hereby amended by adding drilling unit 162 thereto; such unit encompassing the following respective areas: All of Lots 4 (40.76 acres) and 5 (40.00 acres) of Block 6; all of Lots 1 (44.76 acres), 2 (40.00 acres), 3 (40.00 acres), 4 (40.00 acres), 5 (40.00 acres) and 6 (44.00 acres) of Block 7, Steele and Pershing Subdivision; all of Lots 1 (45.08 acres), 2 (40.00 acres), 3 (42.16 acres), 4 (40.00 acres), 5 (40.00 acres) and 6 (45.04 acres) of Block 8, Steel and Pershing Subdivision; the west 23.14 acres of the north 32.95 acres, and the south 11.05 acres of Lot 1 of Block 4, A. J. McColl Subdivision; all of Lots 2 (44.07 acres) and 3 (44.19 acres) of Block 4, A. J. McColl Subdivision of the land in Hidalgo County, Texas. 
(h)  The map or plat adopted in subsection (a) of this section is hereby amended by adding drilling unit 163 thereto, such unit encompassing the following respective areas: Lot 11, Block 1, C. E. Hammond Lands, Lots 3, 4, 5, 6 and 12, Block 12, Hidalgo Canal Company Survey, Hidalgo County, Texas, and the lands underlying the irrigation canal that runs in a northerly and southerly direction between Lots 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 of C. E. Hammond Lands, Block 1 and Lots 4, 5, 12, of Hidalgo Canal Company Subdivision of lands, all in Hidalgo County, Texas, comprising approximately 260.71 acres of land as set out in red on the plat hereby referred to and made a part of this section for all purposes. 
(i)  The map or plat adopted in subsection (a) of this section is hereby amended by adding drilling unit 164 thereto, such unit encompassing the following respective area: Lots 51 through 59, McAllen Second Suburban Citrus Groves Subdivision out of La Lomita Irrigation and Construction Company Subdivision of Porciones 61, 62 and 63, Hidalgo County, Texas; Lots 182 through 184, La Lomita Irrigation and Construction Company Subdivision of Porciones 61, 62 and 63, Hidalgo County, Texas; the east 26.17 acres of Lot 189, Lot 190, and Lot 191, La Lomita Irrigation and Construction Company Subdivision of Porciones 61, 62 and 63, Hidalgo County, Texas; and Lots 2 and 3, Block 1 of Rio Bravo Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas. 
(j)  The map or plat adopted in subsection (a) of this section is hereby amended by adding drilling unit 399 thereto; such unit encompassing all of Lot 29, C.E. Hammond Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas. 
(k)  The map or plat adopted in subsection (a) of this section is hereby amended by adding drilling unit 441 thereto; such unit encompassing the west 40.15 acres of Lot 144, La Lomita Irrigation and Construction Company Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas. 
(l)  The map or plat adopted in subsection (a) of this section is hereby amended by adding drilling unit 461 thereto; such unit encompassing Lots 1, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10, Clydesdale Acres Subdivision and the west 11.0 acres of Lot 143, La Lomita Irrigation and Construction Company Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas. 
(m)  The map or plat heretofore adopted in subsection (a) is hereby amended by adding drilling unit 858 thereto; said unit encompassing Lot 2, Block 13, Hidalgo Canal Company Subdivision, M. Ujanda de los Rios Porcion 65, Hidalgo County, Texas. 
(n)  The map or plat heretofore adopted in subsection (a) of this section is hereby amended by adding drilling unit 359 thereto; such unit encompassing all of Section 12, Lot 3, Hidalgo Canal Company Subdivision. 
(o)  The map or plat heretofore adopted in subsection (a) of this section is hereby amended by adding drilling unit 153 thereto; such unit encompassing all of Lot 4, Block 8, A.J. McColl Subdivision. 
(p)  The map or plat heretofore adopted in paragraph (a) is hereby amended by adding Drilling Unit 288 thereto; said unit encompassing all of Block 3, Section 17, Steele and Pershing Subdivision. 
(q)  The map or plat heretofore adopted in paragraph (a) is hereby amended by adding Drilling Unit 213 thereto; said unit encompassing all of Lot 1, Block 16, Steele and Pershing Subdivision. 
(r)  The map or plat heretofore adopted in paragraph (a) is hereby amended by adding Drilling Unit 603 thereto; said unit encompassing all of Lot 1, Block 1, Rio Bravo Plantation Subdivision. 
(s)  The map or plat heretofore adopted in paragraph (a) is hereby amended by adding Drilling Unit 604 thereto; said unit encompassing all of Lot 2, Block 1, Rio Bravo Plantation Subdivision and the northern half of Lot 2, Block 2, Rio Bravo Plantation Subdivision. 
(t)  The map or plat heretofore adopted in paragraph (a) is hereby amended by adding Drilling Unit 605 thereto; said unit encompassing all of Lot 3, Block 1, Rio Bravo Plantation Subdivision and the northeastern quarter of Lot 3, Block 2, Rio Bravo Plantation Subdivision. 
(u)  The map or plat heretofore adopted in paragraph (a) is hereby amended by adding Drilling Unit 606 thereto; said unit encompassing all of Lot 4, Block 1, Rio Bravo Plantation Subdivision and the northeastern 0.36 acres of Lot 4, Block 2, Rio Bravo Plantation Subdivision. 
(v)  The map or plat heretofore adopted in paragraph (a) is hereby amended by adding Drilling Unit 607 thereto; said unit encompassing all of Lot 5, Block 1, Rio Bravo Plantation Subdivision. 
(w)  The map or plat heretofore adopted in paragraph (a) is hereby amended by adding Drilling Unit 608 thereto; said unit encompassing all of Lot 6, Block 1, Rio Bravo Plantation Subdivision. 
(Code 1966, § 20-3; Ord. No. 1994-65, § I, 9-20-94; Ord. No. 1996-6, § I, 1-22-96; Ord. No. 1996-33, § I, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 1996-43, § I, 6-24-96; Ord. No. 1997-6, § I, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 1997-22, § I, 3-27-97; Ord. No. 2004-36, § 5-10-04; Ord. No. 2012-34, § I, 5-29-12; Ord. No. 2015-64, § I, 7-27-15)  
Sec. 46-169. - Location in or encumbering streets or alleys. 
It shall be unlawful to drill any well for oil or gas within any of the streets or alleys of the city. It shall be unlawful to block, encumber or close up any street or alley in the drilling or production operations, except by special permit issued by order of the board of commissioners, and then only temporarily. 
(Code 1966, § 20-4)  
Sec. 46-170. - Location near residence or commercial building. 
No well for oil or gas shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued to drill any such well within 400 feet of the subdivided property line of any residence or commercial building, unless the applicant has first secured the permission of the surface owner or owners thereof to drill such well. In the event the applicant fails to secure such permission as a result of being unable to located, after due diligence, such owners, the city commission may issue a variance of this consent requirement if the applicant files an affidavit setting forth applicant's good faith effort to locate such owners and provided not less than 75 percent of the remaining owners have consented to such drilling operations. 
(Code 1966, § 20-5; Ord. No. 1999-79, § 2, 9-13-99)  
Sec. 46-171. - Location near school, church or public building. 
No well for oil or gas shall be drilled, and no permit shall be granted to drill a well for oil or gas, where the hole is to be drilled within less distance than 400 feet from any building or 100 feet from the boundary line of any land used as a school, church, public building site or city park location in the city, whichever is greater, unless the applicant has first secured the permission of the school district or church or city governing body. No well being drilled within 700 feet of any school or church in the city shall have drill-stem testing tools open during school hours, or from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on any day when school is in session, or at a time when church services are being held. Nothing in this section shall be construed as affecting the rights of the school district or church to its pro rata part of oil or gas produced in the unit in which any of its land is situated in the same manner as provided in this article for other owners. 
(Code 1966, § 20-6; Ord. No. 1999-79, § 3, 9-13-99)  
Sec. 46-172. - Authority to further restrict location. 
The board of commissioners shall have the power and reserves the authority to refuse any application for a permit to drill any well at any particular location within any drilling block, where by reason of such particular location and the character and value of the permanent improvements already erected on or approximately adjacent to the particular location in question, or because of the use to which the land and surroundings are adapted for school, college, university, hospital, park or civic purposes, or for health reasons, or safety reasons, or any of them, where the drilling of such well on such particular location might be injurious, or be a disadvantage to the city or to its inhabitants as a whole, or to a substantial number of its inhabitants, or to visitors as a group, or would not promote the orderly development and conservation of oil, gas and minerals, or orderly growth and development of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 20-7)  
Sec. 46-173. - Bond. 
No person shall commence the drilling of any oil or gas well until he has filed with the city secretary a duly executed bond as a drilling bond, executed by the applicant for the drilling permit as principal, and some good and reliable surety company authorized to do business in the state as surety, payable to the mayor and his successors in office, conditioned that, if the permit is granted, the applicant and his assigns will comply with the terms and conditions of this article in the drilling of the well; that the applicant will restore the streets and sidewalks and other public places of the city which may be injured in the operations to their former condition; will clear the lots and blocks of all litter, machinery, derricks, buildings, trash and waste accumulated, used or allowed in the drilling of such well, when the well shall be completed as a producing well or plugged and abandoned as a dry hole. Such bond shall be in the sum of $25,000.00 and, before the permit shall be issued, the bond shall be filed with the city secretary. Such bond shall become effective upon the granting of the permit and shall remain in full force and effect until such well is abandoned as a dry hole and plugged or is completed as a producing well. The city shall not release the obligation of such bond for any well which is abandoned as a dry hole or plugged unless and until sufficient proof is furnished to the city secretary from the state railroad commission as having met all of the requirements of such railroad commission. For convenience such bond may be cumulative and may be conditioned to cover successive wells. 
(Code 1966, § 20-8)  
Sec. 46-174. - Insurance. 
(a)  In addition to the bond required by section 46-173, each person drilling an oil or gas well shall carry public liability insurance in the minimum amount of $500,000.00 for one person and $100,000.00 for one accident, and property damage insurance in the minimum amount of $5,000,000.00 for one accident, with a company authorized to do business in the state, which shall be in force and effect during the drilling of such well and until the completion thereof as a producing well or the abandonment and plugging thereof as a dry hole. 
(b)  If any oil or gas well is completed as a commercially producing well, then the permittee therefore shall be required to carry public liability insurance in a minimum amount of $500,000.00 for one person and $100,000.00 for one accident, and property damage insurance in a minimum amount of $5,000,000.00 for one accident, which shall remain in force and effect and be so carried as long as such well is producing oil or gas, or either of them, in commercial quantities and until plugged and abandoned. 
(Code 1966, § 20-9; Ord. No. 1999-79, § 4, 9-13-99; Ord. No. 2009-35, § I, 6-22-09)  
Sec. 46-175. - Right of entry for inspections and tests. 
Those persons in control of the drilling or operation of any oil or gas well in the city shall permit the city oil and gas inspector, or any subordinate thereof, to come upon the premises and make inspections and tests at all reasonable hours. The city manager shall, from time to time, appoint a city oil and gas inspector. 
(Code 1966, § 20-10)  
Sec. 46-176. - Permit for input or reception well for cycling or pressure maintenance purposes. 
A permit for an input or reception well for cycling or pressure maintenance purposes may be obtained by a person owning oil and/or gas wells in the city, to be located at some convenient place in the city, under the same terms and conditions as provided in this article for obtaining a permit to drill a well for oil or gas, excepting that the one drilling block spacing shall not apply, and, with such exceptions, such well shall be drilled in accordance with this article, except that there may be maintained upon its site such machinery as is necessary for the production of pressure and cycling purposes. Such well shall be for cycling or repressuring purposes only, and not for producing oil or gas. 
(Code 1966, § 20-11)  
Sec. 46-177. - Article does not grant right to enter or occupy property of another. 
Neither this article nor any permit issued under this article shall be interpreted to grant any right or license to the permittee to enter upon or occupy, in any respect, in the drilling or production operations, any land not under contract or lease to him, except by the written consent of the owner. 
(Code 1966, § 20-12)  
Sec. 46-178. - Amendment of article, drilling block map. 
This article and the drilling block map may be changed, amended or repealed at any time by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 20-13)  
Secs. 46-179—46-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 46-191. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence to drill a well for oil or gas within the city, or to work upon or to assist in any way in the prosecution of drilling operations for any such well, without a permit for such well and for the prosecution of such development having first been issued by the city in accordance with the terms of this division. 
(Code 1966, § 20-24)  
Sec. 46-192. - Application. 
(a)  Every application for a permit to drill a well for oil and/or gas shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, or by some authorized person in his behalf, and should cover no more than one drilling block. It shall be filed with the city secretary and approved by the board of commissioners and shall state the drilling block and the particular lot or location in the block where the proposed well is to be drilled, and the application shall show what part of the unit the applicant holds under lease or contract with the owners, and that he owns or controls a 51 percent mineral interest in the block as required by this article. The city secretary is hereby authorized to formulate the form for the drilling permit and application. 
(b)  The city secretary is hereby required to send notice to any surface owner within 400 feet from the location where the well is to be drilled. Such notice shall state the location of the well and the date at which the board of commissioners shall consider the approval of the permit. The city secretary may rely upon the ownership records of the Hidalgo County Appraisal District for notice requirements. Additionally, the city secretary shall cause such notice to be published once in a daily newspaper of the city as least ten days prior to the date at which the board of commissioners is to consider the approval of such permit. 
(c)  Applicant shall prepare a notice stating the location of the well and the date at which the board of commissioners is to consider the approval of the permit. Applicant shall make reasonable effort to ascertain the last known address of every mineral owner in property situated within the drilling block to be drilled, according to the deed records, which interest is not owned by or under lease to, or under contract with, applicant. Applicant shall send such notice to all such mineral owners by registered mail deposited in the U.S. mail not less than 12 days prior to the date at which the board of commissioners is to consider the approval of such permit. Applicant shall file an affidavit with the city secretary setting for [forth] the last known address of each such mineral owner as disclosed by its review of the deed records. The applications shall also be accompanied by the bond required by section 46-173 and a certificate of insurance showing compliance with section 46-174. 
(d)  The application for a well-drilling permit shall be accompanied with a map or plat of the block, showing the exact location of the proposed well. In making such location the applicant must take into consideration improvements which then exist. The city secretary shall cause an independent verification of adjoining improvements to be made. [The application shall also be accompanied by the bond required by section 46-173 and a certificate of insurance showing compliance with section 46-174.] 
(Code 1966, § 20-25; Ord. No. 1999-79, § 5, 9-13-99)  
Sec. 46-193. - Fee. 
(a)  The fee for a permit for drilling on any one drilling block in the city shall be $2,500.00. Such fee shall be deposited, in cash or certified check, with the city secretary at the time the application for the permit is filed, and shall be held in a special fund until the permit is issued. When the permit is issued, such fee shall accrue to the city and shall be full and complete compensation for the expense of inspection and other expenses that may be incurred by the city relating to the drilling permit application and approval. Nothing in this section shall, however, relieve the permittee from the obligation to properly repair the streets, alleys and public properties, and to restore the property in clean condition in case they are used in such drilling or production operation. The payment of the fee and the right of inspection granted in this article shall in no way obligate the city to make any inspections relating to the drilling or operations of any oil or gas well within the city, and furthermore, the payment of the fee or granting of the right of inspection shall not be construed as the approval by the city of the means and manners of drilling, operation or any other conduct relating to the drilling or production which does not meet railroad commission rules and regulations or accepted standards of conduct of the oil and gas industry. 
(b)  If the permit for the well is refused, the fee provided for in this section shall be returned to the applicant, except that there shall be retained therefrom $1,000.00 as a filing fee. 
(Code 1966, § 20-26; Ord. No. 1999-79, § 6, 9-13-99)  
Sec. 46-194. - Issuance generally; to specify location of well. 
If an application to drill is found by the city commission to comply in all respects with the terms of this article, a permit shall be issued by the city secretary for the drilling of the well applied for. The permit shall specify the particular location of the well to be drilled, and permittee shall cause the well to be drilled within 100 feet of such location, as long as it does not affect the notification of any other surface owner within 400 feet. It shall be unlawful for the permittee to drill elsewhere in the drilling block without approval of the city commission. 
(Code 1966, § 20-27; Ord. No. 1999-79, § 7, 9-13-99)  
Sec. 46-195. - Number to be issued in each drilling block. 
There shall be issued a permit for only one well in each separate producing reservoir or each prospective producing reservoir, sand, or strata, in each drilling block in the city. This limitation does not apply to input or reception wells for cycling or secondary recovery purposes and it does not prohibit the use of the surface of one drilling block for the surface location for wells to be drilled directionally and completed under or beneath other designated drilling blocks. 
(Code 1966, § 20-28)  
Sec. 46-196. - To issue only if applicant owns or has lease or contract for at least 51 percent of drilling block. 
No applicant shall be granted a permit to drill a well for oil or gas in the city unless the applicant is the mineral owner of or has under contract or lease at least 51 percent of the oil and gas rights under the area constituting the drilling block on which the well surface location is made and the drilling block under which the bottom of the hole of the well is located and from which production is sought or obtained. 
(Code 1966, § 20-29; Ord. No. 1999-79, § 8, 9-13-99)  
Sec. 46-197. - Conditions to issuance when applicant does not own or have lease or contract for entire drilling block. 
(a)  If an application for a permit for the drilling, completion and operation of a well for oil or gas is made by any person owning 51 percent but not owning or not holding oil and gas leases or drilling contracts from the owners of all blocks, lots or parcels of land included in or embraced within a city drilling block as shown upon the map referred to in section 46-168, a permit shall be issued to such applicant, his heirs, successors and assigns only upon the conditions specified in this section. 
(b)  The applicant referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be free to enter into such contract and agreements with the owners of such other lots or tracts as he may be able to make. 
(c)  A permit for the drilling of a well may be issued to a person holding 51 percent, but not holding oil and gas leases or drilling contracts with the owners of all the lots or acreage in a drilling block, but it shall be a condition of the permit that the permittee, his successors and assigns, shall pay to the owner of an unleased lot or lots or acreage, or to noncooperating lessees, if their leases are in the form provided in this article, for the benefit of his royalty owners, if such lots or acreage are under lease on proper forms to such lessees, in proportion as such area bears to the area of the operator's entire unit, or fieldwide unit, as the case may be, the following royalties: 
(1)  On oil, one-eighth of that produced and saved from such land, such portion to be delivered at the well or to the credit of the owner into the pipeline to which the wells may be connected. The permittee may from time to time purchase any royalty oil in his possession, paying the market price thereof prevailing for the field where produced on the date of purchase. 
(2)  On gas, including casinghead gas or other gaseous substance, produced from such land and sold or used off the premises or in the manufacture of gasoline or other products therefrom, the sale price at the delivery point of one-eighth of the gas sold or used, provided that on gas sold at the well the royalty shall be one-eighth of the amount realized from such sale. Where gas from a well producing gas only, and/or gas and condensate only, in commercial quantities, is not sold or used, the permittee may pay as royalty for the account of the royalty owners in his unit $200.00 per well per year, and upon such payment it will be considered that gas and/or gas and condensate is being produced in commercial quantities. 
The permittee shall never be obligated to pay to such lot or tract owners any greater royalty than specified in this section, regardless of any contract or lease that such owner may have made with any person other than the permittee. 
(d)  In case a permit to drill a well for oil and/or gas is applied for and is issued to any person holding not less than 51 percent but who is not the owner of or who does not have under lease or valid drilling contract, in writing, from the owners of all of the land within the drilling block, it shall be a condition of the permit granted that, in addition to the royalties provided in subsection (c) of this section, the owner of any unleased land in the block, or in case such land has been leased to a person other than the permittee and such owner of unleased land, or noncooperating lessee, does not desire to participate in the unitized venture to the extent of his proportionate part of the working interest therein on a surface acreage basis, then such person may, within ten days after notice to him of the granting of the permit, tender to the permittee, if he is the owner of unleased land, a lease upon such land in the usual form of leases taken in the area by the permittee, reserving his royalty in the amount as provided in subsection (c), and within 30 days thereafter an abstract of title certified to that date showing good and merchantable title in himself, whereupon the permittee shall pay unto him, as a bonus for such lease, the highest price paid by the permittee for a lease in the permittee's unit within the preceding 12 months, in proportion that such owner's area bears to the area upon which such highest bonus was paid, but if the permittee should not have purchased a lease in the permittee's unit within such 12 months, then the bonus to be paid for the lease shall be the average price paid for all other leases secured by the permittee in such unit in proportion to the owner's surface area. If any person owning a lease does not desire to participate in the working interest in the permittee's unit under the conditions provided in this section, then he may, within ten days after notice of the granting of the permit, tender an assignment of his lease, if it is on the permittee's usual form in the area, and within 30 days thereafter an abstract of title certified to that date showing good and merchantable title thereto, to the permittee and he shall be entitled to a like bonus as prescribed for the giving of a lease by the owner, as specified in this section. However, if any lessee has contracted to pay a greater royalty to the owner of the land than that specified in subsection (c), he shall not be entitled to demand for assignment of his lease a bonus or royalty in excess of that specified in this section, but shall be entitled to take only a working interest, subject to the terms and conditions provided in this section, and then and in that event, his having elected to take a working interest, such additional royalty shall be deducted from any sums that may come to such lessee, or his assigns, by reason of his working interest and shall be paid over to such royalty owner, but the permittee shall never be required to pay more than the proportionate part of the working interest specified in this section and the royalties specified in subsection (c), that is to say on the basis of the proportion that the lessee's or assignee's surface acreage bears to the surface acreage of the unit, or consolidated unit, into which the permittee is to incorporate such lot or acreage. If such owner or holder of a lease shall desire to participate in a working interest, his working interest shall be the proportion that the area of his land bears to the area of the permittee's entire oil or gas unit or fieldwide unit, as the case may be. If the owner or owners do not tender leases on the form provided, or make arrangements to participate as to a working interest as provided in this section, and within the time provided in this section, then, if the permittee desires, he may proceed with his operations. 
(e)  If a permit has been in the past, or is, in the future, issued to one who holds 51 percent or more, but who does not hold leases or drilling contracts from owners of the mineral leasehold estates under all of the lands within a drilling block, then any other person owning minerals under, or holding oil or gas leases (on the usual form used by the permittee in the area) covering land in any of the city's drilling blocks located within the perimeter of one of the permittee's producing units, consolidated units, or fieldwide units, shall have the right, subject to the terms and conditions of the permit, and subject to paying his pro rata part of any unrecovered portion of the past exploration, development, reconditioning and reworking expenses and gathering system cost of such unit, consolidated unit, or fieldwide unit, into which his lease is to be incorporated, and upon filing with the city secretary, with an executed copy to the permittee, his written election to participate with the permittee, and upon also filing with the city secretary, with an executed copy to the permittee, a good and sufficient bond, executed by him as principal and by a good and solvent corporate surety company having a permit to do business in the state, as surety, payable to the order of the permittee in an amount representing his pro rata portion of the estimated maximum cost of future drilling, completing and equipping of additional wells in the unit, consolidated unit, or fieldwide unit, as the case may be, plus the expense of operating, maintaining, reworking and/or recompleting any well or wells on such unit, including, but not by way of limitation, compressing, pumping, vacuum operations, extending, repairing, relaying and/or transferring, etc., the gathering system, payment of severance taxes, etc.; whereupon, and only in such event, he shall be entitled to share in the ownership, benefits and production from such unit, consolidated unit, or fieldwide unit, into which his lease is to be merged, in the proportion (measured by surface acreage) that the area attributable to his mineral interest, or his lease, bears to the whole area in the unit, consolidated unit or fieldwide unit, as the case may be, and subject to necessary future unit contractions or enlargements, such bond being conditioned that the principal in such bond will currently, from time to time and before delinquency, pay to the permittee his proportion of all such aforesaid costs, expenses, taxes, etc., plus six percent interest per annum upon any delinquencies, including all costs or expenses incurred by the permittee in fulfilling the terms and conditions of the permit, such bond to be subject to approval by the city secretary with the advice and consent of the permittee, and plus reasonable attorney's fees if placed in the hands of an attorney for collection after delinquency. 
(Code 1966, § 20-30)  
Sec. 46-198. - Expiration. 
If any person who has been granted a permit under this article does not in good faith commence operations for the drilling of a well for oil and/or gas in the drilling block for which such permit was issued within six months from the date of the issuance of such permit, such permit shall be null and void and no well shall be drilled in that particular drilling block until another permit is granted therefor on the same terms and conditions as provided in this article for the granting of a permit. 
(Code 1966, § 20-32)  
Secs. 46-199—46-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DRILLING AND OPERATION 
 
Sec. 46-211. - Earthen slush or mud pits prohibited. 
No earthen slush or mud pits shall be dug or used within the corporate limits of the city in the drilling of any oil or gas well. 
(Code 1966, § 20-43)  
Sec. 46-212. - Waste, refuse and trash not to remain on premises. 
No waste, refuse, trash, waste oil or wastewater shall be permitted to remain on the premises where an oil and/or gas well is being drilled or being produced. 
(Code 1966, § 20-44)  
Sec. 46-213. - Fencing. 
All oil and/or gas wells, when completed, shall be enclosed by a good and substantial smooth net wire fence, sufficiently high and properly built so as to ordinarily keep persons and animals out of the enclosure. The gate to the enclosure shall be kept locked when the permittee or his employees are not at the premises. Any area or site containing a well or multiple wells (when completed ), or production facilities (such as compressor stations, gas dehydration equipment, etc.) shall be protected with a fence appropriate to the general area in which they are located and shall be secured with a gate and lock, sufficiently high and properly built so as to ordinarily keep persons and animals out of the enclosure. The gate to the enclosure shall be kept locked when the permittee or his employees are not at the premises. In a developed residential area, the permittee will be obligated to provide adequate landscaping and maintain the appearance of the area or site to conform to the surrounding residential area. In undeveloped areas, landscaping will not be necessary. However, if the surrounding area is subsequently developed into a residential neighborhood, the permittee will be obligated to conform to the residential landscaping, fencing and appearance. The mineral owner, to whom a permit has been issued and for which the landscaping and fencing requirements are now applicable on an existing site, shall have nine months from this date hereof to provide such landscaping and 90 days to provide such fencing. 
(Code 1966, § 20-45; Ord. No. 1999-79, § 9, 9-13-99)  
Sec. 46-214. - Storage and receiving tanks to be kept outside city; removal of derricks, etc. 
After any oil and/or gas well is brought into production, there shall be no storage or receiving tanks kept within the city, but such tanks shall be kept on the outside thereof, and all derricks shall be timely taken down after the completion of the well and there shall remain on top of the ground during the natural flowing life of the well only a Christmas tree and a separator and their equipment and the pipes leading thereto or therefrom to points outside the city limits. Nothing in this section shall, however, be construed as prohibiting the installation of all necessary equipment for the necessary reconditioning, reworking, and or recompletion of a well, and when the time comes where the natural flow has ceased or become so light as to make necessary the installation of pumps or compression equipment, all such derricks and equipment may be installed for such purpose and necessary equipment may be maintained. 
(Code 1966, § 20-46)  
Sec. 46-215. - Casing generally. 
In the drilling of an oil and/or gas well, new pipe with a mill test pressure of not less than 1,000 pounds per square inch shall be set for surface casing at a depth below the surface of not less than that required by the state railroad commission for the McAllen Field, and shall be cemented from the bottom of the pipe to the surface with proper mixture of cement. Cementing shall be by the pump and plug method. Cement shall be allowed to stand under pressure a minimum of 12 hours, and a total of 24 hours shall elapse before drilling plug or initiating tests. Casing shall be tested by pump pressure in the following manner: Apply pump pressure of at least 1,000 pounds per square inch; if at the end of 30 minutes the pressure shows a drop of 100 pounds or more, corrective measures shall be required, and after such corrective operation, the casing shall again be tested in the same manner until it shall be found to comply with the specifications set out in this section. 
(Code 1966, § 20-47)  
Sec. 46-216. - Casing for producing or oil string. 
In the drilling of an oil and/or gas well, the producing or oil string shall be new casing that has been tested to 3,000 pounds per square inch, and after cementing it shall be tested by pump pressure in the following manner: Pump pressure of at least 3,000 pounds per square inch shall be applied. If at the end of 30 minutes the pressure shows a drop of 100 pounds or more, corrective measures shall be required, and after such corrective operation, the casing shall again be tested in the same manner until the casing conforms to the specifications set out in this section. 
(Code 1966, § 20-48)  
Sec. 46-217. - Determination of position of producing horizon; cementing producing string. 
The position of the producing horizon in any oil or gas well shall be determined by coring, logging or testing. The producing string shall be cemented at the top of such producing horizon or lower. Cementing shall be by the pump and plug method. A sufficient quantity of cement shall be used so that it will fill the annular space back of the pipe to a distance of not less than 600 feet above the shallowest sand capable of producing oil or gas in commercial quantities. Cement shall be allowed to stand a minimum of 24 hours under pressure before drilling plug or initiating tests. 
(Code 1966, § 20-49)  
Sec. 46-218. - Blowout preventer and other control equipment. 
A double-ram type, or its equivalent, blowout preventer, and other connections for keeping any oil or gas well under control at all times shall be installed as soon as pressure is released from the surface casing. The blowout preventer shall be of dual control or of such type of construction and operation as to satisfy any test which may be required by the state railroad commission or city building official. The blowout preventer shall be tested in the manner and frequency commonly employed and established for oilfield operations. All control equipment shall be in good working order and condition at all times, and shall have been tested to at least 6,000 pounds pressure. 
(Code 1966, § 20-50)  
Sec. 46-219. - Drilling fluid. 
After the setting of surface casing, as in this article provided, and drilling operations are commenced, there shall be kept at all times a mud-laden fluid for drilling purposes of a minimum weight of 8.3 pounds per gallon, and a minimum weight of 9.5 pounds per gallon when drilling in excess of 10,000 feet below the ground surface, but at no time less than such weight as will provide a hydrostatic head equivalent to the formation pressures of the horizons being drilled, and such mud-laden fluid shall be tested during drilling operations each eight hours. Just before completion or drill-stem testing operations are commenced, the mud-laden fluid shall be tested while circulating and shall be made to conform to the specifications in this section before proceeding. When coming out of the hole with the drill pipe, the drilling fluid shall be circulated until equalized and a fill-up line shall be turned into the casing to ensure a full load of fluid on the bottom of the hole at all times. 
(Code 1966, § 20-51)  
Sec. 46-220. - Mufflers required for equipment. 
All steam exhausts on pumps, boilers and equipment, as well as all combustible engines, used for drilling wells shall be equipped with mufflers. 
(Code 1966, § 20-52)  
Sec. 46-221. - Bradenheads. 
All wells shall be equipped with a bradenhead which has a working pressure of not less than 3,000 pounds per square inch, and with test pressure rating of 6,000 pounds per square inch. Bradenheads shall be welded by a certified welder, and as soon as installed, the bradenheads shall be equipped with the proper pipe connections and valves accessible at the surface. 
(Code 1966, § 20-53)  
Sec. 46-222. - Protective devices for drill stem inside surface casing. 
Throughout the drilling operations of any well below surface casing, that portion of the drill stem inside the surface casing shall be equipped with standard protective devices designed to minimize wear on the surface casing, such protective devices being spaced at intervals not greater than 60 feet. 
(Code 1966, § 20-54)  
Sec. 46-223. - Deviational surveys during drilling. 
A deviational survey of each well being drilled shall be made with proper instruments at 1,000-foot intervals, and the reading of each survey shall be noted and a record thereof kept, which record shall be open to the inspection of any interested party. 
(Code 1966, § 20-55)  
Sec. 46-224. - Pressure for Christmas tree fittings. 
Christmas tree fittings for wells of 8,000 feet depth or less shall have 3,000 pounds per square inch working pressure and 6,000 pounds per square inch test pressure. Wells below 8,000 feet shall have Christmas trees of not less than 5,000 pounds per square inch working pressure and not less than 10,000 pounds per square inch test pressure. 
(Code 1966, § 20-56)  
Sec. 46-225. - Tubing for natural flowing wells. 
All natural flowing wells shall be equipped with tubing of not more than three inches in diameter, and the rules and regulations of the state railroad commission shall apply in regard to types of completions and applicable equipment. 
(Code 1966, § 20-57)  
Sec. 46-226. - Chokes or beams. 
All wells shall be equipped with adequate chokes or beams to properly control their flows. 
(Code 1966, § 20-58)  
Sec. 46-227. - Operation of boiler or generator near well or oil tank. 
No boiler or electric lighting generator shall be operated nearer than 150 feet from any producing well or from an oil tank. 
(Code 1966, § 20-59)  
Sec. 46-228. - Time for swabbing or bailing operations and drill-stem tests. 
All swabbing and/or bailing operations and drill-stem tests on oil or gas wells shall be done and completed in the daylight hours after sunrise and before sunset, except wells controlled by section 46-171. 
(Code 1966, § 20-60)  
Secs. 46-229—46-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PIPELINE SPECIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 46-241. - Compliance with division. 
Each and every pipe used for the purpose of transporting natural gas and crude oil, or the products thereof, within the city shall comply with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1966, § 20-71)  
Sec. 46-242. - Resistance to internal pressure. 
Every pipe used to transport oil or gas within the city shall have a calculated resistance to internal pressure value based on the nominal wall thickness and minimum yield strength of the steel at least two times the value of the highest working pressure that is ever imposed on such line. This is a safety factor of two and may be derived by dividing the yield strength as determined in this section by the working pressure. The result of such division must be two or greater. 
(Code 1966, § 20-72)  
Sec. 46-243. - Water test. 
Any pipe employed for the purpose of transporting oil or gas through the city shall be hydrostatically tested with water to a pressure at least 1½ times as high as the maximum working pressure that will be employed. 
(Code 1966, § 20-73)  
Sec. 46-244. - External corrosion. 
All pipe shall be protected from external corrosion. 
(Code 1966, § 20-74)  
Sec. 46-245. - Pipe to be buried. 
All pipe shall be buried beneath the surface of the ground in accordance with specifications provided by the city engineer. 
(Code 1966, § 20-75)  
Sec. 46-246. - When expansion loops required. 
Expansion loops shall be provided when the pipe is to be subjected to gases and liquids at a higher than normal temperature. 
(Code 1966, § 20-76)  
Sec. 46-247. - Identification of street crossings. 
All road and street crossings shall be cased with pipe larger than the pipeline and shall be marked by suitable signs designating such crossing. 
(Code 1966, § 20-77)  
ARTICLE VII. - SHORT TERM RENTALS 
 
Sec. 46-248. - Short term rentals. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to establish regulations for the use of residential single family dwelling units as short term rentals and to ensure the collection and payment of hotel occupancy taxes. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, a short term rental (STR), is defined as the use of a residential dwelling unit or accessory building on a temporary or transient basis. An STR shall include a residential dwelling unit or accessory building used as a short term vacation rental for any period less than 30 consecutive days. STR does not include structures that are not owner-occupied and not associated with an owner-occupied principal residential unit that seek to offer multiple rooms or units for lease. 
(c)  For purposes of this article, an owner shall designate the owner, or an agent or a representative to comply with the requirements of this section on behalf of the owner. The owner or designated agent or representative is referred to as "operator" herein. 
(d)  The owner shall not be relieved from any personal responsibility or personal liability for noncompliance with any applicable law, rule or regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy of the residential dwelling unit as a short term rental unit, regardless of whether such noncompliance was committed by the owner's authorized agent or representative or the occupants of the owner's short term rental unit or their guests. 
(e)  This article is not intended to provide any owner of residential property with the right or privilege to violate any private conditions, covenants, and restrictions applicable to the owner's property that may prohibit the use of such owner's residential property for short term rental purposes as defined in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-55, § I, 9-25-17; Ord. No. 2019-48, § I, 8-26-19)  
Sec. 46-249. - Registration. 
(a)  The environmental health and code compliance department of the city is the administrative agency for the registration of STRs and collection of rental registration fees. 
(b)  The owner/operator shall obtain an STR registration and any other required documents from the environmental health and code compliance department of the city located at the McAllen Development Center, 311 N. 15th Street, McAllen, Texas, 78501. 
(c)  The owner/operator must submit the following information on an STR registration form: 
(1)  The name, address, email and telephone number of the owner/operator of the subject short term rental unit; 
(2)  The name, address, email and 24-hour telephone number of the local contact person; 
a.  The local contact person is the person designated by the owner or the operator who shall be available 24 hours per day, seven days per week for the purpose of: 
1.  Responding in person within one hour to complaints regarding the condition, operation, or conduct of occupants of the short term rental unit; and 
2.  Taking remedial action to resolve any such complaints. 
(3)  The name and address of the proposed short term rental unit; 
(4)  The number of bedrooms and the applicable overnight and daytime occupancy limit of the proposed short term rental unit; 
(5)  Such other information as the city manager, or designee, deems reasonably necessary to administer this section. 
(d)  Registration fee. 
(1)  Except as provided by subsection (b)(2), short term rentals are subject to a registration fee as established by the city commission. 
a.  The STR registration fee shall be $50.00 (per rental unit). 
(2)  Exceptions. 
a.  Properties in compliance with chapter 98, article III "Hotel Occupancy Tax" and article IV "Two Percent Hotel Occupancy Tax") as of September 30, 2017 (09/30/2017) are exempt from paying a registration fee. 
b.  All entities must register each individual property, even if the tax payments are made under one tax payer identification number. 
(3)  A registration is valid from the date the completed registration is filed with the city and applicable payment of the registration fee has been made, unless the ownership of the short term rental changes. 
(4)  Each property shall be issued a registration number. 
(Ord. No. 2017-55, § I, 9-25-17)  
Sec. 46-250. - Minimum standards of conduct and safety. 
(a)  The owner, agent or representative shall provide a brochure or other alternative publication to renters, of short term vacation rentals, with information which shall provide basic, minimum, standards of conduct during their visit to the city. 
(b)  Additionally, renters can be directed to the city's website, www.mcallen.net , and access the McAllen Code of Ordinances for additional resources and/or list of rules and regulations pertaining to the city. 
(c)  Each property shall have a functioning smoke detector in each room or space advertised as a place occupants may use for sleeping. 
(d)  Each property shall prominently display a map indicating points of egress from the dwelling in case of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2017-55, § I, 9-25-17)  
Sec. 46-251. - Penalties. 
(a)  The owner or operator shall comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the use and occupancy of the subject short term rental unit, including, but not limited to, chapter 46, article II "Nuisances", chapter 46, article V "Noise" and chapter 98, article III "Hotel Occupancy Tax" and article IV "Two Percent Hotel Occupancy Tax." Pursuant to section 98-89, the owner or operator shall, submit a monthly report to the city, on the appropriate "hotel occupancy tax collection report" form, even if the short term rental unit was not rented during any such month. 
(b)  Failure to comply. 
(1)  Notice of violation. The city may issue a notice of violation to any occupant, owner(s) or operator, if there is any violation of this article committed, caused or maintained by the owner, operator or occupant. 
(2)  Citation. As allowed by law, the city may issue citations for violations of this article and any other applicable state or local law. 
(c)  Penalty. 
(1)  A violation under this section is a Class C misdemeanor offense punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500.00 per offense. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  Pursuant to state law and this Code, the maximum penalty for offenses arising under such code or ordinance of the city governing fire safety, zoning, public health and sanitation, shall not exceed the sum $2,000.00. 
(3)  If such maximum penalty provided for by this Code or any such offense is greater than the maximum penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state, then the maximum penalty for violation as provided by state statute shall be the maximum penalty under this Code. 
(4)  Penalties provided for are in addition to any other enforcement remedies that the city may have under city ordinances and state law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-55, § I, 9-25-17)  
Chapter 50 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Fire prevention and protection, art. 5. 
Cross reference— Fire zones established, § 22-1; housing code adopted, § 22-241 et seq.; unsafe building abatement standards and procedure, § 22-271; smoking prohibited in certain public places, § 54-122; damage to fire hydrants, etc., § 106-70. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Arson reward. 
(a)  The city hereby offers a reward of $500.00 to any individual providing information leading up to the arrest and grand jury indictment of any person found guilty of committing the crime of arson, as that crime is defined by the criminal statutes of the state, within the corporate limits of the city. This reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall cause notice of the reward provided for in this section to be placed upon placards or signs and placed in public and commercial buildings in locations around the city in such quantities as deemed appropriate by the fire marshal. 
(Code 1966, § 14-6; Ord. No. 1996-16, § I, 3-11-96)  
Sec. 50-2. - Tampering with or improper use of fire hydrants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or in any manner meddle with or use the fire hydrants within the city, except employees of the owners of such fire hydrants and authorized members of the fire department, and the latter shall not be permitted to tamper with or in any manner meddle with or use such hydrants except when acting under the authority of and under instructions from the fire chief, assistant fire chief or fire marshal. 
(Code 1966, § 14-4)  
Secs. 50-3—50-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Fire department, art. 5, § 1. 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-196 et seq.; notice to fire department regarding fumigation of any areas, § 54-92; social security for firefighters, § 82-101 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-26. - Interfering with firefighters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not a member of the fire department to interfere with or attempt to aid or assist the fire department in fighting any fire within the city, unless requested to do so by the officers of the fire department. 
(Code 1966, § 14-2) 
Charter reference— Authority of fire department personnel to make arrests, art. 5, § 3.  
Sec. 50-27. - Unauthorized riding on fire trucks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fire trucks of the city at any time, unless such person is a regular member of the fire department or unless he is given permission to so ride by the officers of the fire department. 
(Code 1966, § 14-3)  
Secs. 50-28—50-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIRE MARSHAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-196 et seq.; substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
Sec. 50-41. - Appointment. 
The fire marshal shall be appointed in accordance with the civil service rules and regulations as adopted by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 14-19(c))  
Sec. 50-42. - Duty to investigate fires. 
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be commenced within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. 
(Code 1966, § 14-22)  
Sec. 50-43. - Duty when evidence indicates crime in connection with fire. 
If the fire marshal shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with any fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense, or either of them, and shall furnish the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 1966, § 14-23)  
Sec. 50-44. - Inspection of premises; ordering removal or repair of dangerous conditions. 
(a)  The fire marshal or his designee shall have the right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon any and all buildings and premises within the city. 
(b)  It shall be the fire marshal's duty to enter upon any mercantile, manufacturing or public building on a periodic basis to conduct a thorough examination where in his professional opinion circumstances so require. 
(c)  If the fire marshal is refused entry for the purposes stated in this section, the fire marshal may apply to the municipal court of the city for a search warrant to conduct the inspection and otherwise carry out the duties of the fire marshal. 
(d)  Whenever the fire marshal shall find any building or other structure which for any cause is especially liable to fire and whenever he shall find conditions or materials which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to firefighters or occupants, he shall order such materials or conditions to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of the building or premises. All such orders shall be in writing and delivered to the owner or person otherwise in control of such premises. 
(e)  If the owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he shall, within 30 days, file a written notice of appeal to the building board of adjustments and appeals, which such board of adjustments and appeals shall serve as the fire code board of adjustments and appeals. Failure to file a written appeal shall constitute a waiver of any further administrative relief by the aggrieved party. Such board of adjustments and appeals shall follow the procedures otherwise required of it and not in conflict with this article as set out in the building code as adopted and amended by the city. The board of adjustments and appeals shall have the authority to revoke, revise or order the enforcement of any such order and any owner or person otherwise in charge of such building who fails to comply with such order shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine as prescribed in section 1-14 upon conviction for violation of this section. 
(f)  The city attorney shall also have the authority to enforce the provisions of this section by injunctive relief filed in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1966, § 14-24; Ord. No. 2006-84, § 1, 8-14-06)  
Sec. 50-45. - Record of fires to be kept. 
The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of loss which may be determined by the investigation required under this article. The distribution of such records compiled by the fire marshal in compliance with this section shall be controlled by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. 
(Code 1966, § 14-25)  
Secs. 50-46—50-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Fire prevention and protection, art. 5. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 50-66. - International Fire Code adopted; amendments; copies on file. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted for and by the city, the 2012 International Fire Code, with all appendices thereto, prepared by the International Code Council, except that: 
(1)  Section 104.10 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Generally. Fire Investigations. The Fire Marshal or designee shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be commenced within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. 
(2)  Section 105.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Scope. Permits, and the requirements thereof, shall be in accordance with Section 105 unless the Fire Marshal determines otherwise by rule, all such rules being on file in the office of the city secretary and in the office of the fire marshal. 
(3)  Section 109.3 shall be amended by the addition of the following language at the end thereof: 
Members of the Fire Prevention Division may issue citations or file complaints in Municipal Court as necessary for violations of the International Fire Code or this Article. Each violation shall be punishable by payment of a fine not to exceed $500.00 dollars. 
(4)  Section 304.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Waste Material. Accumulations of any type of waste or scrap material shall not be allowed to remain in any location where, in the opinion of the Fire Marshal, they may constitute a fire and life-safety hazard or impede Fire Department operations. 
(5)  Section 401.3.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
False Alarms and Reports. It shall be unlawful for a person, device or system to give, signal or transmit a false fire or medical alarm. 
(6)  Section 503.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Where required. Fire lanes and other emergency access routes shall be provided in accordance with Sections 503.1.1 through 503.1.3, unless the Fire Marshal, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, determines otherwise. 
(7)  Section 503.2.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Dimensions. Fire lanes and other emergency access routes shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet, an unobstructed width of 26 feet if it has a fire hydrant, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet. Turning radii, weight capacity, marking and all other dimensions or factors affecting fire lanes or emergency access routes shall be as specified in the Code unless otherwise approved by the Fire Marshal, in the exercise of reasonable discretion. 
(8)  Section 901.6.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Standards. Fire protection systems shall be inspected, tested and maintained in accordance with the reference standards listed in Table 901.6.1, unless the Fire Marshal determines otherwise by rule, all such rules being on file in the office of the city secretary and in the office of the fire marshal. 
(9)  Section 901.7 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Systems out of service. Where a fire protection system is out of service for any reason, or in the event of an excessive number of activations, the fire department shall be notified immediately and, where required by the Chief, a fire watch shall be provided until the fire protection system has been repaired and returned to service. 
(10)  Section 903.3.7 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Generally. Fire Department Connections shall be free standing away from the collapse area. 
(i)  FDC height shall be between 28 inches and 36 inches. 
(ii)  Shall have a fire hydrant within 150 feet. 
(11)  Section 903.4.2 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Generally. Alarms shall be all weather horn and strobe and tie to the water flow only instead of the water motor gongs. 
(12)  Section 905.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Generally. Standpipe systems shall be provided as set forth in this section or as required by the Fire Marshal, in the exercise of reasonable discretion. 
(13)  Section 5601.3 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Generally. The manufacture, possession, storage, sale, transportation, use and/or handling of fireworks or pyrotechnic material of any type are prohibited in the City of McAllen except as noted below: 
Exception. Approved events organized and conducted by licensed fireworks and pyrotechnic professionals where all necessary safety precautions are reviewed by the Fire Department and observed on site. 
(14)  Section 5003.1.1 shall be amended by the addition of the following language: 
5003.1.1 Location. Facilities storing hazardous, flammable or combustible liquids or materials in excess of the quantities listed in Tables 5003.1.1(1) through 5003.1.1(4) that are installed or relocated after the adoption of this provision, may only be located as approved by the Fire Marshal, in the exercise of reasonable discretion. 
(15)  5608.2.2. Use of pyrotechnics before a proximate audience is amended by adding Section 5608.2.2.1 (Inside Use of Pyrotechnics) as follows: 
5608.2.2.1 Inside Use of Pyrotechnics. The use of pyrotechnics inside of a building shall be unlawful unless authorized and approved in writing by the Fire Marshal prior to the issuance of a permit. The Fire Marshal may require the owner or person in possession or control of the building or premises to provide without charge to the department a technical opinion and report stating whether harmful smoke would be produced and pose a health hazard to the public. The opinion and report shall be prepared by a qualified engineer, specialist, laboratory, or fire safety specialty organization acceptable to the Fire Marshal and the owner. A permit for the use of pyrotechnics shall be issued when approved by the Fire Marshal. Application for a permit shall be made in writing 30 days prior to the use of pyrotechnics. 
(16)  Section 5608.2. Permit application is amended by adding Sections 5608.2.3 (Procedure for Applying; Permit for Fireworks Display) through 5608.2.8 (Duties of Permittee) as follows: 
5608.2.3 Procedure for Applying; Permit for Fireworks Display. A permit applicant shall, at least 30 days before using fireworks, file with the Fire Marshal a completed permit application showing the: 
a)  Pyrotechnics: 
1.  Business address; 
2.  Proof of legal competency; and 
3.  Record of previous experience with fireworks. 
b)  Address of the proposed display; 
c)  Amount, type, and class of fireworks to be used; 
d)  Address of the company supplying the fireworks; 
e)  Date of proposed display; 
f)  Starting and ending times of the proposed display; and 
g)  Diagram of the proposed display grounds, detailing: 
1.  Firing points; 
2.  Location of buildings and highways on or adjoining the grounds; 
3.  Spectator restraining lines; and 
4.  Overhead obstructions. 
h)  Completed permit application to the Fire Marshal including the surety bond or insurance coverage required by State Law. 
The Fire Marshal shall, within five days from date of the completion of the requirements in Subsection (l) of this section, approve or refuse to approve the permit. If the Fire Marshal refuses to approve issuance, he shall immediately send to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written statement explaining the basis of the refusal. 
5608.2.4. Refusal to Issue. The Fire Marshal may refuse to approve issuance of a permit if the applicant: 
1.  Intentionally makes a false statement as to a material matter in the permit application; 
2.  Is a fugitive from justice; 
3.  Is under a felony indictment; 
4.  Has been finally convicted of a felony offense within that five-year period immediately preceding the filing of the application; 
5.  Has been finally convicted of a misdemeanor violation of an explosives law or regulation within the two-year period immediately preceding filing of the application; 
6.  Held a permit issued under this article, which permit was revoked within that one-year period immediately preceding the filing of the application; 
7.  Has been adjudicated a mental defective; is an unlawful user of, or addicted to, a controlled substance or dangerous drug, or suffers from any other handicap, infirmity, defect, or condition which might reasonably diminish his competency to safely conduct the proposed activity or would create an unreasonable risk of injury to life or property in the performance of the proposed activity. 
5608.2.5. Revocation of Permit. The Fire Marshal shall revoke a permit if the permittee: 
1.  Intentionally makes a false statement as to a material matter in the permit application; 
2.  Knowingly allows another to use his permit; 
3.  Violates a term or condition of the permit; 
4.  Fails within the applicable time period to comply with an order or notice on him under this article; or 
5.  Fails to discharge a duty imposed on him by this Section. 
The Fire Marshal shall, within five days from the date of revocation, send to the permittee by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written statement explaining the basis of the revocation. 
5608.2.6. Appeal of Permit Refusal or Revocation. If the Fire Marshal refuses to issue a permit under this section, that action is final unless the applicant or permittee, within 10 days after receiving a written notice of the action, files a written appeal with the chairman of the Board of Appeals. 
5608.2.7. Bond. The permittee shall furnish a bond or certificate of insurance in the minimum amount of One Million Dollars. The Fire Marshal may increase the amount of the required bond or insurance when he deems it advisable. 
5608.2.8. Duties of Permittee. A permittee shall: 
1.  Upon request, make his permit available for inspection to a member of the Fire Department, Police Officer, or any other authorized person; 
2.  Notify the Fire Marshal of the loss or destruction of an unexpired permit, notice to be given immediately upon discovery of the loss or destruction; 
3.  Secure a replacement permit for that lost or destroyed; 
4.  Comply immediately with the Fire Marshal's order to dispose of fireworks which become hazardous during the performance of this permitted activity; and 
5.  Return his permit to the Fire Marshal immediately upon its expiration, together with a statement detailing the cause of expiration and the disposition of unused fireworks. 
(b)  A copy of the 2012 International Fire Code shall be on file in the office of the city secretary and two copies of such code shall be on file in the office of the fire marshal. 
(Code 1966, § 14-18; Ord. No. 1992-82, § I, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 2002-64, § 1, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 2006-84, § 3, 8-14-06; Ord. No. 2009-07, § X, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 2012-91, § I, 12-10-12; Ord. No. 2013-62, § I, 8-12-13)  
Sec. 50-67. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the International Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the city. 
(b)  Whenever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the International Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the city attorney. 
(c)  Words, terms and phrases when used herein and in the code shall have the meanings ascribed to them by the code unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Terms not defined by the code shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(Code 1966, § 14-20; Ord. No. 2009-07, § X, 1-26-09) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-68. - New materials, processes or occupancies which require permits. 
The city manager, the chief of the fire department, and the fire marshal shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire prevention code. The fire marshal shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Code 1966, § 14-26)  
Sec. 50-69. - Establishment and duties of enforcement officers. 
(a)  The primary responsibilities for the enforcement of the fire prevention code shall be in the fire department, to administer and enforce the fire prevention code as adopted in section 50-66. 
(b)  All references in the fire prevention code to the division of fire prevention shall apply to the office of the fire marshal. 
(c)  The chief of the fire department and the fire marshal jointly may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as from time to time may be necessary. 
(d)  A report of the fire marshal shall be made monthly and transmitted to the city manager, which shall contain all proceedings under the fire prevention code, with such statistics as the fire marshal may wish to include therein; the fire marshal shall also recommend any amendments to this article which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Code 1966, § 14-19(a), (b), (d), (e); Ord. No. 2006-84, § 2, 8-14-06)  
Sec. 50-70. - Modifications. 
The fire marshal shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decisions of the fire marshal thereon shall be entered upon the records of the fire department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1966, § 14-21)  
Secs. 50-71—50-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Fireworks, V.A.T.S., Insurance Code art. 5.43-4. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fireworks means and includes any firecrackers, cannon crackers, skyrockets, torpedoes, Roman candles, sparklers, squibs, fire balloons, star shells, gerbs or any other substance in whatever combination by any designated name intended for use in obtaining visible or audible pyrotechnic display, and such term shall include all articles or substances within the commonly accepted meaning of fireworks, whether specifically designated and defined in this section or not. 
(Code 1966, § 14-27) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-92. - General prohibition against manufacture, sale, discharge, transportation, etc.; city-sponsored holiday fireworks displays. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, assemble, store, transport, receive, keep, sell, offer for sale, use, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or have in his possession any fireworks of any description within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Possession and use of fireworks by pyrotechnics shall be allowed in connection with a city-sponsored fireworks display in celebration of a recognized holiday, such as the Fourth of July and New Year's, under the following conditions: 
(1)  The site of the display has been previously approved by the fire marshal; 
(2)  The display is within ten days of a federal, state or city holiday, and is in connection with a public holiday celebration; 
(3)  The display is to be held under the supervision of the fire marshal or his representative. It is unlawful for any person or entity, in conducting such a display or storing or transporting explosives preparatory to such an event, to fail to adhere to all specifications and directions of the fire department representative supervising such event. 
(Code 1966, § 14-28; Ord. No. 2013-62, § II, 8-12-13; Ord. No. 2018-47, § I, 7-9-18)  
Sec. 50-93. - Discharge in connection with plays, circuses and other shows. 
It shall not be unlawful, upon a permit issued by the fire marshal, for any person engaged in any organized play, legitimate theatrical performance, circus or other show designed for the amusement and edification of the general public to use, discharge or cause to be discharged and ignited fireworks as a part of any act, performance, play or circus, so long as such person does not also engage in the retailing, wholesaling, selling or distributing of any of such fireworks. The fire marshal shall cause to be made an investigation of each application made under this section to determine whether the use of such fireworks as proposed shall be of such a character that it may be hazardous to property or dangerous to any person, and he shall, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, grant or deny the application for such permit. 
(Code 1966, § 14-29)  
Sec. 50-94. - Permitted transportation; vehicle signs. 
(a)  It shall be lawful to transport fireworks as provided in this section on the following designated streets: 
(1)  U.S. Expressway 83. 
(2)  Ware Road and McColl Road. 
(3)  23rd Street from U.S. Expressway 83 south to the city limits. 
(b)  Any vehicle transporting fireworks as authorized in this section shall be equipped with at least one class 20-B fire extinguisher meeting the standards of National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet No. 10 (1972) for class 20-B extinguishers and having a minimum of ten pounds of extinguishing agent. Such extinguisher shall be in good operating condition and located so that it is readily accessible to the driver of the vehicle. Vehicles used for the transportation of fireworks shall also be provided with signs on both sides reading "Fireworks." The sign shall have a white background with red letters at least six inches in height and a maximum width of not less than three-fourths of an inch. Provided further, class A and class B fireworks to be used for a public display within the city may be transported to the site of such display pursuant to section 50-117. 
(Code 1966, § 14-30)  
Sec. 50-95. - Illegal fireworks as nuisance; seizure, destruction, etc. 
(a)  The presence of any fireworks within the corporate limits of the city, in violation of this article, is hereby declared to be a common and public nuisance. The fire marshal is directed and required to seize and cause to be safely destroyed any fireworks found in violation of this article, and any member of the fire prevention division of the fire department or any police officer of the city or any other duly constituted peace officer is empowered to stop the transportation of and detain any fireworks found being transported illegally or to close any building where any fireworks are found illegally until the fire marshal can be notified, in order that such fireworks may be seized and destroyed in accordance with the terms of this section. Notwithstanding any penal provision of this article, the city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the city or the fire marshal, or both, for such injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent unlawful storage, transportation, keeping or use of fireworks within the corporate limits of the city and to aid the fire marshal in the discharge of his duties and to particularly prevent any person from interfering with the seizure and destruction of such fireworks, but it shall not be necessary to obtain any such injunctive relief as a prerequisite to such seizure and destruction. 
(b)  Subsection (a) does not authorize the seizure or destruction of packaged, unopened fireworks. 
(Code 1966, § 14-31; Ord. No. 2018-47, § II, 7-9-18)  
Sec. 50-96. - Certain signal flares, torpedoes and rockets excluded from article. 
This article shall not apply to signal flares and torpedoes of the type and kind commonly used by any railroads, which signal flares and torpedoes are received by and stored or transported by any railroad for use in railroad operation; nor shall this article apply to any marine signal flare or rocket of the type and kind commonly carried by a vessel at sea for its own use and which signal flare or rocket is transported or received or stored for use only as ship's stores; nor shall this article apply to signal flares or rockets for military or police use. 
(Code 1966, § 14-32)  
Sec. 50-97. - Right of entry. 
The fire marshal or any member of the fire prevention division of the city is hereby authorized to enter any building where the unlawful presence of fireworks is suspected in order to inspect such building for the presence of such fireworks. 
(Code 1966, § 14-33)  
Sec. 50-98. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who shall manufacture, assemble, sell or offer for sale any fireworks in violation of this article may, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-14. 
(b)  Any person who shall store, transport, receive, keep or possess any fireworks in violation of this article shall be fined in accordance with subsections (1) or (2) below, as applicable: 
(1)  The offense shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-14 if all of the fireworks stored, transported, received, kept or possessed are of types and sizes that are permissible for retail sale under the general laws of the state and if the combined value of the fireworks is $20.00 or less. 
(2)  The offense shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-14 if any of the fireworks stored, transported, received, kept or possessed are of a type or size that is not permissible for retail sale under the general laws of the state or the combined value of the fireworks is more than $20.00. 
(3)  The aforesaid value of the fireworks shall be the fair market value at retail sale of the fireworks as based upon prevailing prices at the time of the offense in places within the county at which fireworks may lawfully be sold. If an alleged offense does not occur during a time period in which fireworks may be lawfully sold at retail pursuant to state law, then the value shall be determined as of the last preceding time period during which the retail sale of fireworks was permitted pursuant to state law. 
(c)  Any person who shall use, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks in violation of this article shall be fined as provided in section 1-14. Any parent or guardian of any minor child below the age of 14 years or any other person who permits or allows such minor child to possess, use, discharge, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks in violation of this article shall be fined as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 14-34; Ord. No. 1992-82, § II, 10-12-92)  
Secs. 50-99—50-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC DISPLAYS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
Sec. 50-111. - When permitted. 
The provisions of division 1 of this article shall not apply to a public display of fireworks made under the terms and conditions of this division, and such a display shall be permitted upon compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1966, § 14-40)  
Sec. 50-112. - Permit—Application; fee. 
(a)  Provided they are qualified professional pyrotechnics, any adult or any entity may apply for a permit under the provisions of this division. Any such person or entity planning to make a public display of fireworks shall first make written application for a permit to the fire marshal at least 30 days in advance of the date of the proposed display, and simultaneously pay an application fee of $500.00. 
(b)  Possession and use of fireworks by pyrotechnics shall be allowed with a permit in connection with a fireworks display in celebration of a recognized holiday under the following conditions: 
(1)  The site of the display has been previously approved by the fire marshal; 
(2)  The display is within ten days of a federal, state or city holiday, and is in connection with a public holiday celebration; and 
(3)  The display is to be held under the supervision of the fire marshal or his representative. In addition to other violations contained in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person in conducting such a display, or storing or moving explosives preparatory to such an event, to fail to adhere to all specifications and directions of the fire department representative supervising such event. 
(Code 1966, § 14-41; Ord. No. 2013-62, § III, 8-12-13)  
Sec. 50-113. - Same—Issuance or denial; term; transferability. 
It shall be the duty of the fire marshal to make an investigation as to whether the display, as proposed by the applicant for a permit under this division, shall be of such a character that it may be hazardous to property or dangerous to any person, and he shall, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, grant or deny the application, subject to the conditions prescribed in this division. If the application is approved, a permit shall be issued for the public display by the fire marshal. Such permit shall be for a period of time designated on the permit but shall not exceed seven days, and the permit shall not be transferable. If the application is denied by the fire marshal, he shall notify the applicant of the denial in writing. 
(Code 1966, § 14-42)  
Sec. 50-114. - Same—Insurance or bond required. 
The applicant for a display permit under this division shall, at the time of making application, furnish proof that the applicant carries compensation insurance for his employees as provided by the laws of the state, and he shall file with the fire marshal a certificate of insurance evidencing the carrying of public liability insurance, including bodily injury liability, in the limits of $250,000.00 per each person and $1,000,000.00 for each accident, and property damage liability insurance in the limits of $500,000.00, issued by an insurance carrier authorized to transact business in the state, for the benefit of the person named therein as insured, as evidence of ability to respond in damages in at least the above amounts, to be approved by the fire marshal. 
(Code 1966, § 14-43)  
Sec. 50-115. - Only aerial display permitted; range of display; use of steel tubes required. 
Any fireworks display authorized under this division shall be limited to an aerial display. The fireworks shall be discharged vertically from steel tubes, paper mortars, fiberglass mortars, or high density polyethylene (HDPE) mortars. 
(Code 1966, § 14-44; Ord. No. 1997-47, § I, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 2003-46, § 1, 6-23-03)  
Sec. 50-116. - Time and number of displays. 
No display authorized by this division shall be commenced prior to the hour of 1:00 p.m. on any day, nor later than 10:00 p.m. Sundays through Thursdays nor later than 11:00 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays; provided, however, that regardless of the day of the week, fireworks displays may be commenced on December 31 of any year as early as 10:00 p.m. and through 1:00 a.m. of the following day, if such displays comply with all other requirements of this Code. Any display authorized by this division shall be completed within one hour after the time the display is commenced, and no permit shall authorize more than two displays within any 24-hour period. 
(Code 1966, § 14-45; Ord. No. 2013-62, § IV, 8-12-13)  
Sec. 50-117. - Materials not to be stored in city. 
The material to be used for a public display authorized by this division shall not be stored within the city limits but shall be brought in on the day of the public display and then shall be taken immediately to the place of display for further handling and storage. 
(Code 1966, § 14-46)  
Sec. 50-118. - Hazardous conditions prohibited. 
No public display of fireworks shall be of such a character and so located, discharged or fired as to be hazardous or dangerous to persons or property, and this determination shall be within the sound discretion of the fire marshal. 
(Code 1966, § 14-47)  
Sec. 50-119. - Qualifications of persons handling fireworks. 
The persons handling the display of fireworks under this division shall be competent, adult persons and experienced pyrotechnic operators approved by the fire marshal. No person not approved by the fire marshal shall handle fireworks at the public display. The names of the experienced pyrotechnic operators shall be designated on the permit issued. 
(Code 1966, § 14-48)  
Sec. 50-120. - Firefighters to be present; charges; exceptions. 
For each public display of fireworks under this division, not less than one firefighter of the city shall be in attendance at the display, at the expense of the applicant. The fire chief or fire marshal may require a standby firefighting unit, at the expense of the applicant. Charges for the attendance of any firefighter and any standby firefighting unit shall be in addition to permit application and other applicable fees. These charges shall be paid prior to permit issuance or at such time or times as directed by the fire marshal. Provided, however, no city firefighters and/or standby firefighting unit shall be required at a public display, and no charge for the same shall be made, if the applicant has available at the display adequate firefighting capabilities which have been approved by the fire marshal prior to issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1966, § 14-49; Ord. No. 2013-62, § V, 8-12-13)  
Chapter 54 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Disposal of rabid animals, § 14-11; proclamation by the health director for confinement of certain animals during rabies emergency, § 14-38; beekeeping regulations and restrictions, § 14-111 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 54-1—54-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Requirements for conditional use for portable or temporary food concession stands, § 138-118. 
State Law reference— Food generally, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 431.001 et seq.; unwholesome food, drink or medicine, V.T.C.A., Penal Code §§ 22.09, 32.42. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-26. - Definitions. 
The definitions as set out in Texas Food Establishment Rules 229.162 T.A.C. shall be given the same meaning as if set out herein. 
(Code 1966, § 15-31.1; Ord. No. 1999-45, § 1, 4-26-99; Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 3-27-00) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-27. - Adoption of Texas Food Establishment Rules; penalty for violation. 
(a)  For the purpose of regulating food service and food service establishments, the current rules or rules as amended by the Texas Board of Health found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 228 regarding the regulations of food establishments is hereby adopted and made a part of this article as if fully set out in this article, and the provisions thereof shall govern all matters covered therein within the city, except those provisions which may be in conflict with other provisions of this Code. A copy of such administrative code is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of the ordinance and code adopted by this section shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 15-31; Ord. No. 1999-45, § 2, 4-26-99; Ord. No. 2016-66, § I, 10-10-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-66, § I, adopted Oct. 10, 2016, changed the title of § 54-27 from "Adoption of food service sanitation code; penalty for violation" to read as herein set out.  
Secs. 54-28—54-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
Sec. 54-41. - Required; transfer prohibited; posting; temporary permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment or retail food store within the city without a valid permit issued to him by the regulatory authority of the city. Only a person who complies with the provisions of this article shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. 
(b)  Permits shall not be transferable from one person to another person or from one food establishment or retail food store to another such establishment or retail food store. 
(c)  A valid permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in every food establishment and retail food store. 
(d)  Permits for temporary food service establishments shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed 14 days. 
(Code 1966, § 15-32; Ord. No. 1999-45, § 3, 4-26-99)  
Sec. 54-42. - Application; inspection by health department; issuance; fee. 
(a)  Application. Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment or retail food store within the city shall make a written application for such permit on forms to be provided by the city health department. Such application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, office address and telephone number, including the address and telephone of the home office, if any, and whether such applicant is an individual, firm or corporation; and, if a partnership, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the general and/or limited partners; 
(2)  The location and type of food establishment or retail food store; 
(3)  The signature of the applicant or applicants; and 
(4)  If the application is for a temporary food service establishment, it shall include the inclusive dates of the proposed operation of such establishment. 
(b)  Inspections. Upon receipt of such application, the health department shall make an inspection of the food establishment or retail food store to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. The health department may make such inspections thereafter as it shall deem necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. If an inspector is required to return to an establishment for a third inspection due to failure of the previous two or due to serious, immediate public health violations as determined by the director of health and code compliance, the establishment shall be assessed a $50.00 reinspection fee. 
(c)  Issuance; fee. When inspection by the health department reveals that the applicable requirements of this article have been met, including the payment of a permit fee as required in this subsection, a permit shall be issued to the applicant by the health department. The annual permit fee to be paid by each applicant shall be as follows: 
Food establishment and retail food store permits: 
1—5 employees .....$300.00 
6—20 employees .....$500.00 
21+ employees .....$700.00 
Temporary events only .....$50.00 
(Code 1966, § 15-33; Ord. No. 2002-57, § 2, 9-11-02; Ord. No. 2006-103, § 3, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 2016-58, § V, 9-26-16; Ord. No. 2016-67, § V, 10-10-16; Ord. No. 2018-79, § I, 11-12-18)  
Sec. 54-43. - Suspension; reinstatement. 
(a)  Suspension. Permits may be suspended by the health department for failure to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Noncompliance with notice. Whenever a permit holder or operator has failed to comply with any notice issued under the provisions of this article, the permit holder or operator shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended, and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the city manager by the permit holder. 
(c)  Reinstatement of permits. Any person whose permit has been suspended may, at any time, make application for reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of permit. Within 48 hours following receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that in his opinion the conditions causing suspension of the permit have been corrected, the health department shall make a reinspection. If the applicant is in compliance with the requirements of this article, the permit shall be reinstated. 
(Code 1966, § 15-34)  
Sec. 54-44. - Review of building permit applications. 
(a)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that 20 percent or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials or work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this ordinance. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion. 
(b)  Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a building permit denial, suspension, or revocation in accordance with the procedures under the building code. 
(Ord. No. 1999-45, § 4, 4-26-99)  
DIVISION 3. - FOOD MANAGER'S PERMIT 
 
Sec. 54-45. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a food establishment service, food processing establishment or mobile food unit during all hours of operations, to fail to have at least one person on the premise in charge of the operation who has a valid food manager's permit. This requirement shall not apply to retail food stores, roadside markets that offer only fresh fruits and vegetables for sale, food vending machines, or religious or charitable organization's bake sales. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 2, 3-27-00)  
Sec. 54-46. - Issuance. 
(a)  A food manager's permit may be issued by any state, municipality, agency or school of instruction whose food manager's certificate program of certification has been accredited by the Texas Department of Health. The certificate shall provide evidence that the applicant attended and satisfactorily completed a course of instruction. Such course shall include, as a minimum, not less than 15 hours of training, the contents of which cover minimum essential knowledge of safe food handling practices, the biological basis of food borne infection and transmission, the safe preparation, handling and storage of food by all employees found in food service operations. The permit shall be issued and be on a form designed by the regulatory authority and shall remain the property of the regulatory authority to be returned to the regulatory authority if revoked. 
(b)  A graduate of an institution of higher education who has completed all requirements for an associates or higher degree in hotel and restaurant management may be issued a permit without taking the food manager's course upon providing satisfactory proof of graduation from an approved school. A dietitian currently registered by the A.D.A. and licensed by the Texas State Board of Examiners of Dietitians may be issued a permit without taking the food manager's course upon providing satisfactory proof of current licensure and registration. 
(c)  A fee of $40.00 will be charged for each food manager's permit issued by the health department. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 2, 3-27-00; Ord. No. 2002-57, § 3, 9-11-02; Ord. No. 2016-58, § VI, 9-26-16)  
Sec. 54-47. - Term. 
A food manager's permit shall be valid for a period of five years from the date of course completion certification, unless said permit is sooner revoked by the health director as described in section 54-49 of this chapter. A permit issued to a dietitian shall be valid for three years from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 2, 3-27-00; Ord. No. 2012-26, § I, 4-23-12)  
Sec. 54-48. - Revocation. 
The city health director may revoke or suspend a food manager's permit upon a material violation of food service sanitation ordinances, rules or regulations. Notice of revocation of a food manager's permit shall be by written notice to the permittee, sent or delivered to the address or location of the food establishment or that of the permittee, and after affording the permittee an opportunity for hearing before the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 2, 3-27-00)  
DIVISION 4. - FOOD HANDLING CERTIFICATION 
 
Sec. 54-49. - Certification. 
(a)  Certification. It shall be unlawful for any employee of a food establishment to begin work without obtaining a food handling certification. A minimum of two hours of food sanitation training is required every three years to ensure employee performance of their duties in accordance with food service sanitation ordinances, rules and regulations. 
This training shall be an approved regulatory authority course. A fee $15.00 will be charged for each food handler permit issued by the regulatory authority. A food handler's food handling certification permit shall be valid for a period of three years from date of issuance, unless the city health director sooner revokes permit as described in section [54-50]. 
(b)  Posting. Each food handler's food handling certification permit shall be at all times kept posted, filed or otherwise readily available for viewing by the health director or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 2, 3-27-00; Ord. No. 2006-103, § 3, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 2016-58, § VII, 9-26-16)  
Sec. 54-50. - Revocation. 
The city health director may revoke or suspend a food handler's food handling certificate permit a material violation of food service sanitation ordinances, rules or regulations. Notice of revocation of a food handler's food handling certification permit shall be by written notice to the permittee, sent or delivered to the address of location of the food establishment or that of the permittee, and after affording the permittee an opportunity for a hearing before the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 2, 3-27-00)  
DIVISION 5. - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 
 
Sec. 54-51. - Mobile food vendors. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Edible goods may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Prepackaged food including, but not limited to candy, beverages, and ice cream. 
b.  Prepared food including, but not limited to hot dogs, desserts, and pizza. 
c.  On-site prepared food including, but not limited to shaved ice, sandwiches and tacos. 
(2)  Mobile food vendors shall mean any business which sells edible goods from a non-stationary location within the city. The terms shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Mobile food trucks: a self-contained motorized unit selling items defined as edible goods. 
b.  Concession trailers: a vending unit which is pulled by a motorized unit and has no power to move on its own. 
(3)  Non-refrigerated shall mean edible goods that are not required to be kept at a temperature below 41 degrees Fahrenheit according to the Federal Food and Drug Administration and the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(b)  Permit and application. 
(1)  Permit. Every mobile food vendor shall have a permit issued by the city to conduct business in the city. 
(2)  Application. Every mobile food vendor shall apply for a permit on a form promulgated by the city. Each vending unit requires a separate permit. 
(3)  Permit form. A complete application shall require the following information from the applicant to be considered: 
a.  Name of applicant. 
b.  Legal name of business or entity. 
c.  State of incorporation or filing of a partnership or articles of association. 
d.  If applicable, copy of charter or articles of incorporation and current listing of the directors, partners, or principles. 
e.  Sales tax number with a copy of sales tax permit. 
f.  Signed permission form or provide notarize affidavit from the private property owner granting permission for unit placement. 
g.  Name, phone number and driver's license number of business owner. 
h.  Proposed itinerary with route, vending locations and times. 
i.  Contact name and phone number for mobile food vending unit while in route. 
j.  Description of product being sold. 
k.  Vehicle identification number and description of mobile food vending unit. 
l.  Signed affidavit with photo identification that each individual applicant: 
1.  Has no unpaid civil judgments against him or her in any state of U.S. possession which arise from a business activity which would have been covered by this section if in effect at the time in the jurisdiction where such judgments are of record. 
2.  A statement of all convictions in any state, the United States or U.S. possession within the last ten years. 
(4)  Permit fee. 
a.  The application fee for a mobile food vendor permit shall be $300.00. Each mobile food vendor unit shall be permitted separately. 
b.  Mobile food vendor permits shall be valid for one year from the date of permit issuance. 
1.  Upon renewal the applicant shall pay the renewal $300.00 fee, and update any changes in the permitting documentation upon permit renewal. The applicant must submit the application and the renewal fee within 30 days before expiration of the permit or must reapply as a new applicant. 
(5)  Permit denial. A permit may be denied where: 
a.  An applicant is found to have an unpaid civil judgment(s) against him which relates to the duties and responsibilities of the permitted occupation which shall be determined by the nature and amount of the judgment, the relationship of the judgment to the purpose of the permit and the extent that the permit would allow someone to engage in further activity that would lead to unsatisfied civil judgments; or 
b.  An applicant has been convicted of a crime which directly relates to the duties and responsibilities of the licensed occupation which shall be determined by the nature and seriousness of the crime, the relationship of the crime to the purpose of the permit and the extent that the permit would allow someone to engage in further criminal activity; or 
c.  The required information is incomplete or incorrect or shows that a person is not otherwise entitled to conduct business as a mobile food vendor. 
d.  The opportunity to issue a permit has been denied due to previous violations as described in this section. 
(6)  Display of permit. Every permit, including those from the city, shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place where it can be read by the general public on the mobile food vendor's truck or concession trailer. 
(7)  Permit revocation or suspension. 
a.  A permit may be revoked upon conviction of any offense committed by an individual operating as a mobile food vendor in the city while engaged in the permitted business, or if a final conviction occurs or is found to have existed at the time of application, or if civil judgments, as set forth above, are placed or found of record against an applicant. A permit may be suspended in the event of pending charges of a crime, as set forth above, upon a magistrate's determination of probable cause in connection with such charges. 
b.  A permit may be revoked for non-conformity to the application location specifications or requirements as well as to non-conformity to an approved location plan or diagram 
c.  Any employee working for an applicant permitted as an employer under this section above may be denied the right to solicit under such permit, or such rights may be suspended or terminated, under the same circumstances and procedures which apply to the holder of the permit. Revocation or suspension of an employer's permit terminates all employee permits. 
d.  A permit may be suspended or revoked for not complying with the requirements of this section, or any other ordinances, or laws. 
(8)  Appeal of permit revocation, suspension, or denial. 
a.  The notice of revocation, suspension, or denial of a permit shall include the procedure for appealing the suspension, revocation, or denial. 
b.  If a city official revokes, suspends, or denies a mobile food vendor permit, the holder or applicant of the permit which has been revoked, suspended, or denied, shall have the right of appeal to the city manager or designee by submitting an appeal in writing to the health director within ten business days of the revocation, suspension, or denial. 
c.  Pending action on the appeal, a permit which has been revoked or suspended shall be considered revoked or suspended. 
d.  If a written appeal is not submitted within the ten business days of revocation, suspension, or denial, of if the appeal is denied, the permit shall hence be considered revoked, suspended or denied. 
(9)  Reapplication after revocation, suspension, or denial of permit. 
a.  If a mobile food vendor or applicant is not in compliance with this section or any other ordinance, law or the approved vendor application, the following action will be taken: 
1.  1st violation. A warning may be issued, or the permit may be revoked or suspended and the vendor may become ineligible for a new or reissued permit for 90 consecutive days. 
2.  2nd violation. Permit will be revoked and the vendor may become ineligible for a new or reissued permit for 90 consecutive days. 
3.  3rd violation. Permit will be revoked and the vendor will become ineligible for new or reissued permit for one year. 
4.  If an applicant's permit has been denied and the appeal is denied the applicant may not reapply for 90 consecutive days. 
(c)  Zoning and location restrictions. 
(1)  Distance regulations. 
a.  No mobile food vendor shall conduct business within any residential zoning district unless otherwise approved in writing by the health director. 
b.  A mobile food vendor may not be located within 100 feet of the primary entrance of an open and operating fixed-location food service establishment. 
(2)  A mobile food vendor shall not conduct sales at a stationary location: 
a.  On any public street; 
b.  In congested areas where the operation impedes vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(3)  Location regulations. 
a.  No mobile food vendor shall be located on any private property without written permission to do so and must comply if asked to leave by the property owner or city official. A copy of the written permission to operate in a specific location signed by the private property owner, shall be kept within the mobile vending unit at all times. If operating in a plaza or shopping center, a mobile food vendor must obtain written permission from at least half of the owners or tenants. 
b.  No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial handbill. 
c.  No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial handbill upon any premises if requested by the property owner or city not to do so, or if there is placed near or at the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "no advertisement". 
d.  No person shall sell or offer for sale any item upon any premises if requested by the property owner or city official not to do so, or if there is placed at or near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "no peddlers or vendors", "no trespassing", or "no solicitors." 
(d)  Mobile food vendor requirements. 
(1)  The following regulations shall apply to mobile food vendors within any zoning district: 
a.  Mobile food establishments shall operate from a central preparation facility or other permitted fixed food establishment and shall report to such location for supplies and for cleaning and servicing operations. 
b.  Each unit shall be equipped with a portable trash receptacle and shall be responsible for proper disposal of solid waste and waste water in the sanitation facility legally accessed by the food service establishment. All disturbed areas must be cleaned following each stop to a minimum 20 feet of the sales location. 
c.  Mobile food vendor may not have a drive through. 
d.  Continuous music or repetitive sounds shall not project from the mobile unit. 
e.  A five-foot clear space can be maintained around the mobile food vending unit. 
f.  The mobile unit will be subject to inspection upon permit application through the code enforcement and health department and the fire marshal and may be subject to random inspection and upon reissuance of the permit. 
g.  No sales are allowed within public park facilities while park concession units are operating. 
h.  A "No Smoking" sign must be posted next to the order window or area. 
i.  A tagged fire extinguisher shall be kept accessible as directed by the city fire marshal or designee. 
j.  An extinguishing vent hood, Type 1 or other if approved by the city fire marshal, shall be required when the cooking process produces grease laden particles within the mobile unit. Said hood shall require testing in the presence of a city fire marshal designee. 
k.  Mobile food vendors are prohibited from any alteration, removal, attachments, additions, placement or change in, under, or upon the unit that would prevent or otherwise reduce ready mobility. A mobile food vendor is required to demonstrate the unit is readily moveable when applying or reapplying for a permit. 
l.  Mobile food vendors must label outlet tanks as "waste water". 
m.  During operating hours mobile food vendors must provide access to a restroom on or within 600 feet of the property on which they are operating. 
(e)  Offenses and regulations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any individual as the agent or employee of another regulated under this section to sell edible goods in the city unless its principal or employer has received a permit under this section. 
(2)  A permit issued under this section is not transferable. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for an individual to sell edible goods while displaying a valid permit issued by the city in the name of another individual, organization, or entity. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any individual directly or through an agent or employee to sell goods within the corporate limits of the city after the expiration of the permit issued by the city under this section. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for an individual directly or through an agent or employee to misrepresent on the permit affidavit any acts that are regulated under this section. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any individual directly or through his agents or employees to represent that the issuance of a permit by the city constitutes the city's endorsement or approval of the product for sale. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful to operate a mobile food vendor operation that is not in compliance with the Texas Food Establishment Rules as amended from time to time. 
(8)  A violation of this section is a Class C misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine pursuant to the general penalty set out in section 1-14 of this Code. 
(f)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Individuals selling only non-refrigerated farm products in an unrefined state shall be considered as a mobile food vendor, as defined by this division, but shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, § I, 1-28-13; Ord. No. 2016-58, § VIII, 9-26-16; Ord. No. 2018-81, § I, 11-12-18)  
Secs. 54-52—54-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DAY CARE CENTERS, GROUP DAY CARE AND REGISTERED FAMILY HOMES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; requirements for conditional use for day care facilities, § 138-118. 
 
Sec. 54-66. - [Generally.] 
All day care centers, group day care and registered family homes must comply with V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code ch. 42, Texas Administrative Code (Child Care Licensing Rules) and all other state statutes and rules governing the same, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37 § I, 7-10-17)  
Secs. 54-67—54-68. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-37 § I, adopted July 10, 2017, repealed Art. III, §§ 54-66—54-68, and enacted a new Art. III, § 54-66 as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1966, §§ 17-40—17-42; and Ord. No. 2002-57, § 4, adopted Sept. 11, 2002.  
Secs. 54-69—54-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FUMIGATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
Sec. 54-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fumigation or extermination by fumigation means the use of hydrocyanic acid gas, cyanogen, chloropicrin, methyl bromide, or any other poison-ous, noxious or dangerous gases or fumes which are liable to affect human beings by causing sickness or death, for the extermination of germs, bacteria, insects, vermin, rats or other pests in any place of domestic habitation, hotel, apartment hotel, apartment building, tenement building, store, office, hospital, home, roominghouse, place of public assembly, or any other building or place. 
(Code 1966, § 17-30) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-92. - Notice to fire department. 
It shall be the duty of any person intending to generate or release hydrocyanic acid gas or other dangerous gases or fumes for fumigation purposes, before starting such generation or release of such gases, to file written notice with the fire department at least 24 hours before beginning such fumigation. Such notice shall state the following particulars: 
(1)  The location of the building or place to be fumigated. 
(2)  The type of fumigation to be used, including the kind of gas or fumes. 
(Code 1966, § 17-31) 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 50-26 et seq.  
Sec. 54-93. - Inspection of premises and notice to occupants. 
When hydrocyanic acid gas or other dangerous gases or fumes are to be used for fumigation, the person undertaking such fumigation shall personally inspect the premises before beginning the fumigation and shall serve notice, over his signature, upon all responsible occupants of each room or apartment within the danger area, stating the danger of the process and the precautions to be observed, designating the rooms or apartments which must be vacated, and indicating the time when the gas is to be generated or liberated. The form of this notice shall be approved by the health director. 
(Code 1966, § 17-32)  
Sec. 54-94. - Vacating and securing premises. 
Before fumigation, the person fumigating shall personally inspect all rooms and apartments ordered vacated under section 54-93, and shall see that such rooms are unoccupied by persons or domestic animals, after which all doors to such rooms, excepting one exit door to the room or apartment to be gassed, shall be secured, locked and sealed. In addition, such windows or wall openings as might possibly be used to gain entrance shall be sealed and shall be located or barred in such a way as to prevent entrance. Immediately upon generating or liberating the gas, the door through which the fumigator leaves shall be securely locked and sealed, and all keys obtainable to all the rooms or apartments ordered vacated shall be retained by the fumigator until all danger is passed. 
(Code 1966, § 17-33)  
Sec. 54-95. - Placarding of premises. 
Prior to beginning fumigation, suitable warning signs shall be posted on all entrances or doors to the premises to be fumigated, as follows: 
DANGER 
Fumigating With Poison Gas 
KEEP AWAY 
By Order Of 
The Department of Health 
City of McAllen, Texas 
(Name, Address and Telephone Number 
of Fumigator) 
Such signs shall not be less than 24 inches by 18 inches, and shall be printed in red ink on white cardboard or metal white background. The letters in the word "Danger" shall be at least two inches high, and all others, except the signature of the fumigator, at least three-fourths of an inch high. At night, and in such places where the natural light between sunrise and sunset is dim, such signs shall be illuminated so as to make the reading matter thereon plainly legible. 
(Code 1966, § 17-34)  
Sec. 54-96. - Guarding of premises. 
Whenever hydrocyanic acid gas or other dangerous gases and fumes are used for fumigation, a sufficient number of guards shall be kept at the entrance or entrances to the building or place where the gas remains therein. Such guards shall remain on duty until after the building or place is opened for airing, and until the gas has been completely dispelled from such building or place. The fumigator shall be responsible for seeing that such building or place is safe for human habitation before allowing persons to reenter. 
(Code 1966, § 17-35)  
Sec. 54-97. - Fumigator to take necessary reasonable precautions. 
All persons fumigating or engaged in extermination by fumigation shall take all such necessary and reasonable precautions and safeguards in connection with such fumigation as shall be necessary to protect all persons who might be affected by such fumigation. 
(Code 1966, § 17-36)  
Secs. 54-98—54-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SMOKING REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-65, § I, adopted Oct. 23, 2017, amended Art. V, §§ 54-121—54-128 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art V, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1966, §§ 17-45—17-49; Ord. No. 2001-15, § 1, adopted Feb. 13, 2001; Ord. No. 2007-32, § 1, adopted Apr. 23, 2007; Ord. No. 2007-69, §§ 1—3, adopted Aug. 27, 2007; Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, adopted Apr. 14, 2008; and Ord. No. 2015-92, § I, adopted Nov. 9, 2015. 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
State Law reference— Air pollution, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.001 et seq.; smoking prohibited in certain areas, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 48.01. 
 
Sec. 54-121. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bar means an area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food represents less than 50 percent of total receipts, including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges and cabarets. A bar includes those facilities located within a hotel, motel, or other similar transient occupancy establishment. 
Business means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered, and private clubs. 
E-cigarette means any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, which provides a vapor of nicotine or any other substances, and the use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term "e-cigarette" shall include any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, or under any other product name or descriptor. 
Employee means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
Employer means any person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, which employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by permanent or temporary walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, long-term care facilities, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, psychiatrists, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. The term "health care facility" shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a child care, adult day care or heath care facility. 
Playground means any park or recreational area designed in part to be used by children that has play or sports equipment installed or that has been designated or landscaped for play or sports activities, or any similar facility located on public or private school grounds or on City of McAllen grounds. 
Private club means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building, or portion thereof, used exclusively for club purposes, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 USC 501. 
Private residence means the primary residence for an individual, family, or household, whether permanent or semi-permanent. A house, apartment, mobile home, duplex, four-plex, or other similar type of dwelling unit. 
Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, gaming facilities, health facilities, hotels and motels, laundromats, public transportation vehicles and facilities, reception area, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant. 
Retail tobacco store and e-cigarette store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products/e-cigarettes and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
Service line means any line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money, including, but not limited to, ATM lines, concert lines, food vendor lines, movie ticket lines, and sporting event lines. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, in any manner or in any form. The term "smoking" also includes the use of an e-cigarette which creates a vapor in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this article. 
Sports arena means an enclosed or outdoor sports pavilion, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports events. 
(Ord. No. 2017-65, § I, 10-23-17)  
Sec. 54-122. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted nor construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2017-65, § I, 10-23-17)  
Sec. 54-123. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to improve and protect the public's health by eliminating smoking in public places and places of employment, guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air, and recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the choice to smoke. 
(Ord. No. 2017-65, § I, 10-23-17)  
Sec. 54-124. - Prohibition of smoking in public places. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city, except as otherwise provided in this article, including, but not limited to, the following places: 
(1)  Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, attorneys' offices and other offices, banks, laundromats, hotels and motels. 
(2)  Elevators. 
(3)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multi-unit residential facilities. 
(4)  Polling places. 
(5)  Buses, bus terminals, taxicabs, train stations, airports and other facilities and means of public transit under the authority of the city, as well as ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots. 
(6)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways and any other common-use areas. 
(7)  Retail stores. 
(8)  Rooms, chambers, place of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings under the control of any board, council, commission, committee, including joint committees, or agencies of the city or any political subdivision of the state. 
(9)  Service lines. 
(10)  All city-owned facilities. 
(11)  Restaurants, bars. 
(12)  Galleries, libraries, museums and zoo facilities and grounds. 
(13)  Any facility which is primarily used for exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, lecture, musical recital, or other similar performance. 
(14)  Child care and adult day care facilities, health care facilities. 
(15)  Convention facilities; educational facilities, both public and private. 
(16)  Hotels and motels. 
(17)  Shopping malls, indoor flea markets. 
(18)  Enclosed and outdoor sports arenas and convention halls, including bowling facilities. 
(19)  Private clubs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-65, § I, 10-23-17)  
Sec. 54-125. - Prohibition of smoking in places of employment. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees. 
(b)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within a place of employment without exception. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities. 
(c)  This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this article and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-65, § I, 10-23-17)  
Sec. 54-126. - Prohibition of smoking in outdoor areas. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following outdoor places: 
(1)  Within a distance of ten feet from outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited, so as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter those areas. 
(2)  In all outdoor sports arenas, playgrounds, parks, zoos, stadiums, and amphitheaters, bleachers and grandstands for use by spectators at sporting and other public events. 
(3)  In all public transportation stations, platforms, bus shelters, and outdoor public transit waiting areas. 
(4)  In all outdoor service lines. 
(5)  In outdoor common areas of nursing homes, except in designated smoking areas, which must be located at least ten feet outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited. 
(6)  Outdoor flea markets. 
(Ord. No. 2017-65, § I, 10-23-17)  
Sec. 54-127. - Additional declaration of nonsmoking establishment. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this article may declare that entire establishment as a nonsmoking establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-65, § I, 10-23-17)  
Sec. 54-128. - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Private residences, except if used as a child care, adult day care or health facility. 
(2)  Not more than 25 percent of hotel and motel rooms rented to guests and designated as smoking rooms. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Retail tobacco stores and/or retail e-cigarette stores, provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Cigar bars provided they receive more than 40 percent of their revenue from smoking and smoke related sales. 
(5)  Golf courses between the tee of the first hole and the green of the final hole. 
(6)  Outdoor seating at restaurants, bars, and private clubs, provided that smoking will not be permitted within ten feet of entrances, operable windows or ventilation systems of the enclosed areas. 
(7)  A bingo facility operated under the Bingo Enabling Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code Ch. 2001, if: 
a.  An enclosed nonsmoking area is provided; 
b.  The smoking area is mechanically ventilated to prevent smoke from entering a nonsmoking area; 
c.  Amenities such as restrooms, sales areas, and food service areas are all located in the nonsmoking section; 
d.  No one under the age of 18 is admitted to the smoking area; and 
e.  Employees are strictly prohibited from entering the smoking area during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2017-65, § I, 10-23-17)  
Sec. 54-129. - Prohibition related to minors. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by state or federal law, the sale of e-cigarettes to any person under the age of 18 years is prohibited in the City of McAllen. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by state or federal law, possession of an e-cigarette by any person under the age of 18 is prohibited in the City of McAllen. 
(Ord. No. 2017-65, § I, 10-23-17)  
Sec. 54-130. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  The owner, manager or other person having control of such building or other area where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have a conspicuously posted sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited at each entrance and within the building or other areas where smoking is prohibited. 
(b)  Such "No Smoking" signs shall have bold lettering of not less than one inch in height. The international "No Smoking" symbol may also be used (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with red bar across it). 
(c)  All ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia shall be limited in facilities to that required for the enforcement of extinguishing of smoking materials in public places. 
(d)  The owner, manager or other person having control of every vehicle that constitutes a place of employment under this article shall clearly and conspicuously post at least one sign, visible from the exterior of the vehicle, stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2017-65, § I, 10-23-17)  
Sec. 54-131. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be implemented by the city environmental health department, building inspection department, fire prevention department, fire department and police department. 
(b)  Notice of the provisions set forth in this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city. 
(c)  Any owner, manager, operator or employee of any establishment regulated by this chapter shall be responsible for informing persons violating this article of the provisions through appropriate signage. 
(Ord. No. 2017-65, § I, 10-23-17)  
Sec. 54-132. - Non-retaliation. 
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment or customer because such employee, applicant or customer exercises any right to a smoke-free environment afforded by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-65, § I, 10-23-17)  
Sec. 54-133. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to regulation under this article to fail to comply with all of its provisions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for the first violation. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within a one-year period of the first violation. 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for an additional violation within a one-year period of the first violation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-65, § I, 10-23-17)  
Secs. 54-134—54-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATION 
 
Sec. 54-150. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent not effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the board of commissioners, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50(1976), FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560(1991), City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 12 S. Ct. 1382 (2000), and on studies in other communities, the city commission finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2)  Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses, defined in this article as adult theaters and adult cabarets, engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments. 
(3)  Sexual acts, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. 
(4)  Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
(5)  Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually ori-ented businesses. 
(6)  At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections. 
(7)  Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States; 
(8)  The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high level. 
(9)  The Surgeon General of the United States has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
(10)  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
(11)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(12)  The findings noted in subsections (1) through (12) raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(13)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(Ord. No. 2001-15, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 54-151. - Definitions. 
Words, terms and phrases in this article shall be defined as follows: 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited, wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matters exhibiting "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store means a commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial stock-in-trade, or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual representations, which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear semi-nude; or 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities;" or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the exhibition or display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear nude or semi-nude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon means the dominant or principal theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas," the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or display of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
Employee, employ and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent, or by another status. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Enforcement officer shall mean the city code enforcement officer or any employee under the code enforcement officer or any police officer of the city or such person as may be designated by the city commission. 
Establish or establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
Nude, nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Operate or cause to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. Operator means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operational control of the business, or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation, the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Regularly featured or regularly shown means a consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business. 
Semi-nude or in a semi-nude condition means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
Semi-nude model studio means a commercial establishment which regularly features a person (or persons) who appears semi-nude and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, or photographed by other person who pay money or form of consideration, but shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial establishment, that as one of its principal business purposes offers for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of "specified sexual activities." The definition of sexual encounter center or any sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, semi-nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
(2)  Less than completely opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling of another person's genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or 
(3)  Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the activities set forth in (1) through (2) above. 
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor areas exist on the date this article takes effect. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 2001-15, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 54-152. - Classification. 
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(5)  Adult theaters. 
(Ord. No. 2001-15, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 54-153. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if that person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than as authorized for the applicable zoning district under the City of McAllen Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,320 feet of: 
(1)  A church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; 
(2)  A public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities. "School" includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential (including multi-family residential) district as defined in the City of McAllen Zoning Ordinance; 
(4)  A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities; 
(5)  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in the City of McAllen Zoning Ordinance; or 
(6)  An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family entertainment. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 750 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(e)  For the purpose of subsection (b) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in subsection (b). The presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section. 
(f)  For purposes of subsection (c) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented business shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(g)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on February 13, 2001, that is in violation of subsection (a) through (f) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 750 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is/are nonconforming. 
(Ord. No. 2001-15, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 54-154. - Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
(a)  It shall be an offense for a person to knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity or engage in specified sexual activities. 
(b)  It shall be an offense for a person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a semi-nude condition, unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, is at least six feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from the floor. 
(c)  It shall be an offense for an employee, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, to receive directly any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity directly to any employee, while that employee is semi-nude in a sexually oriented business. 
(d)  It shall be an offense for an employee, while semi-nude, to knowingly and intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(Ord. No. 2001-15, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 54-155. - Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business. 
A person commits an offense if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 2001-15, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 54-156. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business, may remain open at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 2001-15, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 54-157. - Exemptions. 
It is a defense to prosecution under section 54-154 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Texas; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university. 
(Ord. No. 2001-15, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 54-158. - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in violation of this article is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-15, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Chapter 58 - HUMAN RELATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 58-1—58-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DISCRIMINATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 58-26—58-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FAIR HOUSING 
 
Sec. 58-36. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about, through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity for each person to obtain housing without regard to his race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status. It is further declared that this policy is grounded upon a recognition of the inalienable right of each individual to provide for himself and his family a dwelling according to his own choosing; and further, that the denial of such rights through considerations based upon race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable right which is within the power and the proper responsibility of government in general, and the city government of McAllen, Texas in particular, to prevent. 
(Code 1966, § 12½-11; Ord. No. 1993-16, § II, 2-22-93)  
Sec. 58-37. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 58-38 through 58-40. 
Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon or any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
Person means and includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries and any other organization or entity of whatever character. 
To rent means and includes to lease, sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1966, § 12½-12) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-38. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
Except as exempted by section 58-41, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To refuse the sale or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status. 
(3)  To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status, or any intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit, or with the hope or expectation of profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status. 
(Code 1966, § 12½-13; Ord. No. 1993-16, § II, 2-22-93)  
Sec. 58-39. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Code 1966, § 12½-14; Ord. No. 1993-16, § II, 2-22-93)  
Sec. 58-40. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers organization or other service organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status. 
(Code 1966, § 12½-15; Ord. No. 1993-16, § II, 2-22-93)  
Sec. 58-41. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  There shall be exempted from the application of section 58-37: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses, wherever located, at any one time; provided further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided further, the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this division only if such house is sold or rented: 
a.  Without the use of any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or person; and 
b.  Without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 58-38(3); 
but nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as is necessary to perfect or transfer the title; 
(2)  The rental of rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(b)  Nothing in this division shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members. 
(Code 1966, § 12½-16; Ord. No. 1993-16, § II, 2-22-93)  
Sec. 58-42. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (referred to in this section as the "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the municipal court of the city. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice and shall set forth the particulars thereof. The municipal court and the administrative personnel and employees of the municipal court may assist in the clerical preparation of such complaints. 
(b)  The municipal court of the city shall receive and accept notification and referral of complaints from the secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, PL 90-284, and shall treat such complaints in the same manner as complaints filed directly by the person aggrieved. 
(c)  If, in the course of any investigation as provided in section 58-43 on a complaint filed with or referred to the municipal court, the city attorney's office shall receive credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that the person or persons named in such complaint have committed a discriminatory housing practice on grounds not stated in such complaint, the city attorney may prepare and file a supplementary complaint upon his own motion and in his own name and such supplementary complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as an original complaint filed by the person aggrieved. 
(d)  If at any time the city attorney or his office shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person or persons have committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed or is about to be filed, the city attorney may prepare and file complaint upon his own motion and in his own name, and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by the person aggrieved. 
(e)  Upon the filing or referral of any complaint under this section, the city attorney shall furnish a copy of the complaint to the person or persons named in the complaint. 
(f)  A complaint under subsections (a), (c), (d) and (e) of this section shall be filed within 180 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice has occurred. Complaints shall state the facts upon which the allegations of the discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him and, with the leave of the municipal court, which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be signed. 
(Code 1966, § 12½-17)  
Sec. 58-43. - Investigation. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a complaint as provided in section 58-42, the city attorney's office, with the aid and cooperation of any and all city departments, as applicable, shall cause to be made a prompt investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. 
(b)  In connection with the investigation provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the city attorney's office may provide for the questioning, taking and recording of testimony and statements of such persons who appear and may provide for the examination, recording and copying of any and all documents which are produced. 
(c)  During or after the investigation, the city attorney's office shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred, or is about to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance or rectification of the discriminatory housing practice and voluntary compliance and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  If conciliation is effected, the city attorney's office shall disclose nothing said or done in the course of such conciliation in such a way as to make public identification of the person or persons named in the complaint without the written consent of the persons concerned. 
(Code 1966, § 12½-18; Ord. No. 1993-16, § II, 2-22-93)  
Sec. 58-44. - Legal proceedings. 
(a)  Upon the completion of the investigation and informal endeavors of conciliation by the city attorney's office, the city attorney shall then institute a charge in municipal court and prosecute the same to a final conclusion. 
(b)  The final instituting of the charge by the city attorney's office in the municipal court and the other actions to be taken by the city attorney's office under this article shall be cumulative of all other remedies and procedures for the effectuation and enforcement of this article and the prosecution of alleged violators of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 12½-19)  
Sec. 58-45. - Cooperation with secretary of Housing and Urban Development. 
The city attorney's office and the personnel of the municipal court who are authorized are encouraged to cooperate with the secretary for Housing and Urban Development and/or designee pursuant to the provisions of title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, PL 90-284, and may render such service to the secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this article and may accept remuneration from the secretary for services rendered to assist with the carrying out of the provisions of the federal law cited in this section. 
(Code 1966, § 12½-20; Ord. No. 1993-16, § III, 2-22-93)  
Sec. 58-46. - Unlawful intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful for any persons, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of force to willfully injure, intimidate or interfere with, or attempt to injure, intimidate or interfere with: 
(1)  Any person because of his race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status and because he is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or 
(2)  Any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate such person or any other person or class of persons from: 
a.  Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection (1) of this section; or 
b.  Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection so to participate; or 
(3)  Any person because he is or has been or in order to discourage such person or any other person from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection (1), or participating lawfully in speech or peaceable assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity so to participate. 
(Code 1966, § 12½-21; Ord. No. 1993-16, § II, 2-22-93)  
Sec. 58-47. - Penalty for violation of division. 
Any person violating the terms and provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 12½-22)  
Chapter 62 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police department, art. 4, § 1. 
Cross reference— Airport security police, § 18-61 et seq.; alarm systems, § 42-26 et seq.; smoking prohibited in certain public places, § 54-122. 
State Law reference— Public safety, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.003 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 62-1. - Procedure upon arrest for violation of Code. 
(a)  Whenever any police officer in the city arrests any person for any violation of this Code, the police officer shall take the person arrested or have him taken without unnecessary delay before a magistrate who has jurisdiction of such offense, except as specifically provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  A police officer who is charging a person with committing an offense as a class C misdemeanor, under the state penal code, other than an offense under V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.08, or for any offense in violation of this Code may, instead of taking a person before the magistrate, issue a citation to a person that contains written notice of the time and place that the person must appear before a magistrate, the name and address of the person charged, and the offense charged. The citation shall specify in the notice to appear that such person must appear before the municipal court or other magistrate not less than three days nor more than 14 days from the date of the issuance of the citation. 
(c)  The arrested person, in order to secure release as provided for in this subsection, must give his written promise to appear in court by signing in duplicate the written notice prepared by the arresting officer. The original of such notice shall be retained by the officer and a copy of that delivered to the person arrested. Thereupon, the officer shall forthwith release the arrested person from custody. 
(d)  Any person willfully violating his written promise to appear in court, given as provided for in this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14, upon conviction thereof, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(e)  A written promise to appear in court may be complied with by an appearance by counsel. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person, when given a written promise to appear, or given a written notice by any police officer to appear before a municipal court, to give an assumed or fictitious name or a false place of residence or address other than the true name and the true place of residence or address upon the request of such officer. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-8)  
Sec. 62-2. - Civil service authorized positions and longevity pay for police department. 
In accordance with Ordinance No. 2014-53 and Chapter 143 Muncipal Civil Service, Subchapter C, Section 143.041: 
Authorized Positions 
Description 	Authorized
Positions 	Authorized
Positions 
Classification 	Title 	2014 	2016 
Captain 	- CSP1 	3 	3 
Lieutenant 	- CSP3 	11 	11 
Sergeant 	- CSP4 	39 	39 
Police Officer 	- CSP5 	231 	235 
Unclassified 
Probationary 
Police Officer II 1 	- P402 		
Unclassified 
Probationary 
Police Officer I 	- P401 		
		284 	288 
 
1  New police officers with TCLEOSE certification and three years previous law enforcement experience or six months of service as a Police Officer I. 
(Ord. No. 2014-53, § I(Exh. A), 10-13-14; Ord. No. 2016-59, § I(Exh. A), 9-26-16)  
Secs. 62-3—62-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE HUMAN RELATIONS COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-76 et seq.; procedure for appointment and terms and qualifications of board members, § 2-77; substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
Sec. 62-26. - Created. 
There is hereby created a police human relations committee (PHRC) for the city. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-21)  
Sec. 62-27. - Composition; terms. 
(a)  The police human relations committee (PHRC) shall be comprised of five persons, three of whom will be residents of the city appointed by the board of commissioners and two of whom will be police officers appointed by the chief of police. No police officer serving on such committee shall hold a rank higher than that of captain. One officer, to be selected by the chief of police on an ad hoc basis, shall not hold a rank higher than that of the officer under review. 
(b)  The members of the PHRC must live in different geographical areas of the city, and they shall themselves be representative of the ethnic, economic, age, and male/female makeup of the city, as determined by the most recent U.S. Census. 
(c)  The term of a PHRC member, except for the police officer to be selected on an ad hoc basis, will be for one year. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-22)  
Sec. 62-28. - Chairman. 
The PHRC shall at the earliest possible date elect one of its members to serve as its chairman. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-23)  
Sec. 62-29. - Responsibilities. 
It shall be the responsibility of the PHRC to thoroughly review complaints of police misconduct, including but not limited to complaints concerning the use of excessive force, false arrest, and malicious prosecution. It shall also be the responsibility of the PHRC to recommend disciplinary measures, where appropriate, to the chief of police. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-24)  
Sec. 62-30. - Recommendations to be in writing and kept on file. 
(a)  Within two weeks of receiving a complaint, the PHRC shall make written findings and a written recommendation to the chief of police and shall forward copies of such findings and recommendation to the city manager. 
(b)  Copies of all recommendations of the PHRC shall be maintained in the files of the city manager and of the police department, and in no case shall they be destroyed. 
(c)  Within one week of receiving the PHRC's findings and recommendation, the chief of police shall either accept the recommendation or state in writing to the city manager the reasons for rejecting the recommendation. This writing shall be preserved in the manner provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  The initial complaint concerning an officer and the results of the investigation of that complaint will be automatically placed in the file of the police officer named in the complaint and/or investigated. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-25)  
Sec. 62-31. - Lawsuits and informal complaints. 
The filing of a lawsuit or an informal complaint will also trigger the review mechanism set out in sections 62-29 and 62-30. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-26)  
Secs. 62-32—62-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSISTANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Law enforcement assistance, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 362.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 62-51. - Statutes adopted. 
The city hereby adopts and makes applicable to the city V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 362.001 et seq., concerning law enforcement officers; interlocal assistance, and makes the provision of such law applicable to the city. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-1)  
Sec. 62-52. - Mayor authorized to provide law enforcement assistance to other counties or municipalities. 
The city hereby authorizes the mayor or his successor in office to make provision for the regularly employed law enforcement officers of the city to assist any other county or municipality in the state when in the opinion of the mayor there exists in such other county or municipality a need for the services of additional law enforcement officers to protect the health, life and property of such other county or municipality, its inhabitants and the visitors thereto by reason of riot, unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force and violence or threat thereof by three or more persons acting together or without lawful authority, or during time of natural disaster or manmade calamity. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-2)  
Sec. 62-53. - Status of law enforcement officer serving in other counties or municipalities. 
While any law enforcement officer regularly employed as such by the city is in the service of a county or other municipality pursuant to this article, he shall be a peace officer of such county or other municipality and be under the command of the law enforcement officer therein who is in charge of that county or municipality as fully as though he were within the county or municipality where regularly employed and his qualification, respectively, for office where regularly employed shall constitute his qualification for office in such county or other municipality and no other oath, bond or compensation need be made. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-3)  
Sec. 62-54. - Salary, pension, etc., of law enforcement officer serving other counties or municipalities. 
Any law enforcement officer of the city who is ordered by the mayor or the chief of police to perform police or peace duties outside the territorial limits of the city where he is regularly employed as such officer shall be entitled to the same wage, salary, pension, and all other compensation, and all other rights for such service including injury or death benefits, the same as though the service had been rendered within the limits of this city where he is regularly employed, and such officer shall also be paid for any reasonable expense of travel, food or lodging that he may incur while on duty outside the city limits. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-4)  
Sec. 62-55. - Payments by city; reimbursement by serviced county, etc. 
All wages and disability payments, pension payments, damage to equipment and clothing, medical expense, and expenses of travel, food and lodging incurred while the city law enforcement officer is in the service of another county or municipality shall be paid by the city. Upon making such payments, the city shall when it so requests be reimbursed by the county or other municipality whose authorized officials requested the services out of which the payments arose. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-5)  
Sec. 62-56. - Authority of city finance officer. 
The city finance officer is hereby expressly authorized to make payments for the services of law enforcement officers of a county or any other city upon verification that such service was in fact rendered. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-6)  
Secs. 62-57—62-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - POLICE RECORDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Public records of the city, § 2-341 et seq. 
 
Sec. 62-76. - Purpose. 
There is hereby created an article establishing procedures for microfilming, retention and disposal or destruction of police records and matters related thereto for the administrative benefit of the city's police department. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-30)  
Sec. 62-77. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative capacity means the performance of executive and managerial duties of police affairs by any designated official of the police department. 
Notice means a written memorandum or instrument. 
Police records means any or all documents prepared as a part of the permanent record for investigation and disposition of any arrests, offenses, incidents and accident reports recorded by the police department. 
Recordkeeper means that person designated by the police department to be in charge of keeping and handling the files of police records. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-31) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 62-78. - Procedures for microfilming and retention. 
(a)  Official police records may be microfilmed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq. and the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  All original police records, except as provided in section 62-79(d), must be retained by the police department for 18 months from the date the original police records came into existence before such original police records are microfilmed. All police records microfilmed under this article must meet the requirements of United States of America Standards Institute for archival quality, density, resolution and definition. Any person or entity providing such microfilming services will certify that such microfilm meet such standards. Such certification will be forwarded to the chief of police. 
(c)  The city police department's recordkeeper or persons under his supervision will check or cause to be checked and certify that each microfilm record of the police records is a true and correct duplication of the original police records. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-32)  
Sec. 62-79. - Destruction and disposal. 
(a)  Before any disposal or destruction of any of the original police records by the police department is made, there must first be notice of the proposed destruction or disposal of such police records to the state librarian or state archivist, and if, in the opinion of either state agency, the proposed police records are needed for the state library, such police records shall be transferred thereto. 
(b)  After the police department has complied with section 62-78, any police records which are microfilmed in compliance with this article may be destroyed as directed by the police department with the advice and consent of the city attorney, unless otherwise prohibited by federal law, state law or valid court order. 
(c)  Any original police records which are part of any pending civil or criminal litigation may not be destroyed until such litigation is final. 
(d)  Any police records which are not required to be microfilmed in compliance with this article, and are determined worthless by the police department, may be destroyed as directed by the police department by following the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-33)  
Sec. 62-80. - Public access. 
The public shall have access to the information in the original police records and microfilmed police records to the extent that the public would be entitled to under existing state and federal law. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-34)  
Sec. 62-81. - Evidentiary use. 
Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 204.011, when the microfilmed police records are issued and certified by the recordkeeper or any persons acting under the direction and supervision of the recordkeeper of the police department, a copy on paper or film of the microfilm record will be accepted as a certified copy of an original record by any court or administrative agency of the state. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-35)  
Secs. 62-82—62-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 62-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Unclaimed property means any such property turned over to the special services division which has not been restored to its owner under the provisions of chapter 47 of the state code of criminal procedures, as amended, and shall have remained unclaimed by its rightful owner for a period of 30 days from the date of acquisition by the police department or from the date that the property is no longer required to be held by the police department for evidentiary purposes or as otherwise required under the state code of criminal procedures. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-51) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 62-102. - Responsibility for possession and processing of confiscated property. 
All property seized by the police department or otherwise acquired by the police department as a result of police department operations and otherwise owned by third parties shall be, after initial processing in accordance with the state code of criminal procedures by the responsible officer, turned over to the special services division for safekeeping and disposition according to the terms of this article or as otherwise specified by the state code of criminal procedures. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-51)  
Sec. 62-103. - Processing claims for property by owners. 
All persons claiming ownership and desiring the return of property acquired by the police department shall file an application form, which shall be promulgated by the special services division of the police department, and present proof of purchase, ownership papers with serial number or other sufficient evidence relating to ownership of the claimed property. The special services division shall, after making record thereof, turn over any such claimed property upon the presentation of satisfactory evidence of ownership to the person making such claim. Where any such claim is based upon a general description of the property without other evidence of ownership, the special services division shall record such claim and hold such property for a period of six months, and if no other person shall make a claim for the property, the property will then be released to the original claimant after such six-month period. Should any other party make a claim for property being held during such six-month period, the matter will be referred to the municipal court of the city for an evidentiary hearing after which the municipal court judge shall make a ruling for the disposition of the property based on such hearing. If any claimant disagrees with the decision of the special services division to hold such property for such six-month period, such claimant shall, within five days of the decision of the special services division, file a written appeal with the chief of police, who shall hold a hearing relating to such appeal and shall have the authority to release such property or affirm the decision of the special services division. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-52)  
Sec. 62-104. - Procedures for sale of unclaimed property. 
(a)  The special services division shall be responsible for mailing a notice to the last known address of the owner, if known, of any unclaimed property by certified mail. Such notice shall describe the property, shall give the name and address of the officer holding such property, and shall state that if the owner does not claim such property within six months from the date of notice, such property shall be sold and the proceeds of such sale after deducting the reasonable expense of keeping such property and the cost of the sale shall be placed in the city general fund. 
(b)  If the owner of such property is unknown or if the address of the owner is unknown, then the special services division shall cause to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice containing the description of the property held; the name of the owner, if known; the name and address of the officer holding such property; and a statement that if the owner does not claim such property within six months from the date of the publication, such property will thereafter be sold, and the proceeds of such sale, after deducting the reasonable expense of keeping such property and cost of the sale, will be placed in the city general fund. 
(c)  Any person making a claim for property after notice is provided for under this section, shall follow the same procedures as provided for in this section. Provided, however, that for property being claimed by general description for which a city six-month holding period has been established, the time period for claims made as a result of this action shall be the lesser of six months or the period between filing the claim and the date of sale as provided for in this section. 
(d)  The sale of any property under this section shall be preceded by notice published once at least three weeks prior to the date of such sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, stating the description of the property, the name of the owner if known, and the date and place that such sale will occur. If a representative of the special services division shall consider any bid as insufficient, he need not sell such property, but may decline such bid and reoffer such property for sale or otherwise put such property to use or dispose of such property upon written order of the chief of police. 
(e)  The real owner of any property sold under this section shall have the right to file a claim to the proceeds of such sale with the board of commissioners. If a claim is allowed by the board of commissioners, the director of finance shall pay the owner such funds as were paid into the general fund of the city as proceeds of the sale less costs of holding of the sale and storage. If the claim is denied by the board of commissioners or if the board of commissioners fails to act upon any such claim within 90 days from the date of claim, the claimant may sue the city in a court of competent jurisdiction in the county, and upon sufficient proof of ownership, cover judgment against the city to recover the proceeds of the sale as provided for in this section. Failure to initiate such suit within six months from the date authorized for the filing of such claim shall be deemed a waiver of any right to cover the proceeds of such sale. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-53)  
Sec. 62-105. - Certain items exempted from provisions of article. 
The disposition of gambling paraphernalia, prohibited weapons, criminal instruments, explosive weapons, chemical dispensing devices, and other contraband as defined in chapter 18 of the state code of criminal procedures shall be processed, returned or destroyed according to the applicable provisions of chapter 18 of the state code of criminal procedures, as amended, and shall not be subject to the procedures for processing required for unclaimed property as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-54)  
Secs. 62-106—62-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - POLICE RESERVE FORCE PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 62-126. - Establishment. 
An auxiliary police force to be known as the McAllen Police Reserve in and for the city is hereby established. It shall be composed of personnel who have volunteered to join such organization and whose application for membership has been accepted after such persons have complied with all the rules, regulations and orders provided for the conduct, control and qualifications for membership for the members thereof. Such police reserve shall be composed of not to exceed 25 members. The police reserve shall be separate and distinct from the police department of the city, but shall be under the control and the supervision of the chief of police. The number of actual members of the police reserve shall be as required by the chief of police at his sole discretion, but shall not exceed 25 members. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-60)  
Sec. 62-127. - Qualifications for membership; termination; renewal. 
(a)  The membership of the police reserve force shall be composed of applicants selected by the chief of police or by a selection committee to be established by the chief of police for such purposes. All applicants must be U.S. citizens, residents of the county and between the ages of 21 and 55 years of age. In addition, all applicants must meet the minimum criteria as established by the state commission on law enforcement officer standards and education as such criteria are in effect at the time of any application. Any selected applicant must apply for a temporary reserve officer license from the state commission on law enforcement officer standards and education within the time limits as set by the chief of police, or otherwise have a valid and outstanding reserve officer license issued by the state commission on law enforcement officer standards and education. In order to remain a member of the police reserve force, each member must diligently comply with all the requirements in order to receive the permanent reserve law enforcement license from the state commission on law enforcement officer standards and education. The chief of police is hereby authorized to formulate any application forms and establish criteria for minimum requirements for licensing as a reserve peace officer. 
(b)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to terminate any member of the police reserve force for any cause deemed sufficient by the chief of police. The chief of police is hereby authorized to establish procedures for resignation from the police reserve force and it shall be the duty of any police reserve officer to follow such resignation procedures as established by the chief of police. 
(c)  The membership in the police reserve force shall expire automatically as to each member at midnight on December 31 of each year. Any existing member in good standing on such date shall have the right to file for a renewal of his membership with the chief of police according to the standards and specifications as established by the chief of police. Priority for selection shall be granted to each past member in good standing of the police reserve force who applies for renewal of membership. Notwithstanding this provision, the chief of police may establish procedures for extending membership in the police reserve force after midnight December 31 in any year, pending the application process or renewal of membership after such date and until members are reappointed or new members are appointed under the selection process. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-61)  
Sec. 62-128. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to establish standard operating procedures and rules and regulations for the police reserve which may be amended from time to time and which such procedures, rules and regulations shall be followed by all officers at all times. The chief of police, in establishing rules and regulations and operating procedures for the police reserve, shall follow any and all state statutes, state commission on law enforcement officer standards and education rules and regulations, or directives as may be issued from time to time by the state authority having jurisdiction thereof. 
(b)  Members of the police reserve force shall be prohibited, while on duty or otherwise, from carrying a firearm except on the express written order of the chief of police. 
(c)  Members of the police reserve force shall at all times be assigned to, and under the immediate supervision of, a regular police officer of the police force. The chief of police shall establish training procedures for the regular members of the police force to carry out the duties as established in this article or as otherwise provided by the chief of police. 
(d)  The chief of police is hereby ordered to establish procedures for establishing restrictions relating to the duties and powers of members of the police reserve force to make arrests while in the line of duty. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-62)  
Sec. 62-129. - Identification, uniforms; false impersonation. 
(a)  All current members of the reserve police force shall carry an identification card or such other insignia or evidence of identity as the chief of police may prescribe, and each member must carry such identification at all times while on duty, and shall surrender such identification upon termination of his membership. The chief of police is hereby authorized to issue equipment including uniforms to all members of the police reserve force. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than a member in good standing of the police reserve force to wear, carry or display any police reserve force identification card or otherwise represent himself to be connected with the police reserve force unless he is, in fact, a member thereof in good standing. Each incident or violation as provided for in this section shall be a separate offense, and upon conviction therefor, such person shall be subject to a fine as prescribed in section 1-14 for each conviction thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-63)  
Sec. 62-130. - Annual reports. 
The chief of police is hereby directed to present an annual report of activity of the police reserve force and any and all rules and regulations and operating procedures as promulgated to the board of commissioners and the city manager. The report of the chief of police shall be furnished to the board of commissioners and to the city manager between January 1 and January 31 of each year. 
(Code 1966, § 17½-64)  
Chapter 66 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Library means buildings, furniture, and physical and digital materials owned by the city or used by the city for the purpose of supplying its citizens with accepted library functions, including branch locations. 
Library director means a person so designated and appointed as provided in this chapter and who is in charge of the library department. 
(Code 1966, § 18-3; Ord. No. 2016-82, II, 11-28-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 66-2. - Designation of name. 
The name of the public library shall be "McAllen Public Library." 
(Code 1966, § 18-2; Ord. No. 2016-82, II, 11-28-16)  
Sec. 66-3. - Violation of lending privileges. 
Every person who shall take from the public library any book, periodical, film, equipment, artwork, physical material or other property, except in accordance with the rules of such library, shall, upon conviction, be punished pursuant to section 1-14. It shall be the duty of each person who holds a library borrower's card to notify the library of any change of residence or contact information. 
(Code 1966, § 18-4; Ord. No. 2016-82, II, 11-28-16)  
Sec. 66-4. - Neglect to return materials. 
Every person who shall take or borrow from the public library any book, periodical, physical or digital material, or other property, and neglect to return the same by the due date will be sent an electronic notification. A block will be placed on the borrower's patron account and on any account linked to the borrower's account. Failure to return the overdue material shall, upon conviction, be punished pursuant to section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 18-5; Ord. No. 2016-82, II, 11-28-16)  
Sec. 66-5. - Defacing library property. 
Every person who shall intentionally cut, mutilate, mark, tear, write upon, deface or otherwise destroy or injure in whole or in part any book, periodical, map or document, picture, written or engraved or printed paper, digital or computer equipment, artwork or other property belonging to the public library, or residing on library property, or who shall suffer any such injury to be inflicted while such property is in his custody, or shall willfully or wantonly mark or deface or in any way injure the public library or any part thereof, or any fixtures therein or appertaining thereto, shall, upon conviction, be punished pursuant to section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 18-6; Ord. No. 2016-82, II, 11-28-16)  
Sec. 66-6. - Penalties not exclusive. 
(a)  The penalties prescribed in sections 66-3, 66-4 and 66-5 for the violation of lending privileges, neglect to return books and materials, and defacing of library property shall in no way be interpreted to preclude prosecution by the appropriate authorities of any person whose actions in violating such sections constitute a class B misdemeanor, class A misdemeanor, or felony under state or federal law. 
(b)  The penalties prescribed in sections 66-3, 66-4 and 66-5 shall not preclude a civil action for monetary damages or other relief brought by the city against a person violating such sections or against the parent, guardian, managing conservator, possessory conservator, or other person having the duty of control and reasonable discipline of a child under V.T.C.A., Texas Family Code ch. 41 where such child has violated such sections of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 18-7; Ord. No. 2016-82, II, 11-28-16)  
Secs. 66-7—66-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LIBRARY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-76 et seq.; procedure for appointment and terms and qualifications of board members, § 2-77; substantial evidence rule in effect regarding appeals from decisions of boards, commissions and committees, § 2-82. 
 
Sec. 66-31. - Created; official name. 
There is hereby created a public library advisory board to be known as the McAllen Public Library Advisory Board. 
(Code 1966, § 18-12; Ord. No. 2016-82, II, 11-28-16)  
Sec. 66-32. - Composition; appointment. 
(a)  The McAllen Public Library Advisory Board shall be composed of seven members and one alternate. 
(b)  All members of the library board shall be appointed and shall serve as provided in sections 2-76 through 2-82, and the alternate shall be appointed by the library director. 
(c)  The alternate member shall vote in the event the full board is not present at the meeting. 
(Code 1966, § 18-13; Ord. No. 2016-82, II, 11-28-16)  
Sec. 66-33. - Powers and duties. 
The McAllen Public Library Advisory Board shall make recommendations to the library director concerning the review, formulation and adoption of written operating policies for the library as included in the library policies and procedures manual and assist the library director in promoting library facilities, programs, and materials. 
(Code 1966, § 18-15; Ord. No. 2016-82, II, 11-28-16)  
Secs. 66-34, 66-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-82, § II, adopted Nov. 26, 2016, repealed §§ 66-34 and 66-35, which pertained to "Constitution and bylaws" and "Incurring expenses on behalf of city," and derived from Code 1966, §§ 18-16, 18-17.  
Secs. 66-36—66-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LIBRARY DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-196 et seq.; substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
Sec. 66-56. - Created. 
There is hereby created the library department for the city. 
(Code 1966, § 18-1; Ord. No. 2016-82, II, 11-28-16)  
Sec. 66-57. - Library director—Office created; appointment; qualifications. 
There is hereby created the office of library director who shall be appointed by the city manager and who shall be a person professionally competent by experience and training, with a master's degree in library science from an american library association accredited institution, to manage the municipal library department. 
(Code 1966, § 18-18; Ord. No. 2016-82, II, 11-28-16)  
Sec. 66-58. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The library director shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To adopt after consulting the McAllen Public Library Advisory Board, all rules and regulations deemed necessary for administration, government and protection of the library, meeting rooms, and all other library property and to enforce all such rules and regulations. 
(2)  To cause to be purchased through the purchasing agent of the city, in the manner provided by the Charter and ordinances of the city, all books, periodicals, and audio-visual materials, whether physical or digital, and other necessary property, including furniture, appliances, equipment, and supplies for the operation of the public library and the municipal library department. 
(3)  With the approval of the city manager, to select and employ a librarian and other assistants and employees as may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the library and public meeting rooms. 
(Code 1966, § 18-19; Ord. No. 2016-82, II, 11-28-16)  
Chapter 70 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Municipal court, ch. 34; fireworks, § 50-91 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— In order to accommodate Ord. No. 1995-37, § I, adopted July 24, 1995, which provided for establishment of Art. II, §§ 70-1—70-13 have been grouped under the heading of Art. I. 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or dangerously expose any refrigerator, icebox, cold storage box, or any container having attached or affixed to the door thereon a spring lock or a latch fastener or lock that permits the opening of the door thereon from the outside only, unless such refrigerator, icebox, cold storage box, or container has had removed therefrom the door thereon or the latch, lock or fastener attached to such door. 
(Code 1966, § 19-2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 756.001.  
Sec. 70-2. - Leaving a child in a vehicle. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly leave a child in a motor vehicle for longer than five minutes, knowing that the child is: 
(1)  Younger than seven years of age; and 
(2)  Not attended by an individual in the vehicle who is 14 years of age or older. 
(b)  Any person convicted for an offense under this section in the municipal court of the city shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 19-9)  
Sec. 70-3. - Damaging property generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, hack, deface, break, damage, remove, paint, mark or otherwise injure any building, fence, railing, awning, post, fixture, telephone, telegraph or electric wire or post, shade tree, ornament, monument, bulletin board, sign, show frame, fruit or other stand, platform, bridge or any other thing not the property or under the control of such person. 
(Ord. No. 1993-67, § I(a), 9-27-93)  
Sec. 70-4. - Damaging, defacing or littering public or school property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for any person at any time to damage, destroy or injure any public property or property of the city independent school district or any improvements located thereon, or to deface any of such property by painting, marking or otherwise placing thereon any signs, paintings, words or language, whether obscene or not. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person at any time to throw upon or allow to come to rest upon any public place or property of the city independent school district any trash, garbage or litter, as such terms are defined in the litter ordinance of the city. 
(c)  The violation of any of the provisions of this section is declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-14. 
(d)  The penalty provisions of this section shall not preclude the use of any other remedy at law or in equity to which the city may resort to ensure that the provisions of this section are not violated. 
(Code 1966, § 19-15.1) 
Charter reference— Power to abate and remove nuisances, art. 11.  
Sec. 70-5. - Reward for furnishing information leading to apprehension and conviction of a person willfully damaging certain property. 
(a)  The city hereby authorizes payment of a reward of $50.00 for furnishing information to the chief of police of the city leading to the apprehension and conviction of any person willfully damaging any traffic signs, street name signs, traffic control devices, public buildings or furniture located therein, or any property of the city in violation of state and federal laws. 
(b)  If information is furnished to the chief of police leading to the apprehension and conviction of any person violating this section, the city treasurer is hereby authorized upon proper certification from the chief of police to issue a check on the general fund of the city in payment of the reward provided in this section. 
(Code 1966, § 19-27)  
Sec. 70-5.5. - Parental responsibility. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Child" means a person under 18 years of age who is not and has not been married or who has not had his disabilities of minority removed for general purposes. 
(2)  "Parent" means the mother, a man as to whom the child is legitimate, or an adopted mother or father, a court-appointed guardian or conservator or other person 18 years or older, authorized by the parent, by court order, or by the court appointed guardian or conservator to have the care and custody of a child. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a parent of a child to fail to repair or pay for any property damage proximately caused by: 
(1)  The negligent conduct of the child if the conduct is reasonably attributable to the negligent failure of the parent to exercise control and reasonable discipline of the child; or 
(2)  The willful and malicious conduct of a child who is at least 12 years of age but under 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 1995-38, § I, 7-24-95) 
Editor's note— Prior to the re-establishment of § 70-5.5 by Ord. No. 1995-38, Ord. No. 1994-59, § I, adopted Aug. 22, 1994, set out provisions repealing § 70-5.5, which pertained to graffiti and derived from Code 1966, § 19-6 and Ord. No. 1993-67, § I(b)—(j), adopted Sept. 27, 1993.  
Sec. 70-6. - Firearms, discharging. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm of any kind within the city, except inside an indoor shooting range established and operated in compliance with all applicable legal requirements. This section shall not apply to police officers acting in the line of duty. 
(Code 1966, § 19-11; Ord. No. 2012-20, § I, 3-26-12)  
Sec. 70-7. - Possession of firearms by minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor to have in his possession or carry on his person, except within the minor's domicile, a revolver, rifle, shotgun or any firearm which is of either air compression or percussion nature unless such minor is accompanied and supervised by a parent, guardian or responsible adult. 
(Code 1966, § 19-12)  
Sec. 70-8. - Disturbing the peace. 
Any person who shall disturb the peace and quiet of any person, family or neighborhood, or who shall disturb the peace and order of any assembly or meeting of people assembled for worship or other purposes, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1966, § 19-8)  
Sec. 70-9. - Throwing stones or missiles. 
Any person who shall throw or cast any stone or missile of any kind, either with or without the aid of a catapult or sling, at or against any person or property not belonging to him, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1966, § 19-19)  
Sec. 70-10. - Advertising on public street or alley right-of-way. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether individually or through an agent, employee or representative, to place, erect or install any advertising sign or billboard on any public street or alley right-of-way within the city. 
(b)  The purpose of this section on advertising on the public street or alley right-of-way is to promote public safety by ensuring that signs and billboards: 
(1)  Do not obstruct the sidewalk area along public streets which have a primary purpose of safe use by pedestrians; 
(2)  Do not obstruct firefighting or police surveillance; 
(3)  Do not create traffic hazards by distracting operators of motor vehicles; and 
(4)  Do not create traffic hazards by impairing the vehicle operators' ability to see pedestrians, obstacles or other vehicles when using public streets or when entering public streets from alleys, private driveways, or other streets. 
(Code 1966, § 19-3.1)  
Sec. 70-11. - Trespassing on city drainage right-of-way/state right-of-way. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except when legally authorized, to enter or to trespass upon city drainage right-of-way property or state improved drainage right-of-way property when such person is operating a motorized vehicle or such person is using a skateboard, roller skates, coasters or other similar type devices. 
(b)  Any police officer of the city who shall detect a violation of this section shall be authorized to issue a citation under the provisions of section 62-1(b). 
(c)  Any person who shall be convicted of any violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 19-28)  
Sec. 70-12. - Blasting operations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to blast or cause to be blasted within the limits of the city any rock or other material without having such rock or other material covered with good sound timber or other material to effectively prevent fragments of rock or other material blasted from being thrown into the air. 
(Code 1966, § 19-4)  
Sec. 70-13. - Defecation, urination in public places. 
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to urinate against any wall or in any street or alley; or to make a fecal defecation in any street or alley, or in any open lot, or under any house or platform within the city. 
(Code 1966, § 19-7)  
Sec. 70-14. - Concealed handguns prohibited. 
The carrying of any concealed handgun by any person unless such person is a licensed peace officer under the laws of the state and is carrying a concealed handgun under the course and scope of his employment, is prohibited on all city-owned premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry a concealed handgun in violation of the provisions of this section. The city manager is hereby authorized to post notice of this prohibition at the entrance of all city premises. Any person carrying a concealed handgun in violation of this prohibition shall be considered to be entering the premises of the city in violation of Penal Code § 30.05, being the criminal trespass statute of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1995-66, § I, 11-27-95) 
Cross reference— Discharging firearms, § 70-6; possession of firearms by minors, § 70-7.  
Secs. 70-15—70-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-21, § 1, adopted March 10, 2003, provides for an extension of the provisions of Ch. 70, Art. II. Section 2 of said ordinance provides, "That within thirty-six (36) months after the passage of this ordinance, unless another time limit is provided under State law enacted after the effective date hereof, the Chief of Police shall review this ordinance and make recommendations to the City Commission concerning the effectiveness of and the continuing need for the ordinance." Subsequently, the following ordinances provide for the extention of art. II provisions: Ord. No. 2006-15, § 1, adopted Feb. 15, 2006; Ord. No. 2009-78, § I, adopted Nov. 23, 2009; Ord. No. 2012-61, § II, adopted Sept. 24, 2012; Ord. No. 2015-72, §§ I, II, adopted Aug. 24, 2015; Ord. No. 2018-53, § I, adopted Aug. 13, 2018. 
 
Sec. 70-20. - Definitions. 
Chief of police means the Chief of Police of the City of McAllen or a designated representative. 
Curfew hours means: 
(1)  10:30 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
(2)  12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday. 
Direct route means the shortest path of travel through a public place to reach a final destination without any detour or stop along the way. 
Emergency means, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Holding location means a place designated by the chief of police to which a minor taken into custody for a violation of this section will be delivered to await pickup by a parent or juvenile authorities. 
Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural or adoptive parent of another person; 
(2)  A court-appointed guardian to have the care and custody of another person; 
(3)  At least 21 years of age and authorized by a parent or court-appointed guardian to have the care and custody of another person. 
Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, playground, park, plaza, building, or other place used by or open to the public. 
Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay unnecessarily; or 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1995-37, § I, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 1995-59, § I, 10-23-95; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 1, 3-10-03; Ord. No. 2006-15, § 1, 2-15-06; Ord. No. 2006-18, § 1, 2-27-06; Ord. No. 2009-78, § I, 11-23-09; Ord. No. 2012-61, § II, 9-24-12)  
Sec. 70-21. - Offenses. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(b)  A parent of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(c)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. 1995-37, § I, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 1, 3-10-03; Ord. No. 2006-15, § 1, 2-15-06; Ord. No. 2009-78, § I, 11-23-09; Ord. No. 2012-61, § II, 9-24-12)  
Sec. 70-22. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 70-21 that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent and was using a direct route; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, including but not limited to newspaper delivery, and was using a direct route; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence; 
(7)  Attending an official school or religious activity or returning home by a direct route from an official school or religious activity. 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(9)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A. Family Code ch. 31. 
(Ord. No. 1995-37, § I, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 1, 3-10-03; Ord. No. 2006-15, § 1, 2-15-06; Ord. No. 2009-78, § I, 11-23-09; Ord. No. 2012-61, § II, 9-24-12)  
Sec. 70-23. - Enforcement. 
(a)  A police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of subsection 70-21, shall: 
(1)  Ascertain the name and address of the minor; 
(2)  Issue to the minor a written warning that the minor is in violation of section 70-21; and 
(3)  Order the minor to go promptly home by a direct route. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of section 70-21, may take the minor into custody and deliver the minor to a holding location if: 
(1)  The minor has received two previous written warnings for a violation of section 70-21; or 
(2)  Reasonable grounds exist to believe the minor has engaged in delinquent conduct or conduct indicating a need for supervision in accordance with V.C.T.A. Family Code § 51.03 and § 52.01. 
(c)  When a minor is taken into custody under this subsection, the police department shall immediately notify a parent to pick up the minor at the holding location. After a parent arrives at a holding location and provides the information required by the chief of police to file an incident report, the minor shall be released into the custody of the parent. If a parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the minor, the minor shall be released to the juvenile authorities. 
(d)  If a minor is not taken into custody for a violation of section 70-21, the police department shall by certified mail, return receipt requested, notify a parent of the minor that the minor has violated section 70-21 and include a warning that any subsequent violation may result in prosecution of the minor and the parent under this section. If the minor was found in violation of section 70-20 at an establishment, the police department shall by certified mail, return receipt requested, notify the owner, operator, or employee of the establishment of the violation and include a warning that any subsequent violation may result in prosecution of the owner, operator, and employee under this section. 
(e)  A police officer shall, within 24 hours after finding a minor in violation of section 70-21 file a written report on the incident or assist to the extent possible in the preparation and filing of the report by a supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 1995-37, § I, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 1, 3-10-03; Ord. No. 2006-15, § 1, 2-15-06; Ord. No. 2009-78, § I, 11-23-09; Ord. No. 2012-61, § II, 9-24-12)  
Sec. 70-24. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any minor who violates section 70-21 of this article three or more times within any 24-month period is subject to appropriate action by a juvenile court in accordance with V.T.C.A. ch. 51 and ch. 52. A minor may be prosecuted in municipal court for a violation of section 70-21 and upon conviction be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 per violation. 
(b)  A parent of a minor who violates section 70-21 of this article is, upon conviction, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 1995-37, § I, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 1, 3-10-03; Ord. No. 2006-15, § 1, 2-15-06; Ord. No. 2009-78, § I, 11-23-09; Ord. No. 2012-61, § II, 9-24-12)  
ARTICLE III. - SEX OFFENDERS 
 
Sec. 70-25. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, and terms not defined here shall be construed as in ordinary and common usage: 
Child safety area shall mean all improved and unimproved areas of a lot or tract of land that is used as a private or public elementary or secondary school, public or private school bus stop or school bus shelter, licensed day-care center or facility, private or public playground, private or public youth center, public swimming pool, video arcade facility, amusement park, carnival, public park when the use is intended primarily for children or public library. 
Child sex offender shall mean any person with a reportable conviction or adjudication for any of the following offenses: 
(1)  Continuous sexual abuse of a young child or children (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.02); 
(2)  Indecency with a child (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.11); 
(3)  Sexual assault of a child (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 22.011); 
(4)  Aggravated sexual assault of a child (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 22.021); 
(5)  Online solicitation of a minor (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 33.021); 
(6)  Sexual performance by a child, (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 43.25); 
(7)  Possession or promotion of child pornography (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 43.26); 
(8)  A violation of the laws of another state, federal law, laws of a foreign country, or the Uniform Code of Military Justice, if the violation contained elements substantially similar to the elements of the violations described (1) through (7) of this paragraph. 
Day-care center or facility shall mean a facility licensed by the State of Texas, which provides care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision of children for less than 24 hours a day. 
Loiter shall mean standing or sitting idly, whether or not in a motor vehicle, in and around an area. 
Minor shall mean any person under 18 years of age. 
Permanent residence shall mean a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
Person in authority shall mean the owner, a person authorized by the owner, or a person or business with apparent authority to act for the owner, including but not limited to, a manager or a property management business. 
Public park shall mean any land, including improvements to the land, designated for the use of the general public or any athletic field that is owned, leased, operated, managed, or maintained by the city, including, but not limited to, swimming pools, soccer fields, baseball fields, softball fields, basketball courts, water parks, conservation areas, jogging trails, and hiking trails. 
Reportable conviction or adjudication shall have the meaning assigned by V.T.C.A., Texas Code of Criminal Procedure § 62.001(5). 
Temporary residence shall mean a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent residence, or a place where a person abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
In this article, "playground," "premises," "school," "video arcade facility," and "youth center" shall have the meanings assigned by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.134. 
(Ord. No. 2016-87, § I, 12-12-16)  
Sec. 70-26. - Sex offender entry and loitering restriction. 
(a)  It is an offense for a child sex offender to intentionally or knowingly enter a child safety area. 
(b)  It is an offense for a child sex offender to intentionally or knowingly loiter within 300 feet of a child safety area. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b), measurement is made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, between the location and the nearest property line of the child safety area. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if at the time a person prohibited from entering a child safety area is the parent or legal guardian of a child 18 years of age or younger who resides with the person and the child was on the premises of the child safety area. 
(e)  A child sex offender who has a right to be present at an official meeting is exempted from this section and may approach and enter the child safety area for such time as is necessary to attend the official meeting. This exemption shall only apply to those areas of the child safety area that are necessary for attendance at the official meeting, and any child sex offender found outside such areas shall be in violation of this article. 
(f)  When a polling place for an election is located within a child safety area, a child sex offender is exempted from this section and may approach and enter the child safety area for the limited purpose of voting if the child sex offender qualifies to vote at such place. This exemption shall only apply to those areas of the child safety area that are necessary for voting, and any child sex offender found outside such areas shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-87, § I, 12-12-16)  
Sec. 70-27. - Sex offender Halloween restrictions. 
(a)  A child sex offender shall on October 30 th and 31 st of each year or any other date set by the city for trick-or-treaters: 
(1)  Remain at their residence of registry between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 11:59 p.m.; 
(2)  Leave all exterior lights off; and, 
(3)  Refrain from inviting trick-or-treaters to solicit the premises at their residence of registry. 
(b)  It is an offense for a child sex offender to fail to abide by any of the restrictions under this section. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the child sex offender was required to report and did report to a specified location on October 30 and 31 or any other date set by the city for trick-or-treaters as a condition of their probation or parole; 
(d)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this section and need not be alleged or proved. 
(Ord. No. 2016-87, § I, 12-12-16)  
Sec. 70-28. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction, adjudication, or deferred disposition thereof shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00 for each and every offense. Each and every violation or day that such violation shall continue or exist shall be deemed a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this section shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin a violation of this section. The city shall retain all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-87, § I, 12-12-16)  
Sec. 70-29. - Enforcement. 
The police department of the City of McAllen is hereby authorized to issue citations and/or arrest any person(s) who violates any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-87, § I, 12-12-16)  
Sec. 70-30. - Savings clause. 
If any section, part, or provision of this article is declared unconstitutional or invalid, by a court of competent jurisdiction, then, in that event, it is expressly provided, and it is the intention of the city commission in passing this article that its parts shall be severable and all other parts of this article shall not be affected thereby and they shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2016-87, § I, 12-12-16)  
Chapter 74 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages prohibited in the McAllen Nature Center, § 6-4; smoking prohibited in certain public places, § 54-122; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— City parks, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.001. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CITY OF MCALLEN PARK LAND DEDICATION AND PARK DEVELOPMENT FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-67, § 2, adopted Aug. 28, 2000, amended the title of article I to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Requirements for park land dedication. 
(a)  Neighborhood and community parks and recreational facilities are those facilities providing for a variety of recreational opportunities within convenient distances from a majority of the residences to be served thereby. Park zones will be established by the parks and recreation department and shown on the official city limits map for the City of McAllen and shall be prima facie proof that any park located therein is within such a convenient distance from any residence located therein. The ultimate residential property owners, who by reason of the proximity of their property to such parks, shall be the primary beneficiaries of such facilities. Therefore, the following requirements are adopted to effect the purposes stated. 
(b)  Based on the information presented to the parks and recreation advisory board for the purposes of determining the city's needs and level of park land development and park development amount, the city commission hereby makes the following findings: 
(1)  The minimum acreage per 1,000 people population to be dedicated for park purposes in order to meet that minimum standards for adequate usage, is based on five acres of land per 1,000 ultimate residents. 
(2)  The average number of persons residing in any one housing unit in McAllen is 3.18 persons. For the purpose of this article, 3.18 persons per housing unit is know as the dwelling unit equivalent. 
(3)  The average cost per acre of park land for purposes of purchase is $27,620.00 per acre. This amount does not include development costs of such park. 
(4)  The average cost per acre for development of a basic neighborhood and community parks is $60,000.00 per acre. 
(5)  For the purpose of the calculation of the parks development fees, based on the formula of five acres per 1,000 population, using the dwelling unit equivalent of 3.184 persons per dwelling unit equivalent, the cost of $27,620.00 per acre, and the cost for development is $60,000 per acre, then the city's cost per dwelling unit equivalent is calculated to be $1,393.16. The fee charged to developer/owner of the property will be 32.3 percent of $1,393.16, which equals a $450.00 per dwelling unit equivalent. 
FORMULA: 
5 Acres X ($27,620 X $60,000) X 1 Dwelling Unit X 3.18 Persons Per Unit) / 1,000 > = $1,393.16 per dwelling unit; 
(6)  For the purposes of a single-family residential subdivision, one lot equals one dwelling unit equivalent, for the purposes of multifamily subdivisions, the dwelling unit equivalents will be equal to the number of apartments, condominiums, townhomes, or similar single-family housing units. For calculation of the parks for a subdivision, other than a single-family residential subdivision, the dwelling unit equivalent calculation shall be based on the highest density authorized under the McAllen zoning ordinance for the use classification for the acreage of the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1998-113, § 1, 11-23-98; Ord. No. 2000-67, § 2, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 2002-32, § 1, 5-31-02)  
Sec. 74-2. - General requirements. 
(a)  Whenever a final plat is filed for approval within the city for the development of a residential area under zoning use district R-1, R-2, R-3A, R-3T, R-3C and R-4 in accordance with the planning and zoning regulations of the city, such plat shall contain a clear fee simple dedication of an area of land to the city for park purposes, which area shall be calculated at a rate of not less than five acres of park land per 1,000 ultimate residents. Any proposed plat submitted to the city for approval should show the area proposed to be dedicated under this subsection. Such dedication shall be subject to the approval process as provided for below. 
EXAMPLE: 
5 Acres X 65 Dwelling Units X 3.18 Person Per Unit / 1000 = 1.0335 acres to be dedicated 
(b)  When a final plat is filed for approval within the city for the development of a residential area under zoning use districts R-1, R-2, R-3A and R-3C, R-3T and R-4, and require less than one acre of dedication all other residential use districts, then such plat shall not be finally approved until there is a payment of the park development fee of $450.00 per dwelling unit equivalent. 
(c)  Whenever a building permit for new construction, remodeling or addition is applied for, within the city limits, on property already platted, the creates additional residential dwelling units, a park development fee of $450.00 per dwelling unit shall be paid prior to issuance of the building permit. 
(d)  The park development fee required to be collected under the provisions of this section shall be increased on January 1st of each year hereafter as follows: 
(1)  January 1, 2003—$1,393.16 ×. 35.9% = $500.00; 
(2)  January 1, 2004—$1,393.16 ×. 39.5% = $550.00; 
(3)  January 1, 2005—$1,393.16 × 41.1% = $600.00; 
(4)  January 1, 2006—$1,393.16 × 46.7% = $650.00; and 
(5)  January 1, 2007—$1,393.16 × 50.2% = $700.00. 
The above referenced adjustment to the park development fee is based on projected inflationary influences of the cost of the value of real property for the City of McAllen. 
(e)  In lieu of the payment of the park development fee as provided for in subsection (b) and (c) above, the developer/owner of a property may propose to convey to the city fee simple a real property in an area of not less than one acre. The credit against park development fee for dedication of real property shall be calculated at a rate of not less than five acres of park land per 1,000 ultimate residents. The city commission may approve or disapprove the dedication and require the payment of the park development fee in the course of review process as set out in subsection (d). 
(f)  The board of commission declares a development of an area resulting in land dedications smaller than one acres, for public park purposes, may be impractical and for such reason, the park development fee will be applied to any such development which would require less than one acre dedicated for park lands, unless the developer specifically proposes that the park lands be accepted and the city commission specifically approves the same. 
(g)  In all instances where the dedication of more than five acres or greater is required under the provisions of this section, or where dedication of greater than one acre but less than five acres is proposed under the provisions of this section, the city commission shall have the right to accept the dedication for approval on the plat, or to refuse the same, after consideration of the recommendation of the park land dedication advisory board hereinafter created, and to require payment of the applicable park development fee, in lieu of the land, in the amount as provided for in this section. 
(h)  There is hereby created the park land dedication advisory board to be made up of seven members to be appointed by the board of commissioners. At least three of the members shall be chosen from the parks and recreation advisory board and the remaining four members shall be City of McAllen employees or officials. Such board will meet at any time that a property dedicated for park land purposes is pending for review by the board of commissioners. Such board shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman and secretary, and meetings of such board shall be posted in accordance with the Open Meetings Act of Texas. Such board shall make a recommendation to the board of commissioners relating to the acceptance or rejection of the proposed dedicated land for park purposes under a requirement for subdivision plat or building permit as applicable. The general criteria for determination shall be whether or not there is sufficient park area in the public domain in the area of the proposed development or if the recreation potential for that park zone would be better served by expanding or improving existing parks, or whether or not the particular property is suitable for park purposes because of traffic conditions, environmental concerns, adjacent property uses, configuration of the property or other appropriate criteria to be established by the committee. 
(i)  The city commission, upon recommendation by the park land dedication advisory board, shall review the request for dedication as applicable relating to a subdivision plat or building permit, and approve the dedication or reject the same and require a different dedication of parks land within the subdivision or require the payment of the applicable park development fee. 
(j)  The dedication required by this section shall be made by recording the final plat and contemporaneously, by separate instrument, unless additional dedication is required subsequent to the filing of the final plat. If the actual number of completed dwelling units exceeds the figure upon which the original dedication was based, such additional dedication shall be required, and shall be made by payment of cash, in lieu of land, in the amount as provided for in this section. 
(k)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to a property outside the city limits, that is voluntarily annexed into the city on or after September 1, 2019. 
(Ord. No. 1998-113, § 1, 11-23-98; Ord. No. 2000-67, §§ 2, 3, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 2001-93, § 1, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2002-32, § 2, 5-31-02; Ord. No. 2002-57, § 8, 9-11-02; Ord. No. 2002-67, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 2019-43, § I, 8-12-19)  
Sec. 74-3. - Special fund; right to refund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a special fund for the deposit of all sums paid in lieu of land dedicated for park purposes, which fund shall be known as the park land dedication fund. All interest accruing to such account shall be deposited to same, and shall be used for the same purpose as the fund. 
(b)  The city shall account for all sums paid in lieu of land dedication under section 74-2. Any funds paid for such purposes must be expended by the city within six years from the date received by the city for the acquisition or development. Such funds should be considered to be spent on a first in, first out basis. If not so expended, the then owners of the property, subject to refund on the last day of such period shall be entitled to a prorata refund of such sums computed on a dwelling unit equivalent for monies which were collected under money in lieu of land under section 74-2. The then owners of such property must request such refund within one year of entitlement, in writing, or such right shall be forever barred. 
(Ord. No. 1998-113, § 1, 11-23-98; Ord. No. 2000-67, §§ 2, 4, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 2001-93, § 2, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2002-32, § 4, 5-31-02) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 74-4.  
Sec. 74-4. - Additional requirements; definitions. 
(a)  Any land dedicated to the city under this section must be suitable for park and recreation uses. The following characteristics of a proposed area are generally unsuitable: 
(1)  Any area primarily located in the 100-year floodplain. 
(2)  Any areas of unusual topography, or slope, which renders same unusable for organized recreational activities. 
a.  Drainage areas may be accepted as part of a park if the channel is constructed in accordance with city engineering standards, and if no significant area of the park is cut off from access by such channel. 
b.  Each park must have ready access to a public street or roadway. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, the following terms are defined as noted: 
(1)  City park shall mean any park which is owned, maintained or operated by the City of McAllen, Texas. 
(2)  Neighborhood park shall mean a park of three to 15 acres, suitable for intense recreational activities such as field games, court games, playground apparatus, picnicking, etc., generally serving a population within a one-quarter to one-half mile radius of the park. 
(3)  Community park shall mean a park of 15 acres or more, suitable for diverse activities, such as intense recreational activities, athletic complexes, swimming pools, etc., generally serving a population within a ½-3 mile radius of the park, or several neighborhoods. 
(4)  Residential dwelling unit shall mean any unit designed as a stand-alone dwelling, consisting of sleeping, bathing and cooking facilities. 
(5)  Commercial space shall mean any space designed to hold a separate commercial enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 1998-113, § 1, 11-23-98; Ord. No. 2000-67, § 2, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 2002-32, § 5, 5-31-02) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 74-5.  
Sec. 74-5. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  The planning department shall be responsible for processing and collecting park fees at the time of subdivision platting. 
(b)  The building permits and inspections department shall be responsible for processing and collecting park fees at the time of issuance of a building permit. 
(c)  Before receiving a building permit or a recorded plat, the land owner shall submit, and the staff shall confirm and/or adjust according to the ordinance of the City of McAllen, the maximum total number of proposed dwelling unit equivalents which may be constructed on the plat or in the development. The required fee or land dedication shall be calculated based on the provisions of section 74-2, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1998-113, § 1, 11-23-98; Ord. No. 2000-67, §§ 2, 3, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 2002-32, § 5, 5-31-02) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 74-6.  
Secs. 74-6—74-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-76 et seq.; procedure for appointment and terms and qualifications of board members, § 2-77; substantial evidence rule in effect regarding appeals from decisions of boards, commissions and committees, § 2-82. 
 
Sec. 74-26. - Created. 
There is hereby created a parks and recreation advisory board for the city. 
(Code 1966, § 21-12)  
Sec. 74-27. - Composition. 
The parks and recreation advisory board shall be composed of not less than five members nor more than 11 members. 
(Code 1966, § 21-13)  
Sec. 74-28. - Appointment, etc. 
Members of the parks and recreation advisory board shall be appointed and serve as provided in sections 2-76 through 2-82. 
(Code 1966, § 21-14)  
Sec. 74-29. - Duties. 
The parks and recreation advisory board shall advise the board of commissioners on matters pertaining to city parks and recreation areas.  
Secs. 74-30—74-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - USE PERMITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
Sec. 74-51. - Required. 
No person, group or organization shall be entitled to exclusive use of any park or recreational facility, or part thereof, owned or operated by the city unless such person, group or organization shall first obtain a permit for such exclusive use from the director of parks and recreation or his designated representative. 
(Code 1966, § 21-3)  
Sec. 74-52. - Application; issuance or denial. 
(a)  Any person, group or organization applying for a park use permit shall complete an application and pay such fee which is on file in the office of the director of parks and recreation. The applicant shall be entitled to the issuance of such permit unless the director of parks and recreation or his designated representative shall affirmatively find the following: 
(1)  The park or recreational facility is to be used for an unlawful purpose; 
(2)  The time, place or manner of use of the facility is likely to cause substantial disturbance to persons occupying property adjoining the facility; 
(3)  The proposed use is likely to result in damage to city property; 
(4)  If the application for the permit is made such that there is not sufficient time to make the above determinations; or 
(5)  The failure to clean a facility to the satisfaction of the director of parks and recreation, or his designated representative, after a prior use of such facility, regardless of whether such prior use was under a permit provided for in this article or not. 
(b)  Any applicant denied a permit under this section may appeal such denial to the board of commissioners by filing a request for review with the city secretary within three days after written notice of such denial. The city secretary shall place such appeal on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners which meets the requisites of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq., the Texas Open Meetings Act as a nonemergency item. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final. If the permit is denied with insufficient time for it to be considered by the board of commissioners under the provisions of this subsection then, in that event, the permit shall be considered to have been denied by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 21-3.1(a), (b))  
Sec. 74-53. - Softball tournaments, permit procedures. 
(a)  Any person applying for a park use permit for the purposes of conducting a softball tournament shall complete an application and pay the fees which are on file in the office of the director of parks and recreation. 
(b)  The applicant for a softball tournament use permit shall execute an agreement with the director of parks and recreation for additional services and facilities required in the conduct of the tournament. All additional services and facilities and charges therefor will be approved by the city manager. The agreement shall provide that the parks and recreation department will reserve the right to cancel tournaments because of inclement weather or bad field conditions. The agreement shall provide general liability insurance as required by the city and shall include the city as an additional loss payee. 
(c)  All other provisions relating to park permits, as contained in this article, shall be met by an applicant or permit holder relating to any permit granted for the purposes of conducting any softball tournament under this article. 
(Code 1966, § 21-3.1(c))  
Sec. 74-54. - Contents. 
The park use permit when issued shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person, group or organization issued such permit; 
(2)  The date and time for which such permit is effective; 
(3)  The activity for which the permit is issued; 
(4)  The facility or part of the facility which the permittee is authorized to use; and 
(5)  Such other conditions as the director of parks and recreation, or his designated representative, may deem appropriate to minimize disturbance to surrounding property, avoid traffic congestion, and to avoid destruction of city property. 
The items mentioned in this section are not the only items which the parks and recreation director, or his designated representative, may include in such permit but are the items which must be contained in such permit. 
(Code 1966, § 21-3.2)  
Sec. 74-55. - Political activities. 
Political organizations or persons, groups or organizations which desire a park use permit for a political activity must make their application to the city manager, who shall make the same findings regarding the issuance of such permit as would be made otherwise by the director of parks and recreation or his designated representative. If the city manager, in this regard, finds that the permit should be issued and there is no conflict in the use of the facility requested, then the city manager shall direct the director of parks and recreation to issue the permit requested. 
(Code 1966, § 21-3.3)  
Sec. 74-56. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  The director of parks and recreation, or his designated representative, may, in his discretion, require any applicant for a park use permit to post a bond in sufficient amount to indemnify the city against all loss, expense or special police protection, or expense of cleaning up the park or facility after the proposed activity. The posting of such bond, when requested, shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of the park use permit, but such bond shall not be for an amount in excess of the anticipated city expenditures with regard to the activity regarding which the bond is required. 
(b)  If the board of commissioners has approved the charging of a rent for the use of the facility for which the park use permit is requested, anyone wishing to reserve such facility must pay such rent in addition to the permit fee required in this article. 
(c)  Where special rates are provided for non-profit organizations, such non-profit status in the form of an IRS classification or similar document shall be provided along with the permit application. 
(d)  Internal use, such as that by other departments within the city organization, shall be exempt from such fees. 
(e)  Local, state or federal governmental agencies that apply for use permits for facilities where fees have been established may be granted special fee consideration upon the approval of the city manager. 
(f)  Where partnerships have been established for the betterment of the community, in cooperation with the city or the parks and recreation department, rental fees for facilities may be reduced or waived, with approval of the city manager. 
(g)  Administrative. Upon completion of an application, such application shall be reviewed by the director of parks and recreation or his designated representative as referenced in section 74-51. 
(h)  Fees shall be collected as per the city's cash handling policy. 
(Code 1966, § 21-3.4; Ord. No. 2007-44, § 1, 5-29-07)  
Secs. 74-57—74-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
DIVISION 1. - PARKS PROPERTY REGULATION GENERALLY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1996-31, § II, adopted April 22, 1996, set out provisions designating §§ 74-76—74-83 as a new Div. 1, Parks Property Regulation Generally, in order to create Div. 2. 
 
Sec. 74-75. - Director authority for rules. 
(a)  Administration and supervision of the parks and recreation department shall be the responsibility of the director of parks and recreation and/or such other person as may be delegated or assigned such duties by the city manager. 
(b)  The director of parks and recreation is empowered with the day to day authority to regulate the uses and activities in the parks of the city consistent with this Code, and the reasonable enjoyment of the parks and recreation facilities by the citizens of the city. 
(c)  The director of parks and recreation is empowered with the authority to promulgate rules for the regulation of activities in the individual parks, subject to approval and revision by the city manager. 
(d)  No rule promulgated by the director of parks and recreation shall contradict or be inconsistent with any ordinance or regulation set forth in this Code. Any conflict between the promulgated rule and the city ordinance shall be resolved in favor of the city ordinance. 
(e)  To be enforceable, any rule regulating the use of any park or facility must be clearly and conspicuously set out on a sign in any park that is to be regulated by the rule. 
(f)  Violations of a park rule is hereby declared unlawful and shall be subject to the penalties and remedies as provided in section 74-84 and section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 2010-42, § I, 7-12-10)  
Sec. 74-76. - Dogs prohibited during athletic events; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take any dog, whether under a leash or allowed to run at large, upon any city-owned or controlled park or recreational facility during any time in which an organized athletic activity is being conducted at the park or recreational facility, whether or not such athletic activity is organized by the city or any other person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take any dog and/or any other animal upon any city owned or controlled park or recreational facility without making adequate provision to ensure that said dog or animal is prevented from creating an unclean environment in said city owned or controlled park or recreational facility and/or without making adequate provision to restore said city owned or controlled park or recreational facility to a clean condition should said dog or animal create an unclean condition. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the dog has been brought upon the premises of a park or recreational facility during the periods prohibited under this section as a legitimate accommodation of a person's handicap such that the same would be covered under the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(Ord. No. 1992-61, § I(21-4(a)), 7-13-92; Ord. No. 1997-70, § I, 8-11-97) 
Cross reference— Dogs generally, § 14-36 et seq.  
Sec. 74-77. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a)  Athletic events. No person may possess or consume alcoholic beverages in a city-owned or controlled park or recreational facility during the time in which an organized athletic activity is being conducted at that park or recreational facility, whether or not such athletic activity is organized by the city or any other person. 
(b)  City parks. No person may possess or consume alcoholic beverages at the 29th Street and Zinnia Park at any time. 
(Code 1966, §§ 21-4, 21-4.1; Ord. No. 1992-61, § I(21-4(b)), 7-13-92; Ord. No. 2010-59, § I, 9-27-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-59, § I, adopted Sept. 27, 2010 changed the title of § 74-77 from alcoholic beverages prohibited during athletic events to alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6.  
Sec. 74-78. - Hours when entry or use prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to enter into or upon any of the parks and recreation facilities owned or operated by the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. the following morning, unless otherwise posted by appropriate lawful signs erected by the city. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the actual use of jogging trails, fitness facilities and parking areas in conjunction with such use. Further, the authorized use of sports facilities equipped with lights for their intended use, including but not limited to baseball and softball diamonds, tennis courts and swimming pools, when their use beyond the hours indicated in subsection (a) of this section is authorized in writing by the director of parks and recreation. The police department shall also be notified of such authorization. 
(c)  This section shall also include no parking in parking areas designed for such use by park or recreational facility patrons, but shall not include public roadways adjacent to the park or recreational facilities. 
(Code 1966, § 21-2)  
Sec. 74-79. - Parks considered public places. 
For the purposes of the enforcement of the state penal code relating to activities in the parks or recreational facilities owned or operated by the city, all such parks or recreational facilities are considered to be public places as that term relates to offenses in such places in the penal code. 
(Code 1966, § 21-5) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94.  
Sec. 74-80. - Damage to equipment. 
No person shall intentionally or maliciously injure, damage, deface, mar or destroy any property owned, operated or maintained by the parks and recreation department of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 21-5.1)  
Sec. 74-81. - Vehicles on park property. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this section for anyone to operate, drive, station or move any vehicles onto or upon any park or recreational area owned, leased by, or operated by the parks and recreation department of the city, except on areas of such parks or recreational areas clearly marked, designated or defined as public roadways, streets, vehicle passageways or parking areas, except for city vehicles or vehicles of another local subdivision of this state, and then only to operate, repair, maintain or inspect property under such subdivision control. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this section for anyone to operate, drive, station or move any vehicles onto or upon any public roadways, streets, vehicle passageways or parking areas within any park or recreational area owned, leased by, or operated by the city or the parks and recreation department in such a manner as to violate any of the provisions of chapter 102, Traffic, of the Code of Ordinances, or any amendments to such chapter or the provisions of any state law relating to the operation of motor vehicles as incorporated within the provisions of such chapter 102. 
(c)  The speed limit in city parks, parking areas, and interior roadways of such parks is hereby set at 15 miles per hour, and it shall be a violation of this section to operate in any manner a vehicle in excess of such speed limit. 
(Code 1966, § 21-5.2) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 102; stopping, standing and parking, § 102-226 et seq.  
Sec. 74-82. - Swimming pool regulations. 
(a)  The parks and recreation department is hereby authorized to promulgate any and all rules and regulations needed for the operation of the municipal swimming pools, tennis facilities, and skate park. Such rules and regulations shall be posted in the city's official Internet website and at the entrance to the applicable facility, and shall take effect immediately upon posting at such facility. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be kept on file in both the offices of the parks and recreation department and the city secretary for public inspection. All future amendments to such rules and regulations shall take effect in the same manner as provided in this section and shall have the same force and effect as the original rules and regulations promulgated under the provisions of this section. A violation of any of the rules and regulations promulgated under this section shall constitute a violation of this article and is hereby declared to be unlawful. Further, any person violating this section or the rules and regulations promulgated under this section shall be subject to immediate removal from the premises upon which the violation occurs. 
(b)  The provisions of this article regarding the acquisition of a park use permit shall not apply to the municipal swimming pools, tennis facilities, or skate park. The restricted use of such facilities will be governed by the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 21-5.3; Ord. No. 2002-72, § 1, 10-28-02)  
Sec. 74-83. - McAllen Nature Center. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this section for any person to walk, stand or in any other manner traverse or use any portion of the McAllen Nature Center, except those areas designated as pedestrian walk-ways or trails. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this section for any person to enter into or upon any part of the McAllen Nature Center at any time when said park is closed to the public. The city manager and/or the city manager's designee shall have authority to close the McAllen Nature Center to the public at any time and for such times as he deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1997-71, § II, 8-11-97; Ord. No. 2016-06, § I, 1-25-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-06, changed the name of § 74-83 as herein set out. Formerly entitled McAllen Botanical Gardens.  
Sec. 74-84. - Penalties and remedies. 
(a)  Any person, group or organization violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to summary ejection from the facility in which the violation occurs by either a member of the staff of the parks and recreation department or a police officer of the city. 
(b)  In addition to ejection, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the violation of any of the provisions of this article is declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-14. 
(c)  The provisions in this section of the two remedies set out in this section shall not be deemed to preclude the use of any other remedy at law or equity to which the city may choose to resort to ensure that the provisions of this article are not violated. 
(Code 1966, § 21-6; Ord. No. 1997-71, § I, 8-11-97)  
Sec. 74-85. - McAllen War Memorial. 
(a)  The McAllen War Memorial, as constructed and operated by the Veterans' War Memorial Foundation of Texas, located at the southwest corner of 29th Street and Galveston is hereby declared a city public park facility for the duration of the use of such property for the war memorial purposes as set out in an agreement between the City of McAllen and the Veteran's War Memorial Foundation of Texas dated October 1, 1993; and as such, all regulations and restrictions generally applicable to parks as provided for in this article shall be applicable to the McAllen War Memorial in addition to all restrictions as set out herein. 
(b)  The McAllen War Memorial contains an area known as the walkways which are made up of 85,000 brick pavers which have been auctioned for purposes to raise money to fund the Memorial. Because of the uniqueness of such pavers, certain activities must be prohibited to maintain the aesthetic integrity of such area. Upon marking by the City of McAllen providing for such prohibition, possession, use or consumption of any food, gum, drinks, tobacco products, fuel products or solvents is hereby prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess or consume any of such products on the marked pavers. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motorized vehicle upon walkway areas marked as exclusive walkway areas on the McAllen War Memorial property, save and except vehicles driven for official business and with the specific permission of the president of the Veteran's War Memorial Foundation of Texas or the City Manager of the City of McAllen. 
(Ord. No. 2000-43, § 1, 6-12-00)  
Secs. 74-86—74-89. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AFTER-SCHOOL RECREATION PROGRAMS 
 
Sec. 74-90. - Minimum standards for after-school recreation programs. 
The parks and recreation department is hereby authorized to provide for an after-school recreation program from time to time provided budgeted funds are otherwise made available therefore. Any of such programs shall be operated under the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Staff requirements: 
a.  The after-school recreation program shall maintain a minimum staffing ratio of one staff member to every 25 participants, based on the daily average attendance at the site. Exceptions in staffing levels shall be allowed in the case of unforeseen absences of staff members. 
b.  Each staff member employed by the City of McAllen shall meet the employment eligibility requirements as set forth in the parks and recreation department supervised playgrounds and gyms operations manual as promulgated by the director of parks and recreation. These requirements shall be reviewed and updated by the parks and recreation department director on an annual basis. 
c.  Each after-school recreation program site shall have a minimum of one staff member who is certified in first aid and cardio pulmonary resuscitation by the American Red Cross or other recognized agency. 
(2)  Every program site shall have, at a minimum, the following type facilities: 
a.  A gathering room or rooms capable of containing the entire number of participants enrolled at the site and subject to occupancy level set by the fire marshal. 
b.  Separate restrooms for boys and girls, which are sufficiently close to each other to be monitored by one staff member. 
c.  Each site shall maintain a first aid kit containing a minimum of supplies as approved by the city health advisor. 
d.  The parks and recreation director is authorized to close the facility to access to the public during such times as the program is in session. 
(3)  Program requirements: 
a.  The program shall be monitored by the parks and recreation director or his designated representative. The director or his designated representative shall make every effort to visit each site a minimum of once a week. 
b.  Each after-school recreation program site supervisor shall submit biweekly activity and attendance reports to the director of parks and recreation. 
c.  Each site supervisor shall submit any and all accident reports to the parks and recreation department and any other reports deemed necessary by the director of parks and recreation or his designated representative. 
d.  All parents or guardians shall be advised, at the time the participant is registered, that the program is not a day care program, licensed by the State of Texas or any other agency. 
e.  Participants must be of elementary age (ages five to 13). 
(Ord. No. 1996-31, § II, 4-22-96; Ord. No. 1997-25, § I, 4-15-97; Ord. No. 1998-41, § I, 4-15-98; Ord. No. 2002-09, § 1, 1-28-02; Ord. No. 2003-11, § 1, 1-27-03; Ord. No. 2004-33, § 1, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 2005-51, § 1, 5-9-05; Ord. No. 2007-82, § 1, 10-8-07)  
Secs. 74-91—74-94. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY-RELATED YOUTH ATHLETIC PROGRAMS 
 
Sec. 74-95. - Certification for coaches on city-related youth athletic programs required. 
All managers or head coaches of any team participating in an organized youth sports program, which program is either held in a city-owned facility or conducted or sponsored by an entity receiving city funds, shall be certified by the National Youth Sports Coaches Association (NYSCA). The director of parks and recreation is hereby authorized and directed to establish a certification program, including the authority to charge and collect reasonable fees for services relating thereto. 
(Code 1966, § 21-8; Ord. No. 2000-67, § 1, 8-28-00) 
Note— Formerly § 74-1.  
Secs. 74-96—74-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - GOLF COURSE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Golf course means the Palmview Municipal Golf Course and the entire premises thereof, including but not limited to the clubhouse, restaurant, pro shop, cart shed and golf course itself, and all other parts or portions thereof. 
Lessee means any person or organization of whatever nature that uses the golf course premises, facilities or equipment. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 74-107. - Director of golf. 
The administrator in charge of the golf course shall be the director of golf, who shall be employed and discharged by the city manager, subject to the approval of the board of commissioners. The terms, conditions and duties of the director of golf's employment shall be prescribed by the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-2; Ord. No. 2016-07, § I, 1-25-16)  
Sec. 74-108. - Use fees. 
The golf course manager is hereby authorized to collect fees for the use of all golf course facilities and equipment, such fees to be set from time to time upon the recommendation of the golf course advisory board by minute order of the board of commissioners. All fees charged for the use of facilities or equipment under this section shall be due and payable to the city. The free use of all facilities and equipment of the golf course is hereby prohibited to any individual or group or to any employee or officer of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-3)  
Sec. 74-109. - Sale of merchandise; concessions. 
(a)  Only the city and its assigns may sell merchandise at the golf course. The use of any portion of the golf course by any individual, group, firm or corporation other than the city for the purpose of selling merchandise is hereby prohibited without the written consent of the manager of the golf course. Sale of merchandise by tax-exempt/nonprofit charitable organizations or civic groups is hereby excepted from such prohibition and shall be permitted upon the approval of the golf course manager. 
(b)  Only the city and its assigns shall have the right to operate concessions for the sale of food, drinks (including alcoholic beverages), programs, novelties, souvenirs, etc. Sale of concessions by tax-exempt charitable organizations and civic groups are hereby exempted from such prohibition and shall be permitted upon the approval of the golf course manager. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-4)  
Sec. 74-110. - Damaging golf course property. 
It is unlawful for any person to intentionally cut, mutilate, deface, defoliate, or otherwise destroy or cause injury, in whole or in part, to any part or portion of the golf course premises, facilities or equipment. It is unlawful for any person to willfully or wantonly mark or deface or in any way injure the golf course facilities or any part thereof, or any fixtures therein or appertaining thereto. A violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-7)  
Sec. 74-111. - Use of golf course property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into, pass through, or congregate with other persons on the golf course property at a time, whether night or day, when such property is closed to the general public. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into, pass through, or congregate with other persons on golf course property for any other purpose than to participate in an authorized use of the golf course during the hours the golf course is open for business. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to agents, representatives, licensees or employees of the city; provided, however, that such persons are engaged in the performance of their duties. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to play golf using driving-range golf balls which are identified as such by a clearly marked colored or black circle circumventing the golf ball. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disregard any order issued by the golf course marshal relating to the means or manner of play at the golf course. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a golf cart upon any area except designated golf cart areas except as authorized by the golf course manager. 
(g)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 21-1)  
Sec. 74-112. - Violation and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate, participate or acquiesce in the violation of any of the provisions of this article or who shall fail to comply therewith or with any requirements thereof, shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(b)  The penalty provided in subsection (a) of this section should not be construed as exclusive, and the city hereby provides that any other remedy available to it in the enforcement of this article, in law or in equity, is not intended to be, and is not, foreclosed by the provision of such penalty. 
(c)  The penalties prescribed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not preclude a civil action for monetary damages or other relief brought by the city against a person violating this article or against the parent, guardian, managing conservator, possessory conservator, or other person having the duty of control or reasonable discipline of a child under V.T.C.A., Family Code §§ 33.01—33.03, where such child has violated this article. 
(d)  Any violation of this article or any other rule established by the golf course manager may result in a temporary or permanent forfeiture of the right to play golf at the golf course at the direction of the golf course manager. 
(Code 1966, §§ 20¾-8, 20¾-9)  
Secs. 74-113—74-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADVISORY BOARD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-76 et seq.; procedure for appointment and terms and qualifications of board members, § 2-77; substantial evidence rule in effect regarding appeals from decisions of boards, commissions and committees, § 2-82. 
 
Sec. 74-126. - Definition. 
Whenever used in this article, the term "advisory board" shall mean the golf course advisory board created by section 74-127. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-21) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 74-127. - Created. 
There is hereby created and established a golf course advisory board for the city. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-22)  
Sec. 74-128. - Composition; appointment, terms, etc. 
The advisory board shall be composed of seven members who shall be appointed and serve pursuant to sections 2-76 through 2-82. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-23; Ord. No. 2011-20, § I, 4-11-11)  
Sec. 74-129. - Ex officio members. 
The board of commissioners may designate such officer or commissioner of the city as it sees fit to serve as an ex officio member of the advisory board, without voting privilege, who shall act in an advisory capacity only. The golf course manager shall also be an ex officio member of the advisory board, without voting privilege. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-24)  
Sec. 74-130. - Compensation. 
No salary or compensation shall be paid to the members of the advisory board for their services. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-25)  
Sec. 74-131. - Regular meetings. 
The advisory board shall meet once a month in regular session, the time and place to be set by the advisory board, to consider all matters pertaining to the business, operation and use to be made of the golf course and all facilities and equipment pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-28)  
Sec. 74-132. - Special meetings. 
The golf course manager or chairman of the advisory board shall have the right to call such special meetings of the advisory board as may be necessary. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-29)  
Sec. 74-133. - Quorum. 
Four of the regular voting members of the advisory board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-27; Ord. No. 2011-20, § II, 4-11-11)  
Sec. 74-134. - General duties. 
The advisory board shall work in close cooperation with the golf course manager and shall keep informed as to all aspects of the golf course operations, including, but not limited to, management, regulations, rules, purposes, maintenance, policies and ordinances established by the board of commissioners, and it shall stimulate use of the golf course facilities and equipment. It shall, from time to time, transmit information, reports, suggestions, recommendations and advice to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-30)  
Sec. 74-135. - Recommendations to board of commissioners. 
Any and all recommendations made by the advisory board to the board of commissioners shall be by a majority of a quorum. A minority of the advisory board members shall have a right to make a minority recommendation in writing to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-31)  
Sec. 74-136. - Subcommittees. 
The advisory board is authorized to establish subcommittees for specific operational functions, with a chairman for each subcommittee. 
(Code 1966, § 20¾-32)  
Secs. 74-137—74-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - QUINTA MAZATLAN  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-151. - Management and operation. 
Quinta Mazatlan shall be under the management and oversight of the parks and recreation department. 
(Ord. No. 2005-66, § 1, 8-22-05)  
Sec. 74-152. - Manager. 
The administrator in charge of Quinta shall be the Quinta Mazatlan Manager. The director of parks and recreation or his designee shall serve as the Quinta Mazatlan Manager in the absence of the manager. 
(Ord. No. 2005-66, § 1, 8-22-05)  
Sec. 74-153. - Use fees. 
The Quinta Mazatlan Manager is responsible for the collection of the fees due the city for the use of all Quinta facilities and equipment. The fees for use of the Quinta Mazatlan facilities will be set from time to time by minute order of the board of commissioners upon the recommendation of Friends of Quinta Mazatlan, Inc. 
(Ord. No. 2005-66, § 1, 8-22-05; Ord. No. 2016-25, § I, 5-9-16)  
Sec. 74-154. - Sale of merchandise; concessions. 
(a)  The use of any portion of Quinta Mazatlan by any for profit individual, group, firm or corporation for the purpose of selling merchandise is generally not allowed but exceptions may be given in writing by the manager as part of the lease agreement where such use is only ancillary to the primary use of the facility. Sale of merchandise by tax-exempt/nonprofit charitable organizations or civic groups may be permitted upon the written approval of the manager. 
(b)  Only the city and its assigns shall have the right to operate concessions for the sale of food, drinks (including alcoholic beverages), programs, novelties, and souvenirs. 
(Ord. No. 2005-66, § 1, 8-22-05)  
Sec. 74-155. - Damaging Quinta Mazatlan property. 
It is unlawful for any person to intentionally cut, mutilate, mark, deface, defoliate, or otherwise destroy or cause injury, in whole or in part, to any part or portion of the Quinta Mazatlan premises, facilities or equipment. A violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 2005-66, § 1, 8-22-05)  
Sec. 74-156. - Use of Quinta Mazatlan. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into, pass through, or congregate on the Quinta property at a time, whether night or day, when such property is closed to the general public. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into, pass through, or congregate on the property for any other purpose than to participate in an authorized use of Quinta Mazatlan during the hours Quinta is open for business. 
(c)  It shall unlawful for any person to walk, stand or in any other manner traverse or use any portion of the wooded area, except those areas designated as pedestrian walkways or trails. 
(d)  The provisions of this section do not apply to agents, representatives, licensees or employees of the city; provided, however, that such persons are engaged in the performance of their duties. 
(e)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(f)  Any person, group or organization violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to summary ejection by either a member of the staff of the parks and recreation department or a police officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-66, § 1, 8-22-05)  
Secs. 74-157—74-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 74-176. - Definition. 
Whenever used in this article, the term "advisory board" shall mean Friends of Quinta Mazatlan, Inc. created by section 74-177. 
(Ord. No. 2005-66, § 1, 8-22-05; Ord. No. 2016-25, § I, 5-9-16)  
Sec. 74-177. - Created. 
At the direction of the city commission, the Friends of Quinta Mazatlan, Inc., a Texas non-profit corporation, was created and filed with the Texas Secretary of State's Office. 
(Ord. No. 2005-66, § 1, 8-22-05; Ord. No. 2016-25, § I, 5-9-16)  
Sec. 74-178. - Composition; appointment, terms, etc. 
(a) The advisory board shall not be less than seven and not more than 14. Friends of Quinta Mazatlan, Inc., may recruit and recommend appointments to the board of commissioners. The mayor and each commissioner shall make two appointments to the board as otherwise provided under chapter 2, article III of this Code. 
(b) The provisions of chapter 2 article III Boards, Committees and Commissions shall be applicable to Friends of Quinta Mazatlan, Inc. and such board shall be designated as a board under section 2-76. 
(Ord. No. 2005-66, § 1, 8-22-05; Ord. No. 2010-16, § I, 3-8-10; Ord. No. 2016-25, § I, 5-9-16)  
Sec. 74-179. - Ex-officio members. 
The board of commissioners may designate such officer or commissioner of the city as it sees fit to serve as an ex officio member of the advisory board, without voting privilege, which shall act in an advisory capacity only. The McAllen Convention Center Director and the Quinta Mazatlan Manager shall also be ex-officio members of the advisory board, without voting privilege. 
(Ord. No. 2005-66, § 1, 8-22-05; Ord. No. 2016-25, § I, 5-9-16)  
Sec. 74-180. - Special meetings. 
The Quinta Mazatlan Manager or chairman of the advisory board shall have the right to call such special meetings of the advisory board as may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2005-66, § 1, 8-22-05)  
Sec. 74-181. - Quorum. 
A simple (half plus one) majority of the current members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business of any meeting of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2005-66, § 1, 8-22-05)  
Sec. 74-182. - General duties. 
The advisory board shall work in close cooperation with the Quinta Mazatlan Manager and shall keep informed as to all aspects of Quinta's mission as follows: 
(1)  Provision of opportunities for recreational and environmental learning activities that will promote an appreciation of birds and the natural environment. 
(2)  Encouragement of wildlife habitat stewardship and restoration. 
(3)  Demonstration of the benefits of nature tourism. 
(4)  Provide a meeting and special event venue for the city. 
The advisory board shall work in close cooperation with the Quinta Mazatlan Manager and shall keep informed as to all aspects of Quinta's operations, including, but not limited to, management, regulations, rules, purposes, maintenance, policies and ordinances established by the board of commissioners. It shall, from time to time, transmit information, reports, suggestions, recommendations and advice to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2005-66, § 1, 8-22-05)  
Secs. 74-183—74-200. - Reserved.  
Chapter 78 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Vehicles used in vending, § 102-153; requirement for conditional use for produce stands, § 138-118. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Outdoor display and sale of merchandise prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to display and sell any new or used goods or materials, including farm products or agricultural products in their natural state, outdoors on any open or unimproved lot or parcel or on any open area of a lot or parcel with a structure unless excepted or permitted by this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 19-21; Ord. No. 1998-82, § 1, 8-24-98)  
Sec. 78-2. - Exceptions. 
The outdoor display and sale of merchandise on an open or unimproved lot or open area of a lot or parcel with a structure is only allowed in the following situations: 
(1)  On the premises or a lot or parcel in which a retail business is operated in a structure and where the display or sale of merchandise is related to the general operations of such business. The outdoor display and sale of merchandise shall not result in an elimination, temporarily or permanently, of the number of off-street parking ordinance. Such structure must comply with all building requirements and other requirements mandated by this Code. 
(2)  Temporary seasonal display and sales of merchandise, to-wit: 
a.  Fall pumpkins; 
b.  Christmas trees; 
c.  Easter confetti eggs (cascarones); 
d.  Flowers and floral bouquets. 
Except for subsection 2(d), such display or sale shall be limited to six weeks and the seller must apply for and receive a permit issued under the provision of this article. 
(3)  For subsection (2)(d) hereinabove, the display or sale shall be limited to fourteen days before certain holidays, namely: 
a.  Mother's Day (being the second Sunday in May); 
b.  Father's Day (being the third Sunday in June); 
c.  Valentine's Day (being the fourteenth calendar day of February). 
The seller still must apply for and receive a permit issued under the provision of this article. 
(4)  The display or sale of agricultural products on the site from which those products were actually harvested or at a farmers' market location for which a conditional use permit has been obtained and maintained under this Code. 
(5)  The display and sale of merchandise related to a garage sale provided that the display is limited to the address location and duration of the garage sale permit otherwise issued under the provisions of this Code. 
(6)  The display and sale of merchandise at a flea market location for which a conditional use permit has been obtained and maintained under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1998-82, § 2, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 2019-38, § I, 7-8-19)  
Sec. 78-3. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit required by this section 78-2 subsections (2) and (3), shall file a written application, with the city planning director at least ten days prior to the beginning date of the contemplated display or sale of goods. Such application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Full name, address and location of the principal office or place of business of the applicant, and if the applicant is a partnership or firm or joint venture, the full names and addresses of the authorized officers signing the application therefor. If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall state the state or county of the location and the names and addresses of its authorized officers. 
(2)  The location of the open air display and sale, including the street address and lot or block number thereof. If the applicant is not the owner of such location, then the applicant shall also provide the lease, license or other evidence of permission of the owner to occupy the premises for the purposes of the application. 
(3)  If the applicant also requires a license for itinerant vendors under the provisions of article II hereof, then the requirements for application for itinerant vendors may be merged with the application for an open-air permit and the same may be issued by either the city secretary or city planning department under the procedures as promulgated by the city manager therefor. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued except under the following conditions: 
(1)  The location of the premises for which a permit is granted shall be in the proper zoned district for such type of commercial activity. 
(2)  The location shall contain an authorized curb cut for access from a public street. 
(3)  The location shall have sufficient paved parking for the purposes of the activity on the premises. 
(4)  The premises shall have access to permanent restroom facilities on-site. 
(5)  The premises shall have access to on-site garbage and trash dumpster provided by the city or other licensed garbage and trash collection entity under the city regulations. 
(6)  The maximum time for which a permit may be issued shall be for a period not to exceed six weeks. 
(7)  The applicant shall pay an application fee of $100.00 for the purposes of covering the administrative costs for processing such application. 
(8)  The premises shall comply with fire department requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1998-82, § 2, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 1999-38, § 1, 4-12-99; Ord. No. 2016-58, § IX, 9-26-16)  
Sec. 78-4. - Planning director to issue permit. 
The planning director or his/her designee, shall issue to any applicant applying therefor, who has complied with all the requirements of this article, a permit authorizing the open-air displaying and sale of goods within the city. Such permit is not transferable and shall only be applicable to the person or entity applying and receiving such permit. 
(Ord. No. 1998-82, § 2, 8-24-98)  
Sec. 78-5. - Display of permit required. 
Such permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be prominently displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where the open-air permitted activity is authorized and shall remain so displayed so long as any goods or merchandise are displayed and sold under the authority of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 1998-82, § 2, 8-24-98)  
Sec. 78-6. - Additional license required. 
The granting of a permit as provided for in this division shall not excuse any person from applying for and receiving any other license or permit required by the City of McAllen or State of Texas or any other regulatory authority having jurisdiction therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1998-82, § 2, 8-24-98)  
Sec. 78-7. - Appeal of a decision for failure to issue a license. 
(a)  Provided that all the information is furnished by the applicant, the planning director or his or her designee shall issue a permit or deny the issuance of a permit within ten business days after the date of filing an application in compliance with the requirements therefor. Should the director of planning refuse to issue the permit, the director of planning shall issue the reasons for such refusal. 
(b)  Any applicant who has been refused a permit by the planning director, shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal to the city manager's officer's officer within ten business days from the date of the receipt of the denial of the permit by the planning director. The city manager shall issue a decision within ten business days from the date on appeal as perfected by the applicant. The city manager shall issue a decision in writing as to whether or not the permit should be issued or the decision of the planning director should be upheld and shall give the reasons therefor. Such notice of the decision of the city manager shall be mailed to the applicant within five business days after the decision of the city manager is established. The city manager is authorized and directed to establish procedures relating to the consideration of the denial of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1998-82, § 2, 8-24-98)  
Secs. 78-8—78-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ITINERANT VENDORS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 78-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Itinerant vendor means and includes and shall be construed to mean and include all persons, firms and corporations, as well as their agents and employees, who engage in the temporary or transient business in the city of exposing or offering to expose plates or films to make negatives for the making of pictures or photographs, or who engage in the temporary or transient business in the city of selling or offering for sale any goods or merchandise, or exhibiting for sale or exhibiting goods or merchandise for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof, or who, for the purpose of carrying on such business or conducting such exhibits thereof, either hire, rent, lease or occupy any room or space in any building, structure, other enclosure, vacant lot or any other property whatever in the city, in, through, or from which any goods or merchandise may be sold, offered for sale, exhibited for sale or exhibited for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof. The term "itinerant vendor," as defined in this section, shall not include or be construed to include any person engaged in interstate commerce nor any person upon whom the provisions of this article would impose a direct and unlawful burden on interstate commerce. 
Temporary means and shall be construed to mean any business transacted or conducted in the city for which firm arrangements have not been made for the hire, rental or lease of premises in or upon which such business is to be operated or conducted for a period of at least 120 days. 
Transient means any such business of any itinerant vendor as may be operated or conducted by persons, firms or corporations, or by their agents or employees, who reside away from the city or who have fixed places of business in places other than the city, or who move stocks of goods or merchandise or samples thereof into the city with the purpose or intention of removing them or the unsold portion thereof away from the city before the expiration of 120 days. 
(Code 1966, § 22-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 78-27. - Exemptions from article. 
This article is not and shall not be held to be applicable to: 
(1)  Ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods or merchandise to parties engaged in the business of buying and selling and dealing in goods or merchandise. 
(2)  Vendors of farm produce, poultry, stock, or agricultural products in their natural state. 
(3)  Sales of goods or merchandise donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose. 
(Code 1966, § 22-12)  
Sec. 78-28. - Enforcement of article. 
The duly constituted authorities of the city, including the police department, city secretary and others having the duty of enforcing the ordinances of the city, shall enforce the provisions of this article and allow no itinerant vendor to conduct his business without full compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 22-13)  
Secs. 78-29—78-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
Sec. 78-41. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor, or for any person as agent, employee or servant of any itinerant vendor, to sell, or offer or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof, any goods, wares, merchandise, or other personal property in the city, without having an unexpired license issued pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1966, § 22-19)  
Sec. 78-42. - Application. 
Any person desiring a license required by this division shall file a written application, verified by affidavit as to the truthfulness of its contents, with the city secretary at least ten days prior to the beginning date of the contemplated sale or exhibit to be held in the city. Such application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full name, address and location of the principal office or place of business of the applicant and, if the applicant is a partnership, firm or joint adventure, the full names and addresses of all members thereof, and if a corporation, the state or county chartering it and the names and addresses of its officers. 
(2)  The kind and character of goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property to be sold or offered or exhibited for sale or exhibited for the purpose of taking orders for sale in the city. 
(3)  In cases where such business is not to be conducted by the applicant in person, the name and legal relationship to the applicant of the person who is to be present in the city in charge and control of such business. 
(4)  The location and description of the premises or space in or upon which such transient or temporary business is proposed to be conducted, the ownership of such premises, and the terms of any parole arrangement that may have been made for the use of such premises. If a written lease of such premises has been made, the application shall so state and a copy of such written lease, verified by affidavit as to the truth of its contents, shall be filed with the application. 
(5)  If the applicant is a corporation, it shall file with its application a certified copy of its charter, and if it is not incorporated under the laws of this state, a certified copy of its present permit to do business in the state shall accompany the application. 
(Code 1966, § 22-20)  
Sec. 78-43. - Bond required of applicant. 
Each applicant for a license under this division shall furnish and deliver to the city secretary, prior to issuance of the license, a bond in the amount of $2,000.00, with the itinerant vendor in whose behalf such application is made as principal and two or more good and sufficient individual sureties satisfactory to the city secretary, such sureties to be residents of this county, or one corporate surety which shall have authorized agents in this county. Such bond shall be payable at McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, to the mayor of the city, and his successors in office for the benefit of any person legally entitled to recover thereon, and conditioned that the parties thereto will pay all damages to any person caused by or arising from or growing out of any fraudulent or wrongful or illegal act of such itinerant vendor in the conduct of such business in the city. Such bond shall provide that any person for whose benefit the bond is made may sue thereon in his own right without joining the mayor or the city, but successive recoveries may be had thereon to the full extent of the amount therein named and prescribed in this section, and that it shall remain in full force and effect for the entire duration of the license to secure which it is furnished, plus any renewals thereof, and for two years thereafter. 
(Code 1966, § 22-21)  
Sec. 78-44. - Fee. 
The fee for a license required by this division shall be $100.00. The fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the license. Such fee shall be compensated to the city for the services required of it in connection with such license and to enable the city to partially defray the expense of enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 22-22; Ord. No. 2002-57, § 1, 9-11-02)  
Sec. 78-45. - Issuance. 
The city secretary shall issue to any itinerant vendor applying therefor, who has complied with all the requirements of this division, a license authorizing such applicant, as an itinerant vendor, to sell, offer for sale, or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof, in the city, his goods or merchandise. 
(Code 1966, § 22-23)  
Sec. 78-46. - Not transferable; authorizes only one person to conduct business. 
The license provided for in this division shall not be transferable nor give authority to more than one person to conduct a business as an itinerant vendor, but any person having obtained such license may have the assistance of one or more persons in conducting such business. 
(Code 1966, § 22-24)  
Sec. 78-47. - Term. 
A license issued under this division shall continue in force so long as the sale or exhibit authorized thereby is continuously held in the city, or until the expiration date thereof, but in no event shall it continue more than 120 days from its issuance. 
(Code 1966, § 22-25)  
Sec. 78-48. - Display. 
A license issued under this division shall be prominently displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where the sale or exhibit authorized thereby is being conducted and shall remain so displayed so long as any goods or merchandise are being so sold or exhibited. 
(Code 1966, § 22-26)  
Chapter 82 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-196 et seq.; smoking prohibited in certain public places, § 54-122. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 82-1—82-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RETIREMENT SYSTEMS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 82-26—82-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Texas municipal retirement system, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 82-36. - Election to participate. 
(a)  The board of commissioners hereby exercises its option and elects that the city and all of the employees of all the departments of the city, except members of the fire department eligible for membership in the city firemen's relief and retirement fund, participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System, and orders that the city retirement system be merged into the Texas Municipal Retirement System pursuant to the "Merger Agreement" hereinafter. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the exception of the fire department from the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the board of commissioners may, by ordinance, when it deems it in the best interest of the city, include any personnel of the fire department under the Texas Municipal Retirement System when such personnel do not otherwise qualify for the firefighters' relief and retirement fund. The ordinance providing for the addition of any members of the fire department to the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall be filed in the individual's personnel jacket, and the city manager is hereby directed and authorized to give notice of such inclusion to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. Such ordinance shall not be amendatory of the Code of Ordinances, but shall be otherwise in full force and effect. 
(Code 1966, § 23-11; Ord. No. 1994-91, § I, 12-19-94; Ord. No. 1998-39, § I, 3-26-98)  
Sec. 82-37. - Notice to board of trustees. 
The city manager is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the city departments described in this division participate in such system. 
(Code 1966, § 23-12)  
Sec. 82-38. - Employees included. 
(a)  Each person who is a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System by reason of his/her employment by the city prior to January 1, 1995, shall continue as a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a condition of his/her continued employment by a participating department. 
(b)  Persons who are participating members of the city retirement system (hereinafter sometimes called "local plan") at the time the local plan is merged into the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall become members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System at that date, and shall continue participating in the Texas Municipal Retirement System in accordance with the terms of the merger agreement. 
(c)  Any person who became an employee of the city on or after January 1, 1995 and prior to the 1st day of May, 1998, but who was not eligible for membership in the city retirement system or in the city firemen's relief and retirement fund, shall become a member of Texas Municipal Retirement System on the latter date, and shall be allowed "prior service credit" as defined in V.T.C.A., § 853.101, Government Code, that is 100 percent of the "base credit" of such member as defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.105. 
(d)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the 1st day of May, 1998 shall become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a condition of employment. 
(Code 1966, § 23-13; Ord. No. 1994-91, § II, 12-19-94; Ord. No. 1997-28, § I, 4-15-97; Ord. No. 1998-39, § II, 3-26-98)  
Sec. 82-39. - Addition or discontinuance of departments or employees. 
The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to the Texas Municipal Retirement System, but shall never discontinue as to any participants. 
(Code 1966, § 23-14)  
Sec. 82-40. - Rate of deposit; maximum earnings subject to contribution. 
(a)  That all employees of the City of McAllen, who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement system shall make deposits to the system at the rate of seven percent of their individual earnings. 
(b)  Effective date. Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system, this contribution rate shall be and become effective on the 1st day of October, 2009. 
(Code 1966, § 23-15; Ord. No. 2004-95, § 1, 12-13-04; Ord. No. 2009-38, § I, 7-27-09)  
Sec. 82-41. - Remittance to board of trustees; certification of prior service, etc. 
The director of finance is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by such board under the provisions of chapter 75, Acts of the 50th Legislature of the State of Texas, as amended, and the director of finance is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city the prior service rendered to the city by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of the city under the provisions of chapter 75, Acts of the Regular Session, 50th Legislature, as amended, or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Code 1966, § 23-16)  
Sec. 82-42. - Increased municipal contributions to current service annuity reserve at retirement of employees. 
Effective January 1, 1973, for each month of current service thereafter rendered by each of its employees who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his retirement a sum that is 200 percent of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment; and such sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality current service accumulation fund. 
(Code 1966, § 23-17)  
Sec. 82-43. - Antecedent service credit and special prior service credit. 
(a)  Each person who is an employee of the city on December 31, 1972, and who is at that date a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall be allowed and, upon the terms and conditions prescribed by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq., as amended, is hereby granted, effective on the date set out above, antecedent service credit (as that term is defined in such act) calculated on the following basis: Fifty percent of the sum of the current service deposits actually made by such person with the Texas Municipal Retirement System during each month of current service performed for this city prior to December 31, 1971 (together with compound interest allowed by the system on such deposits to such date); plus 50 percent of the sum of the current service deposits actually made by such person during each month of current service performed for this city prior to December 31, 1972 (together with compound interest allowed by the system on such deposits to the date last abovementioned). 
(b)  Each person who is an employee of the city on December 31, 1972, and who at such date is a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System and who holds in such system an effective prior service certificate granted by reason of service performed for this city prior to its participation in such system, shall be allowed and is hereby granted (upon the terms and conditions prescribed by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq.) a special prior service credit in an amount equivalent to the accumulation at interest, as provided in such act, of a series of monthly payments of five percent of the member's average prior service compensation for the number of months of prior service certified to in such member's prior service certificate. The special prior service credit provided for in this section shall be in addition to the prior service credit heretofore allowed such member. 
(c)  Any person who was employed by the city prior to December 31, 1972, whose membership in the Texas Municipal Retirement System by reason of such service has not terminated, and who on such date is absent from service in the employment of the city, shall be entitled to antecedent service credit and to special prior service credit in the amount he would have been allowed under subsections (a) and (b) of this section had he been in active service on such date, provided such person again becomes an employee of the city before termination of his membership in the Texas Municipal Retirement System and within five years from December 31, 1972, and provided such person thereupon continues as an employee of a participating department of the city for a period of five consecutive years. 
(Code 1966, § 23-18)  
Sec. 82-44. - Authorization of updated service credits. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.403 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who has current service credit or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least 36 months of credited service with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of said title) in an amount that is 100 percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of said title). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.601 of said title, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, and who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said section 853.601. 
(c)  In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of said title, the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(d)  Effective date. Subject to approval by the Board of Trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the updated service credits granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of January, 2016. 
(Code 1966, § 23-20; Ord. No. 2002-83, § 1, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 2007-101, § 1, 12-10-07; Ord. No. 2009-61, § 1, 9-28-09; Ord. No. 2009-61, § 1, 9-28-09; Ord. No. 2012-95, 12-10-12; Ord. No. 2012-95, 12-10-12; Ord. No. 2015-85, 9-28-15)  
Sec. 82-45. - Vesting rights. 
(a)  An employee of the city who is a member of the system may terminate employment and remain eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity at any time after that member attains an applicable age and service requirement, if that member has at least ten years of credited service performed for one or more municipalities that have authorized eligibility under Section 854.202(c) of the Act or are subject to Section 854.102(e) of the Act. 
(b)  An employee of the city who is a member of the system may retire and receive a service retirement annuity if that member is at least 60 years old and has at least ten years of creditable service performed for one or more municipalities that either have authorized eligibility under this subsection or are subject to Section 854.102(e) of this subtitle. 
(c)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity, if the member has at least 25 years of credited service in that system performed for one or more municipalities that have participation dates after August 31, 1987, or have adopted a like provision under Section 854.202(f) of the TMRS Act. 
(d)  If a member, to whom subsection (b) of Section 854.204 of the TMRS Act is applicable, shall die before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves surviving a lawful spouse, whom the member has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's accumulated contributions in the event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may, by written notice filed with the system, elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with the system subject to the terms and conditions of said Section 854.204(b). If the accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been payable had the member lived and retired at that date under a joint and survivor annuity (Option 1) payable during the lifetime of the member and continuing thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse. 
(e)  At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to whom subsection (b) applies may, upon written application filed with the system, receive payment of the accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits otherwise payable under this section. In the event such a surviving spouse shall die before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse. 
(f)  An employee of this city who is a member of the system and who performed service for this city prior to September 1, 1987 (for which service that employee did not receive credit with the system because the employee was not at the time a member of the system due to his or her age at the date of his or her employment) is hereby granted service credit with the system for all of such service (performed after the date of his or her latest employment by the city) that is prior to September 1, 1987, for which the employee has not previously received credit with the system, pursuant to Section 852.105 of the Act. 
(g)  The rights, credits, and benefits hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this ordinance pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(Code 1966, § 23-21; Ord. No. 1998-110, § 1, 11-9-98)  
Sec. 82-46. - Disability annuity. 
(a)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a "standard occupational disability annuity" under Section 854.408 of the TMRS Act or an "optional occupational disability retirement annuity" under Section 854.410 of the TMRS Act upon making application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the board of trustees of the system, provided that the system's medical board has certified to said board of trustees: (1) that the member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties of the member's employment; (2) that the disability is likely to be permanent; and (3) that the member should be retired. Any annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of Section 854.409 of the TMRS Act. 
(b)  The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in section (a) above are in lieu of the disability program heretofore provided for under Sections 854.301 to 854.308 of the TMRS Act. 
(Code 1966, § 23-22; Ord. No. 1998-110, § 2, 11-9-98)  
Sec. 82-47. - Agreement merging the City of McAllen Retirement System into Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(a)  An agreement merging the "City of McAllen Retirement System" heretofore established under division 4 of this article II, into the Texas Municipal Retirement System, under substantially the terms and conditions contained in the "merger agreement" set out below, is hereby authorized and approved, and the mayor is authorized to execute the agreement on behalf of the city, and the city secretary is authorized to attest the execution of an agreement reading substantially as follows: 
MERGER AGREEMENT 
This Agreement is made by and between the City of McAllen, Texas (hereinafter "city") and the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
WITNESSETH: 
1.  The "City of McAllen Retirement System" heretofore established by Ordinance No. 1995-2, as amended, (hereinafter referred to as the "Local Plan") shall be and become merged into the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "State System") pursuant to Subtitle G, Title 8, Government Code of Texas (hereinafter the "TMRS Act"), upon the terms and conditions set out in this agreement. Such merger shall be effective at 12:00 midnight on the 30th day of April, 1998, which date and time is hereinafter referred to as the "Effective Date of Merger." 
2.  The merger of the Local Plan into the State System is intended as a replacement and continuation of retirement and related benefits for participants of the Local Plan,a nd there shall be no gap or lapse in time or effect between the coverage under the Local Plan and coverage under the State System. 
3.  The City shall continue as a participating municipality of the State System after the effective date of merger, and all of its departments, with the exception of the Fire Department as to employees eligible to participate in the McAllen Firemen's Relief and Retirement Fund, shall be participating departments in the State System. 
4.  All persons who are participants in the Local Plan at the effective date of merger shall become members of the State System at that time and date, and shall be considered as "employee" of the City. Except as specifically modified by the express terms of this agreement, the rights and obligations of Local Plan participants who become members of the State System pursuant to this agreement shall be governed by the provisions of the TMRS Act. 
5.  Prior to the Effective Date of Merger, the City shall cause the appropriate officials administering the Local Plan to convert the assets of the Local Plan into cash, and the proceeds shall be delivered to the Director of the State System to be deposited to the individual accounts of Local Plan participants becoming members of the State System, and to the account of the City in the System, as hereinbelow provided. 
6.  (a) 
The City shall prepare and deliver to the System a certified list of the names and Social Security numbers of all persons who at the Effective Date of Merger are participants in the Local Plan, along with the amount of accumulated deposits standing to the credit of their respective individual accounts in the Local Plan at that date, and the number of months during which the person was employed by the City and participated in the Local Plan prior to the Effective Date of Merger. Upon receipt of such certified list, and delivery to it of the Local Plan assets, the State System shall establish a separate individual account in the Employee Saving Fund, and shall deposit therein the sum equal to his/her accumulated deposits in the Local Plan. Such accounts shall thereafter constitute the member's individual account in the State System under Section 855.306 of the TMRS Act. 
(b)  As of December 31, 1998, interest shall be allowed by the State System on the beginning (date of transfer) balance of each member account established pursuant to paragraph (a), above, for the period intervening between date of transfer and the end of the year at the rate allowed on the individual accounts of non-merger members of the State System for the year 1998; for each year thereafter, interest shall be allowed and credited on such individual accounts in the manner and at the same rates as may be allowed on the individual accounts of non-merger members. 
(c)  Local Plan participants who become members of the State System by virtue of this agreement, shall not be allowed "prior service credit" by reason of service to the City prior to the Effective Date of merger, but each month of service performed by such person for the City while he/she was a participant in the Local Plan shall be considered and treated as "creditable current service" with like effect as if the service had been performed had the person been a member of the State system at the time of its performance; and the amount transferred to the individual's account established pursuant to paragraph (b), above, shall be included in calculating the current service annuity of a member pursuant to section 854.002 of the TMRS Act, along with other deposits made to that account by reason of service after the Effective Date of Merger. 
(d)  Service rendered to the City subsequent to the Effective Date of Merger by those persons becoming members of the State System under this agreement shall constitute current service as defined by the TMRS Act, and those members shall make the same contributions as are required of other persons becoming members by reason of employment by the City in a participating department after the Effective Date of Merger. 
7.  Assets of the Local Plan remaining after the transfer required to establish individual accounts for participants under paragraph 6.(a) above, shall be transferred by the City to the System, and shall be deposited in the City's account in the Municipality Accumulation Fund, and shall be used for all obligations of the City chargeable to such account. 
8.  (a) 
Words and terms defined in the TMRS Act when used in this agreement shall have the statutory meaning, unless the context clearly indicates another meaning. 
(b)  The rights and obligations of persons who become members of the State System by virtue of this agreement and/or the participation of the City, including: eligibility for service retirement, and the standard service retirement benefit of members so retiring; optional benefits, and the rights of vesting and of deferred retirement; eligibility for disability retirement and the standard benefits payable therefor; death benefits payable by reason of death of members before or after retirement; termination of membership, and rights and consequences of withdrawal of member deposits, shall be governed by the provisions of the TMRS Act, except as expressly modified by this Agreement. It is further understood and agreed that except as to the vested right of members of the State System in the accumulated deposits in their individual accounts, the State of Texas retains the right and power to amend the laws pertaining to the State System and to the benefits payable under such laws, and nothing in this agreement is intended in derogation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1998-39, § III, 3-26-98)  
Sec. 82-48. - Authorization of restricted prior service credit. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this City shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities described in said Section 853.305 provided that (1) the person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for that service, and (2) the service meets the requirements of said Section 853.305. 
(b)  The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credit. 
(c)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action under said Section 853.305 while still an employee of this City. 
(Ord. No. 1999-61, § 1, 6-28-99) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1999-61, § 1, adopted June 28, 1999, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 82-48 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 82-49. - Credited service previously canceled. 
Pursuant to § 853.003 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended, the City of McAllen hereby elects to allow any member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who is an employee of this city on the 27th day of December, 2007, who has terminated a previous membership in said system by withdrawal of deposits while absent from service, but who has at least 24 months of credit service as an employee of this city since resuming membership to deposit with the system in a lump sum the amount withdrawn, plus a withdrawal charge of five percent of such amount for each year from date of such withdrawal to date of redeposit, and thereupon such member shall be allowed credit for all service to which the member had been entitled at date of termination of earlier membership, with like effect as if all such service had been rendered as an employee of this city, whether so rendered or not. The city agrees to underwrite and hereby assumes the obligations arising out of the granting of such credits, and agrees that all such obligations and reserves required to provide such credits shall be charged to this city's account in the municipality accumulation fund. The five percent per annum withdrawal charge paid by the member shall be deposited to the credit of the city's account in such municipality accumulation fund; and the deposits of the amount previously withdrawn by the member shall be credited to his or her individual account in the employees' savings fund of the system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-101, § 2, 12-10-07)  
Sec. 82-50. - "Twenty-year any age" retirement eligibility. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of § 854.202(g) of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended, as amended, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the "TMRS Act," the City of McAllen, Texas, adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein referred to as the "system"): 
(b)  Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least 20 years of credited service in the system performed for one or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under Section 854.202(g) of the TMRS Act. 
(c)  Prior to adopting this section, the governing body of the city has: 
(1)  Prepared an actuarial analysis of member retirement annuities at 20 years of service; and 
(2)  Held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code ch. 551. 
(d)  The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(e)  Effective date. Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the 20-year any age service retirement granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of October 2009. 
(Ord. No. 2009-61, § 1, 9-28-09)  
Secs. 82-51—82-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FIREFIGHTERS' RELIEF AND RETIREMENT FUND 
 
Sec. 82-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Member means a certified firefighter or dispatcher employee of the fire department as such term is defined under the state local firefighters' retirement act and shall include all participants in the city firefighters' retirement fund. 
(Code 1966, § 23-53; Ord. No. 1997-28, § II, 4-15-97) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 82-57. - State law adopted. 
The city hereby adopts and makes applicable to the fire department and the firefighters of the city the provisions of the state local firefighters' retirement act codified as V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq. and such act and retirement fund is extended to all members of the fire department as authorized under the provisions of the act. The city automatically, without further action, adopts any general amendments to the act upon their enactment except those which specifically require additional action of the board of commissioners relating thereto. 
(Code 1966, § 23-54)  
Sec. 82-58. - Deductions from salaries of paid members. 
Effective the first full pay period after April 13, 1998, the city shall deduct an amount equal to ten percent from the monthly salary or compensation of each participating fully paid member firefighter of the firefighters' relief and retirement fund. 
(Code 1966, § 23-55; Ord. No. 1998-42, § I, 4-13-98) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243e, § 10A-2.  
Sec. 82-59. - Contribution by city. 
Effective on the first full pay period after October 1st, 2001, the city shall contribute an amount equal to 11 percent of the monthly salary or compensation of each participating fully paid member firefighter to the firefighters' relief and retirement fund. 
(Code 1966, § 23-57; Ord. No. 1998-42, § I, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 2001-65, § 1, 9-24-01)  
Sec. 82-60. - Deductions, payments and contributions to become part of fund. 
Money deducted from salaries or compensation as provided for in this division and the payments and contributions provided for by this division shall become and form a part of the firefighters' relief and retirement fund of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 23-59) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243e, § 10A(d).  
Sec. 82-61. - Appropriations for city's contributions. 
The sum necessary to make the annual contributions to the fund required by the city under this division is hereby appropriated and set aside out of the unappropriated surplus in the general fund of the city, and there is also appropriated and set aside from the next succeeding tax levy or levies a sum sufficient to make such annual payment, which sum shall be levied, assessed and collected from the ad valorem tax levy annually. 
(Code 1966, § 23-60)  
Sec. 82-62. - Income tax deferral. 
The board of commissioners hereby authorizes and elects that the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq., as amended, are hereby adopted by the city for the purposes of permitting the contributions of the city firefighters to the city firefighters' pension fund to be deferred for the purposes of payment of federal income taxes under the provisions of section 401(a) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code. The city manager is hereby directed to execute any and all documents representing the board of commissioners' action under this section and is further authorized to take any and all actions to carry out the necessary requirements under the state pension law and the Internal Revenue Code to qualify the city firefighter's pension and retirement fund under the act for such purposes. 
(Code 1966, § 23-61)  
Secs. 82-63—82-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1998-39, § IV, adopted March 26, 1998, repealed §§ 82-66—82-80. Formerly, such sections pertained to city retirement system and derived from Ord. No. 1995-2, §§ 1—16, 1-19-95; Ord. No. 1996-37, § I, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 1997-28, § III, 4-15-97. 
 
Secs. 82-66—82-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FEDERAL OLD AGE AND SURVIVOR'S BENEFITS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 82-86. - Execution of agreements. 
(a)  The board of commissioners, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter into all necessary agreements with the state department of public welfare for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of applicable state and federal laws in securing federal old age and survivor's insurance benefits for city employees. 
(b)  The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the board of commissioners and of the city to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for and in behalf of the board of commissioners and the city. 
(c)  The mayor is authorized to act as the agent of the board of commissioners to execute any and all necessary contracts, agreements and instruments of every kind and character to bring about the desired result of including employees of the city performing services in part-time positions with respect only to positions not subject to the firefighters' relief and retirement fund or the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Code 1966, § 23-27)  
Sec. 82-87. - Duties of director of finance. 
The director of finance is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections, payments and reports, as required by the state department of public welfare in connection with the federal old age and survivor's insurance program. 
(Code 1966, § 23-28)  
Sec. 82-88. - Fund established. 
A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the state and federal laws relating to the federal old age and survivor's insurance program, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as the City of McAllen Social Security Fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. 
(Code 1966, § 23-29) 
Charter reference— City depository, art. 7, § 7.  
Secs. 82-89—82-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SOCIAL SECURITY FOR FIREFIGHTERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 50-26 et seq. 
 
Sec. 82-101. - Execution of agreements. 
The city manager is hereby authorized, on behalf of the city, to execute and enter into all necessary or supplementary or amendatory agreements with the state department of public welfare for the purpose of extending to and including social security coverage for all eligible firefighters of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 23-40)  
Sec. 82-102. - Duties of director of finance. 
The director of finance is hereby directed to make assessments, collections, payments and reports as may be required by the state department of public welfare to provide social security coverage for all eligible firefighters of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 23-41)  
Sec. 82-103. - Allocations to be part of social security fund. 
A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of providing social security coverage for all eligible firefighters of the city, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as a part of the city's social security fund established by section 82-88, which funds shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. 
(Code 1966, § 23-42) 
Charter reference— City depository, art. 7, § 7.  
Secs. 82-104—82-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CIVIL SERVICE FOR POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS 
 
Sec. 82-126. - Civil service commission. 
By virtue of the election held on November 7, 1989, in and for the city relating to the creation of the firefighters and police officers civil service, there is hereby established in the city a firefighters' and police officers' civil service commission in compliance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 143. Such civil service commission shall administer the civil service program for the fire and police departments in accordance with the provisions of such chapter 143, as such provisions are applicable to the city. The civil service commission shall be designated office space within the confines of city hall for the purpose of carrying out civil service business. The city personnel policies and procedures, insofar as they conflict with the provisions of such chapter 143, the rules and regulations as adopted by the civil service commission or the rules and regulations as promulgated by the fire and police departments, to the extent that such rules and regulations are in conflict, shall not be applicable to the fire and police department civil service employees. 
(Code 1966, § 23-65)  
Sec. 82-127. - Action by board of commissioners. 
The board of commissioners may from time to time by ordinance, provided however, without the necessity of publication in the Code of Ordinances, take necessary action as required under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 143 for appointment of department heads, approval of classifications of civil service employees, approval of appointments of positions immediately below department heads and approval of classifications according to pay in addition to base pay and other matters as required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 143. 
(Code 1966, § 23-66)  
Sec. 82-128. - Appointments to positions immediately below department heads. 
The department heads of the fire and police departments in the city may appoint persons to occupy any authorized position in the classification immediately below that of the chiefs (department heads) as provided in this section. In the police department, the total number of persons appointed to the classification immediately below that of the chief (department head) may not exceed three people, in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 143.014. In the fire department, the total number of persons appointed to the classification immediately below that of chief (department head) may not exceed one person, in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 143.014. The chiefs (department heads) are hereby directed to make such appointments on October 31, 1990, being the effective date of the civil service provisions for the city. The authority of any persons holding such positions prior to such date shall remain in full force and effect until that date. The chiefs making the respective appointments under this section are hereby directed to comply with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 143.014 to ensure that the persons so appointed meet the qualifications as prescribed therein. The effective date of this section shall be October 31, 1990. 
(Code 1966, § 23-67)  
Secs. 82-129—82-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFICER AND EMPLOYEE LIABILITY COVERAGE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-196 et seq. 
 
Sec. 82-151. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-35, § I, adopted June 11, 2018, repealed § 82-151, which pertained to Texas Municipal League Liability Pool and derived from the original Code.  
Secs. 82-152—82-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SEXUAL HARASSMENT 
 
Sec. 82-171. - Declared illegal; policy of city. 
(a)  Sexual harassment is illegal and against the policies of the city. 
(b)  The city is committed to courteous and considerate treatment of its employees at all times as an accepted standard of behavior. Consequently, all employees should be committed to a work atmosphere that is free of tension caused by demeaning or harassing conduct including animosity engendered by inappropriate religious, racial or sexual conduct or comments. 
(Ord. No. 1993-26, § I, 3-22-93)  
Sec. 82-172. - Types. 
Equal employment opportunity laws identify two basic types of unlawful sexual harassment as follows: 
(1)  Where submission to unwelcome sexual advances and other physical or verbal conduct is made a term or condition of an individual's employment, such as demanding that a subordinate accept a date with a supervisor in order for the subordinate to keep his/her job. 
(2)  Where such conduct interferes with an individual's work performance or creates an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment, such as telling offensive jokes and engaging in offensive behavior in the workplace. 
(Ord. No. 1993-26, § I, 3-22-93)  
Sec. 82-173. - Procedures authorized. 
A procedure for confidential investigations of any complaints of sexual harassment, protecting the identity of the complaining party, witnesses, and the individual alleged to have violated the city's sexual harassment policy, to the extent possible, is integral to a successful program. The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to establish standard operating procedures implementing a policy relating to the subject matter of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1993-26, § I, 3-22-93)  
Secs. 82-174—82-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DRUG-FREE WORK PLACE 
 
Sec. 82-180. - Unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing or use of a controlled substance prohibited; penalty for violation. 
The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing or use of a controlled substance is prohibited within all work places of the City of McAllen and any violation of this policy shall be considered as a violation of the Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual of the City of McAllen as it presently exists or as it may hereinafter be amended and any violation thereof may be punishable by written reprimand, demotion, suspension or termination from the City of McAllen taking into consideration the severity and all circumstances relating thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2003-19, § 1, 3-10-03)  
Sec. 82-181. - Departmental regulations; substance testing, etc. 
Each department head within the City of McAllen is directed to create rules and regulations applicable to that department regarding the implementation of substance testing for the presence of drugs and alcohol within their department. Each department head shall develop such rules and regulations and procedures as may be appropriate to ensure that persons employed in safety sensitive positions which have a special need to ensure that the presence of illegal drugs or alcohol, which might have an immediate impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the employee and/or the citizens of McAllen, are free from the effects of illegal drugs and/or alcohol. The development by the department head of the rules and regulations, as well as the designation of those positions subject to drug and alcohol testing, shall be done in conjunction with the city attorney and said policy and designation of the positions shall be approved by the city manager prior to implementation. Said rules and regulations shall contain a provision which provides that any employee found to be in violation of said policy shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination. Said rules and regulations shall also contain a provision that states that if any employee found to be in violation of said policy is not terminated, such decision shall be reviewed by the city manager to ensure compliance with the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-19, § 1, 3-10-03)  
Chapter 86 - SECONDHAND GOODS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 86-1—86-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PRECIOUS METALS AND JEWELRY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means an activity carried on for profit by any person who buys used or scrap jewelry, precious and semiprecious articles, monies or silverware. This term shall not include occasional purchases or sales made by a hobbyist, or activities regulated by the state pawnshop act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5069-51.01. 
City means and includes the City of McAllen and the area within its effective jurisdiction. 
Dealer means any person who buys used or scrap jewelry, precious and semiprecious articles, monies or silverware in the course of business, but shall not include persons regulated by the state pawnshop act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5069-51.01. 
Licensee means any person who files a written application, as provided in this article, and is granted a license, and includes, but is not limited to, a permittee. 
Money means a consideration which has a numismatic value. 
Precious or semiprecious article includes, but is not limited to, any article in the form of gold, silver, platinum, mineral or gem. 
Silverware means gold-, silver- or platinum-plated flatware. 
Temporary location means any location which has been hired, rented or leased for a period of less than 90 days, and upon or from which a business is or shall be conducted. 
Used or scrap jewelry means jewelry which was previously owned, and made from precious and semiprecious metal, minerals and/or gems, and includes, but is not limited to, watches, rings, pendants, chains, fobs, brooches, pins, necklaces and bracelets. 
(Code 1966, § 29½-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 86-27. - Required business records, activities. 
(a)  Every business licensee shall maintain an accurate record, log or inventory of all business transactions, containing therein the following data: 
(1)  The seller's name, address, license and/or social security number, and a brief physical description designating the seller's age, sex, birthdate and ethnicity; 
(2)  A concise and accurate description of the property bought including its serial numbers, if any, and/or weight and characteristics. 
(b)  The record, log or inventory required by this section shall be kept in an orderly fashion by the person responsible for its entries, and in a well bound book. The licensee shall provide such record, log or inventory for inspection by any authorized city agent or officer. 
(c)  The licensee shall keep all books, records, logs or inventories pertaining to such business for a minimum of one year. 
(d)  Any dealer who conducts business from a temporary location within the city shall deliver his books, records, logs or inventories to the city's chief of police within 24 hours of terminating business at such location. 
(e)  All dealers who buy used or scrap jewelry, precious or semiprecious articles, monies or silverware shall obtain a signed warranty from every seller that the seller has the right or authority to sell such articles, and such warranty shall be retained and recorded by the dealer. 
(f)  All used or scrap jewelry, precious or semiprecious articles, monies or silverware bought by dealers shall be kept in the condition purchased for a minimum of 72 hours from the date of purchase; provided, however, that the passage of this time period shall be tolled between the hours of 12:00 p.m. Saturday through 12:00 a.m. Monday of every calendar week. Such articles shall be made available to the inspection of any police officer or city agent. 
(Code 1966, § 29½-5)  
Sec. 86-28. - Prohibited activities; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who fails to comply with this article's requisites and/or mandates shall be deemed to have committed a prohibited activity. 
(b)  An applicant for a license under this article shall not intentionally or knowingly provide false information in the license application. 
(c)  A dealer shall not buy any of the items affected by this article from any individual who is not or does not reasonably appear to be 18 years of age or older; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply where the minor is either accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or presents a written statement by the minor's parent or legal guardian consenting to such sale. Such statement shall be sworn and attested to, and retained by the dealer. 
(d)  Any person who commits any prohibited activity under this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 29½-6)  
Sec. 86-29. - Appeal procedures. 
(a)  Any dealer aggrieved by an action or decision by the city's chief of police regarding any procedure contained in this article may file a written appeal therefrom with the city secretary, addressed to the city board of commissioners. Such appeal shall state with specificity all relevant details respecting the alleged problem(s) and shall request a hearing by the board. All such appeals shall be filed within 30 days from the date of the alleged problem's inception. 
(b)  Upon notification by the city secretary, the chief of police shall provide all relevant material together with a written memorandum summarizing the basis for the license's suspension, revocation or denial. 
(c)  The board of commissioners shall hold a hearing within 30 days of the filing of written appeal under this section, and shall review all relevant facts to determine whether to sustain or overrule the police chief's decision. The board may initiate such investigation as it, in its sole discretion, deems necessary. Any final decision shall be conclusive as to all parties. 
(Code 1966, § 29½-7)  
Secs. 86-30—86-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
Sec. 86-41. - Required; application. 
(a)  Any dealer who intends to engage in the business of buying used and/or scrap jewelry, precious and/or semiprecious articles, monies, silverware or any other item covered in this article shall file a written application for a license with the chief of police on a form to be provided by the city. 
(b)  The application for a license under this article shall contain spaces for the provision of the following data: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name. 
(2)  The full legal name(s) of all employee(s) who will be involved in the operation of the applicant's business. 
(3)  The name, style or designation of the business. 
(4)  The business address and, if different, mailing address and business telephone number(s). 
(5)  The hours and days of business. 
(6)  The name(s), residence address(es) and telephone number(s) of the business manager(s) and/or supervisor(s) principally in charge of such business. 
(7)  Whether the applicant(s), principal(s) or employee(s) has been found guilty of any criminal offense defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code title 7 (or its equivalent) by any court of competent jurisdiction; and, if so, the nature of such offense and penalty imposed. 
(8)  Whether the applicant(s), principal(s) or employee(s) is currently or will reasonably be a party of any civil or criminal investigation and/or litigation arising from sales and/or purchases of any goods or services; and, if so, the particulars of the pending or existing investigation and/or litigation. 
(9)  Whether the applicant(s), principal(s), or employee(s) is or has ever engaged in a business under an assumed name; and, if so, the name assumed and business conducted thereunder. 
(10)  Whether the applicant(s) has had an identical or similar business license revoked, suspended or denied by any state or local governmental agency or entity within the preceding five years. 
(c)  The application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A tendering of the licensing fee, as provided in this division. 
(2)  Where applicable, proof that an assumed name certificate has been filed with the county clerk. 
(3)  Where applicable, proof that the applicant is authorized to do business as a corporation in the state. 
(Code 1966, § 29½-2)  
Sec. 86-42. - Issuance; term. 
(a)  The chief of police shall issue a business license to the applicant within 48 hours of receipt of the application, provided: 
(1)  The license fee of $10.00 has been received, or, in the case of a check or bank draft, honored upon presentation. 
(2)  The business operation would comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations. 
(3)  The applicant(s), principal(s) and employee(s) have not been convicted of any offense defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code title 7 (or its equivalent) by a court of competent jurisdiction within the preceding ten years. 
(4)  The applicant has not had an identical or similar business license revoked, suspended or denied by any state or local governmental agency or entity within the preceding five years. 
(b)  The business license issued under this article shall be valid for a period of one year. Reissuance shall be achieved by submitting a written application to the chief of police at any time after the expiration of 11 months of the original application. 
(c)  If the applicant is conducting business from a temporary location and meets the requirements of this article, such applicant shall be issued a temporary business license within 48 hours of such application's receipt. Such license shall be valid for the period designated in the application submitted. 
(Code 1966, § 29½-3)  
Sec. 86-43. - Suspension, revocation or denial. 
If the chief of police deems it necessary to suspend, revoke or deny the issuance of a license under this article, a written statement to that effect shall be provided to the applicant within a reasonable period of time after receipt of the application. In such statement, the specific reasons for such action shall be provided, as well as notice of the appellate procedures available, as provided in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 29½-4)  
Secs. 86-44—86-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SALVAGE YARDS AND JUNKYARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
Sec. 86-66. - License required; application; term; revocation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or maintain any property within the city as a scrap or salvage yard or dumping ground, or for the wrecking or disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of wornout, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, stoves, refrigerators, or machinery of any kind, or any of the parts thereof, or for the accumulation of rubbish of any description, without first obtaining a license so to do from the city secretary. Written application for such license shall be filed with the city secretary, which application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant and a legal description of the property or premises upon which such business is to be conducted. The city secretary shall have the power either to grant or reject such application. If the application is granted, a license to operate such business shall be issued upon the payment of a fee of $5.00 per annum. Any license so issued shall expire on January 1 next succeeding the date of its issuance, but may be renewed from year to year in like manner as is provided for the original license. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall have the power to revoke a license issued under this section at any time for good cause, but only after notice has been given to the licensee of a hearing to be held not less than ten days after the service of such notice. 
(Code 1966, § 19-17)  
Sec. 86-67. - Maintenance of premises; fence. 
(a)  Any person granted a license as provided for in section 86-66 shall keep the premises used in the operation and maintenance of such business in a neat and orderly condition. The property and premises on which such business is conducted shall be enclosed by a tight board, brick, block or solid metal fence at least eight feet high and, if such fence is of boards, the boards shall be of a minimum width of four inches and shall not exceed one inch in spacing when erected. Such fence shall be kept in a neatly painted condition, and no scrap or salvage of any character, or parts or machinery of any kind, shall be allowed to remain outside, or extend over, such fence. The entrance to such enclosure shall be by an opening not to exceed 15 feet in width, and provided with gates in accordance with the fence specifications used for the enclosure. 
(b)  At the discretion of the board of commissioners, with the recommendation of the sanitarian, exception may be made to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section requiring the premises to be fenced, on one or more sides, where application is made to the city in writing and it is shown that the exception will not interfere with the purpose and intent of this section and it will be unduly burdensome on the owner unless the exception is granted. When application for such an exception is made, a public hearing before the board of commissioners will be set by the city secretary not less than 15 days or more than 20 days after the application is received. Notice of such hearing will be given at the expense of the applicant in a daily newspaper published in the city. When an exception is granted by the board of commissioners, it will be made of record in the minutes of the proceedings of the board at the time the exception is made. 
(Code 1966, § 19-18)  
Secs. 86-68—86-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GARAGE SALES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 
 
Sec. 86-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garage, estate or porch sale means a sale of used merchandise or personal property from any residence. 
Occupant means, jointly and severally, all those who occupy premises. For purposes of this article, there is only one "occupant" of any premises at any given time. 
(Code 1966, § 19-20(a); Ord. No. 2006-103, § 7, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1, 2-25-08; Ord. No. 2019-09, § I, 2-11-19) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 86-92. - Permit required; limitations; violation and penalties. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of a residence shall obtain a permit from the health and code enforcement department before conducting a garage, estate or porch sale the cost of which permit shall be $20.00. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of a residence wishing to conduct thereon a garage, estate or porch sale shall be limited to three permits in any calendar year, each to cover a period of time not to exceed three consecutive days. No permit shall be granted to the same owner or occupant within 30 days of the previous permit for such residence. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a residence to conduct thereon a garage or porch sale without having first obtained a permit as provided by this section. 
(d)  Non-profit organizations, including but not limited to churches, charitable organizations and schools may have events for the sale of used merchandise or personal property without a permit provided that the event is held entirely on the organization's private property and no more than three such events are held each calendar year. 
(e)  Anyone who violates this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 19-20(b)—(e); Ord. No. 1998-69, § 1, 7-27-98; Ord. No. 2003-12, § 1, 2-10-03; Ord. No. 2006-103, § 7, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1, 2-25-08; Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 2-13-12; Ord. No. 2016-58, § X, 9-26-16; Ord. No. 2016-67, § VI, 10-10-16; Ord. No. 2016-58, § X, 9-26-16; Ord. No. 2016-67, § VI, 10-10-16; Ord. No. 2019-09, § I, 2-11-19)  
Chapter 90 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; housing code adopted, § 22-241 et seq.; smoking prohibited in certain public places, § 54-122; utilities, ch. 106. 
State Law reference— Solid waste disposal, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section as follows; provided, that, to the extent that such definitions do not conflict with the defined or intended definitions in this chapter, the defined terms as provided for in the city zoning ordinance shall be used for the purposes of this chapter: 
Approved container means any dumpster or roll-off container being provided by the city or a permittee. Open-top roll-offs shall not be a substitute for bins or dumpsters unless approved by public works director or designee. 
Bin means a high density polyethylene (plastic) receptacle provided by the city for the deposit and collection of waste designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically for use primarily at residential units including, if applicable, multifamily units. 
Brush means hedge trimmings, tree limbs, branches and trimmings, plant and shrub trimmings, leaves, yard and grass cleanings and other similar items. 
Bulky waste means refuse which due to size, weight or other reason is not capable of collection by the standard garbage or trash collection vehicle normally utilized by the city to carry out that function, and includes but is not limited to stoves, tires, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture and other heavy or bulky waste materials except construction debris, hazardous waste, or household hazardous waste. 
Citizens' collection station means a facility established by the city for the convenience and exclusive use of city residents, but not commercial or industrial users or customers of private collection vehicles, and which may consist of one or more approved containers. 
Composting means a controlled process of degrading organic matter by microorganisms. 
Construction debris means waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations of any type of structure or building. 
Cubic yard means a unit of garbage or trash having a measurement of one yard (three linear feet) in width, one yard (three linear feet) in depth, and occupying one cubic yard of space, regardless of density or degree of compaction of such garbage or trash in place. 
Customer means any owner, occupant, tenant, itinerant vender licensee, or person otherwise in possession or control of any premises in the city, or their agents, on which any material regulated by this chapter, including garbage, trash, brush, and recyclables exist or are accumulated or from which such is removed or required to be removed pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
Disposal fee means the price charged for the disposal of waste at a landfill, incinerator or recycling facility; usually expressed in dollars per ton. 
Dumpster means a commercial type container provided by the city for the deposit of garbage, trash, and/or recyclables. 
Dumpster removal means the removal from the premises of the dumpster. 
Garbage or trash means, interchangeably, anything discarded; any accumulation of waste that results from the use, preparation, processing, consumption, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition of animal, vegetable, or other matter, or any refuse or rubbish, but does not include "recyclables," "bulky waste," "hazardous waste," "household hazardous wastes," "construction debris," dead animals, stable matter or "brush." 
Hazardous waste means any waste or combination of waste of a solid, liquid, contained gaseous, or semisolid form, which is identified by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or any state agency as hazardous, and which exceed the threshold limits set forth by any such regulatory agency, or which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may: (i) cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or (ii) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, those which are toxic, corrosive, flammable, irritants, strong sensitizes, or which generate pressure through decomposition, heat or other means; or any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article which is designated by the EPA or the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) as "hazardous." 
Household hazardous waste means discarded products normally used at residences that are discarded in municipal solid waste and that contain substances already regulated under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 as an industrial hazardous waste. 
Land clearing means the removal of trees, vegetation, soil or debris typically in the preparation of a tract of land for construction of structures or infrastructure. 
Multifamily means any residential unit other than a building on a single lot or parcel designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one family as a separate dwelling unit. 
Nonresidential unit means any unit or establishment within the corporate limits of the city intended to be used or occupied, or used or occupied, for other than residential purposes. 
Recyclables means waste materials which may be transformed into new products in such a manner that the original products may lose their identity, the specific makeup of which shall be periodically determined by the public works director, based upon market demands and state law. 
Residential unit means a dwelling within the corporate limits of the City of McAllen intended for residential occupancy or occupied by any person for residential purposes, but not hotels, motels, boarding houses or other similar transient occupancies, except to the extent that separate kitchen facilities are provided. 
Service means the picking up and removal of garbage or trash and recyclables, regardless of density of compaction in place. 
Sludge means any solid or semi-solid waste generated from a municipal wastewater treatment plant. 
Unit means each individual customer responsible for the payment of any fees or charges for any service rendered under this chapter. 
Waste means any substance or object whose producer or the person in possession of which discards, or intends to or is required to discard. 
Wet slop means waste in a liquid, semiliquid or liquescent form, such as, but not limited to sauces, broths, gravies, water used in a cooking process and grease. 
(Code 1966, § 16-1; Ord. No. 1996-57, § I, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 1997-96, § I, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2014-72, § I, 12-8-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide and establish a method or system of collecting and disposing of garbage or trash, recyclables, brush, and all waste originating in the city, to provide and establish reasonable rules and regulations pertaining thereto, and to establish reasonable, fair, uniform and equitable charges for the services of the city in collecting and removing garbage or trash, recyclables and brush all in order to protect the health and welfare of the citizens of the city and the general public. 
(Code 1966, § 16-2; Ord. No. 1996-57, § II, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 90-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating or found not complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 16-13; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Secs. 90-4—90-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-26. - Duty of city to collect and remove. 
(a)  Residential collection and removal of recyclables, garbage or trash shall be made two times each week, once for garbage or trash, once for recyclables, to be scheduled as determined by the public works director. The public works director may discontinue, on a case by case basis, residential recycling collection due to noncompliance as set forth in subsection 90-41(d), and may issue an additional trash container and appropriate charges. 
(b)  Garbage or trash in dumpsters shall be collected according to a schedule or on an as-needed basis as determined by the public works director. In no event shall collection be scheduled less than twice per week. Provided, however, a commercial account may utilize a trash compactor upon the approval of the public works director, in which case the approval shall also specify the required weekly pickups which in any case shall not be less than one. 
(Code 1966, § 16-8; Ord. No. 1994-37, § I, 6-13-94; Ord. No. 1996-57, § III, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2014-72, § I, 12-8-14)  
Sec. 90-27. - Certain persons to provide own facilities for removal of trees, etc. 
It shall be the responsibility of all tree surgery operators, commercial tree pruning and/or nursery persons or public utilities to provide their own equipment and personnel for removal and disposal of all accumulations created by their work and actions to an approved composting facility. Further, it shall be the responsibility of the premises owner to remove and dispose to an approved disposal composting facility all trees, limbs, trunks and stumps, and similar accumulations where it is not possible to reduce same to an acceptable size and length for city or permittee pick up as required by this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 16-9; Ord. No. 1996-57, § IV, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 90-28. - Removal of brush, soil and trash resulting from land clearing or yard levelling operations. 
Brush, soil and trash resulting from land clearing, yard leveling or similar operations shall be removed by the party responsible for such operations, and at his own expense. 
(Code 1966, § 16-10; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 90-29. - Removal of waste, debris and materials after construction or general cleanup operations. 
No debris or other materials, including, rocks, bricks, waste building materials, scraps, and no trash resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations or resulting from general cleanup of property, and no bulky waste will be removed by the city. Such materials shall be promptly deposited in a roll-off container by the customer and properly disposed of, unless public works director or designee determines that the use of a roll-off container is not necessary. Bulky waste shall be promptly collected and disposed of by customer at an approved landfill or recycling facility. 
(Code 1966, § 16-11; Ord. No. 1996-57, § V, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 90-30. - Removal of automobile bodies, bulky wastes, industrial wastes, etc. 
Discarded automobile bodies or parts thereof, all bulky wastes, and all industrial wastes resulting from manufacturing operations, canning plants, packing plants, fruit and/or vegetable sheds, cotton gins, slaughterhouses for animals or poultry, or fish houses must be properly disposed of by the customer. Disposal of the items referred to in this section shall be conducted under, and in compliance with, all applicable state and federal regulations relating to disposal of such items, and all applicable city ordinances, including those regulating the use of city or state rights-of-way, and motor vehicle regulations. 
(Code 1966, § 16-12; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Secs. 90-31—90-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONTAINERS 
 
Sec. 90-41. - Containers required; proper use of same. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every residential customer to use and maintain in good order and repair, any bin or container provided by the city for the deposit of wastes for collection by the city or for other proper disposal as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  In business, commercial, industrial or multifamily premises, dumpsters are required and provided by the city and, unless otherwise authorized by the public works director or designee, it shall be unlawful to use any other container for garbage or trash or recyclable disposal. Where a customer deems it necessary to use a roll-off container in the management of garbage, trash or recyclables, said service shall be provided exclusively by the city. It shall be the duty of all persons using dumpsters to place waste therein compactly. All boxes and cartons must be broken down. All boxes and cartons shall be placed in a recycling dumpster, if available. The space in such dumpsters must be efficiently used. All doors must be closed and properly latched after any waste is placed therein. Such dumpsters shall be used exclusively for garbage, trash or recyclables, as applicable. All garbage, including wet slop shall be placed in plastic bags designed specifically for garbage disposal, a minimum five mil. in thickness. The plastic bags shall be of sufficient strength to resist tearing under normal handling and shall be tied or fastened when placed for collection. 
(c)  No person utilizing any bin as specified in subsection (a) or dumpster as specified in subsection (b), shall place any waste in any of such containers, unless it may be placed therein without spillage or overflow from such containers, nor shall any waste be placed along the side of, or otherwise on the top of, any such container when such container is properly closed. In any commercial establishment or multifamily units being served by a dumpster, the customer shall also be responsible for complying with the provisions of this subsection. 
(d)  No person utilizing a recycling container shall place materials therein other than those recyclable materials listed in the following table. Failure to deposit approved-only recyclable materials may constitute removal of the residential recycling container and the issuance of an additional trash container with appropriate charges as stated in subsection 90-76(e). 
Recyclable Materials 
PAPER 
 Newspaper 	Catalogs 
 Magazines 	Cardboard Materials 
 Cardboard Cereal Boxes 	Office Paper 
PLASTICS (Coded 1 & 2) 
 Soda Bottles 	Milk & Water Jugs 
 Detergent/Cleaning Bottles 	Plastic Bottles & Jugs 
CANS 	
 Aluminum & Tin 	Aerosol Cans 
 Food and Beverage Cans 

 
This table may be periodically amended by the public works director or designee, and a current table shall be on file in the office of the public works director. 
(e)  No person shall transport waste to another location except for purposes of: 
(1)  Approved recycling, 
(2)  Sale, or 
(3)  Other permitted disposal. 
(f)  Only a duly authorize agent or employee of the city may remove or relocate a dumpster or roll-off container from its city-approved location. 
(Code 1966, § 16-4; Ord. No. 1996-57, § VI, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 1997-96, § II, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2014-72, § I, 12-8-14)  
Sec. 90-42. - Placement for collection; when placement allowed; maximum size of brush, cuttings, etc., and required preparation thereof. 
(a)  If a customer's premises is adjacent and accessible to an alley, the customer shall place for collection the garbage or trash and recyclables containers adjacent to the property in the approved portion of the alley right-of-way where it may be easily accessible to the person collecting and removing garbage or trash and recyclables. If it is not practicable to collect and remove the garbage or trash and recyclables containers from an alley, or if there is no alley, the customer shall place the containers for service at such point on the property as the public works director or designee shall assign and designate as the most convenient and accessible for collecting and removing. Residential customers may not store their containers in the front yard or in the alley where such service is provided, but may do so in the back yard or side yard area that is not also part of the front yard. At no time shall the containers be so placed that an alley or access to a mailbox will be blocked or obstructed and all containers must be a minimum of three feet away from all objects and each other for service. Access is deemed to be obstructed whenever a container is placed within ten feet of a mailbox or within three feet of all other objects. Garbage, trash and recyclables will not be collected from containers that are obstructing a mailbox. For residential pickup of garbage or trash and recyclables bins, the bins shall be placed on the side of the property immediately adjacent to the street to facilitate access to such bins. No container except those serviced by the city may be placed in a street or alley right-of-way and then only as authorized by the public works director or designee. 
(b)  All bins must be placed at the location prescribed in this section not later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of scheduled collection and removed to the side yard or back yard prior to 7:00 p.m. on such day. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any customer to place any brush for collection at other than the designated places provided for in this section. It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For any person to place any brush in an approved container provided for in this chapter; 
(2)  For any customer to place brush for collection in any street right-of-way before the Monday of the week of the published announcement of brush collections by the city; or 
(3)  For any person to place any brush so as to obstruct access to a mailbox, or covering water meter boxes, telephone pedestals, gas meters, cable guywires, or any other public utility fixture. 
(d)  Tree limbs placed for collection shall not exceed five feet in length nor three inches in diameter, and shall be neatly stacked and placed at the location as set out in this section. 
(e)  Grass cuttings and leaves shall be placed in compostable (paper) bags placed at the location as set out in subsection (a) hereinabove, in a way that facilitates pickup of same. Such bags shall be made available to customers at the recycling center, city hall and other city facilities as may be determined by the public works director. No citation shall be issued for a violation of this subsection. 
(Code 1966, § 16-7; Ord. No. 1996-57, § VIII, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 1997-96, § III, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 2006-79, § 1, 7-24-06; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2012-14, § I, 2-27-12; Ord. No. 2014-72, § I, 12-8-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1996-57, § VII, adopted Oct. 26, 1996, repealed the prior § 90-42, which pertained to container specifications and derived from Code 1966, § 16.5. Section VIII of Ord. No. 1996-57 renumbered § 90-44 as a new § 90-42.  
Secs. 90-43—90-65. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1996-57, § VII, adopted Oct. 26, 1996, repealed § 90-43, which pertained to defective containers and derived from Code 1966, § 16-6.  
ARTICLE III. - CHARGES AND BILLING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-66. - Levy and assessment. 
(a)  The charges fixed in this article for the collection, removal and disposal of brush, garbage or trash and recyclables by the city shall be levied and assessed by the city against each customer. Since the prompt and proper removal of all brush, garbage or trash and recyclables is essential to the preservation of the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens and people of the city, and protection against fire hazards, it is deemed necessary that such charges be assessed, levied and collected as provided for in this article. 
(b)  Each customer shall enter into a sanitation solid waste collection agreement with the city or a city-approved agent as described in section 90-121. Each unit shall be charged separately and billed to the person responsible for the sanitation billing. 
(c)  An exemption from payment of trash or garbage charges established by this chapter may be granted by the public works director only to the extent that no other city collection services are provided. 
(Code 1966, § 16-23; Ord. No. 1996-57, § IX, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 2007-26, § 1, 3-26-07; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Secs. 90-67—90-74. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RATES 
 
Sec. 90-75. - Citizen collection station. 
The public works director shall make available a disposal drop-off site only for residential customers to dispose of waste. The fee for this service, available to McAllen residents, shall be $21.82 per ton. Brush will be accepted at the city compost facility and recycling center from commercial or for-profit establishments that primarily engage in providing landscape care and maintenance services and/or install or remove trees, shrubs, plants, lawns or gardens. A disposal fee of $2.00 per cubic yard and $3.00 per cubic yard will be assessed for this service at the compost facility and recycling center, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41 § 1, 5-17-2008; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2016-44, § I, 7-11-16)  
Sec. 90-76. - Single-family units. 
(a)  The monthly rate per bin for the collection and removal of garbage by the city from single-family residences shall be $14.50. 
(b)  If a lot has more than one residential unit including family housekeeping units located thereon, the basic rate set out in this section shall apply to each of such units. 
(c)  The rate established by this section shall apply to rooming houses as one unit, unless separate kitchen facilities are made available, in which case, the basic residential rate, as determined in this section shall be charged per kitchen facility. 
(d)  A base rate of $27.54 shall apply to residential customers whose premises are located outside the city's water certificate of convenience and necessity (CCN) service area. 
(e)  The city shall make available upon a residential customer's request or through assessment for misuse of recycling bin the use of a second bin for the collection of garbage or trash; the monthly rate for said use shall be $12.50. 
(Code 1966, § 16-41; Ord. No. 1996-57, § X, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 1997-96, § IV, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 1998-91, § 1, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 2001-64, § 1, 9-24-01; Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 4-25-05; Ord. No. 2006-103, § 8, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2016-44, § I, 7-11-16; Ord. No. 2016-65, § I, 10-10-16; Ord. No. 2018-83, § I, 11-26-18)  
Sec. 90-77. - Apartments, duplexes, triplexes, quads, condominiums and townhouses. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for in subsection (b) of this section, the monthly rate for the collection and removal of garbage or trash from apartments, duplexes, triplexes, quads, condominiums and townhouses shall be $14.50 for each unit. 
(b)  The public works director or designee is hereby authorized, based on field conditions, to determine whether or not a dumpster shall be required for collection of garbage or trash or recycles from the premises referred to in this section. If the public works director deems that a dumpster should be used for any apartment, duplex, triplex, quads, condominium or townhouse, then such container shall be utilized for collection of garbage and trash and recyclables at such location, and the rate to be charged therefor shall be as set out in subsection 90-80(b). 
(c)  The public works director or designee shall determine the number, size and frequency of the service required for a multifamily complex. At a minimum, a multifamily complex shall be determined to require one two-cubic-yard dumpster serviced twice per week per ten units or fraction thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 16-42; Ord. No. 1996-57, § XI, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 1997-96, § V, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 1998-91, § 2, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 2001-64, § 2, 9-24-01; Ord. No. 2005-43, § 2, 4-25-05; Ord. No. 2006-103, § 8, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2008-72, § I, 10-13-08; Ord. No. 2009-05, § I, 2-2-09; Ord. No. 2016-44, § I, 7-11-16; Ord. No. 2018-83, § I, 11-26-18)  
Sec. 90-78. - Mobile home and travel trailer parks. 
(a)  Dumpsters are required for collection of garbage or trash from mobile home and travel trailer parks. 
(b)  Rates as set out in subsection 90-80(b) shall be applicable for such service. 
(Code 1966, § 16-43; Ord. No. 1996-57, § XII, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 1997-96, § VI, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 1998-91, § 3, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 2001-64, § 3, 9-24-01; Ord. No. 2005-43, § 3, 4-25-05; Ord. No. 2006-103, § 8, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 90-79. - Residences on unplatted property. 
The residential rate established by subsection 90-76(a) shall apply to the collection and removal of garbage or trash and recyclables from residences on unplatted or unsubdivided property by allowing to such residence a reasonable yard to determine the front footage width, this determination to be made by the customer and the public works director. If they cannot agree, such matter shall be determined by the board of commissioners after a hearing following the same standards and procedures as provided for in subsection 90-86(b). 
(Code 1966, § 16-45; Ord. No. 1996-57, § XIV, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1996-57, § XIII, adopted Aug. 26, 1996, repealed the former § 90-79, which pertained to roominghouses and derived from Code 1966, § 16-44. Ord. No. 1996-57, § XIV, then renumbered § 90-80 as § 90-79.  
Sec. 90-80. - Rates for commercial and other properties not described in sections 90-75 through 90-79. 
(a)  Rate for commercial trash compactor service. 
For new businesses or for businesses changing operations using an approved commercial trash compactor, the monthly rate shall be based on a calculation as follows: 
Size 
(cubic yards) 	Frequency of collections per week 
	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
6 	403.20 	806.42 	1,209.63 	1,612.84 	2,016.06 	2,419.26 
 
Commercial trash compactors larger than 6 cubic yards shall be serviced with a roll-off truck; those serviced by the city shall be assessed the hauling and landfill disposal fees as per section 90-84. 
(b)  The rate or charge for dumpsters. For all business, commercial or other nonresidential establishments or uses where a dumpster is used, the monthly basic rate or charge for garbage or trash removed shall be as follows: 
	Monthly Dumpster Collection Rate 
	Frequency of Collections Per Week 
Dumpster Size (Cubic Yard) 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
2 	84.64 	127.72 	169.29 	205.57 	230.84 
4 	161.58 	241.61 	318.18 	343.18 	437.06 
6 	201.60 	301.63 	401.66 	501.69 	600.20 
8 	267.77 	407.67 	535.55 	669.44 	803.32 
 
	Charge for Miscellaneous Services 
Container Size (Cubic Yard) 	Extra Service Per Container 	Wash and Deodorize Per Container 	Lid Lock 
Fee Per 
Dumpster 	
2 	$16.15 	$60.02 	$38.16 	
4 	$29.08 	$60.02 	$38.16 	
6 	$38.76 	$60.02 	$38.16 	
8 	$48.45 	$67.72 	$38.16 	
6 cyd compactor 	$161.43 	$90.84 	N/A 	
20 cyd 
compactor 	See, Hauling + Disposal Fees in Sec. 90-84 	$169.58 	N/A 	
30 cyd 
compactor 	See, Hauling + Disposal Fees in Sec. 90-84 	$254.37 	N/A 	
40 cyd 
compactor 	See, Hauling + Disposal Fees in Sec. 90-84 	$339.16 	N/A 	
 
(1)  Temporary dumpster charge—At customer's request an eight-yard dumpster may be temporarily placed for a daily fee of $60.57. 
(2)  When more than one customer shares any container, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by each affected customer, each customer shall be charged an equal pro rata share of the total charge. Where the waste volume generated is not reasonably expected to exceed the volume capacity of the dumpster, a maximum of four customers may share a single container, unless otherwise determined by the public works director or designee. Unless otherwise approved by the public works director, restaurants and other food establishments shall not be allowed to share a dumpster. 
(3)  In properties where the use of a dumpster is required and the placement of said dumpster is not feasible, as determined by the public works director or designee, sanitation service can be provided through the use of bins. The minimum monthly collection rate shall be $42.32. 
(c)  Rate for non-scheduled collection. In those places where no approved container is located and a non-scheduled pick up is requested by the customer for waste, including uncontained brush or garbage or trash, there is hereby established for removing such brush and garbage or trash a flat rate of $4.92 per minute for the time that is required to remove such brush and for the use of the necessary and required equipment for such removal. In determining such charge, the city has taken into consideration labor costs, including fringe benefits, cost of trucks or other equipment, cost of fuel, insurance, depreciation, distance traveled, bookkeeping and time records, and other similar related costs. 
(d)  In addition to the monthly charge and other charges as provided for in this section, there shall be charged to the individual accounts provided for in this section the amount of $3.40 for every two cubic yard solid waste collection volume available for the premises, for the purpose of funding the operation of the city's recycling program, as mandated by state law. Such charge shall be reviewed by the board of commissioners, from time to time, considering the cost of the city's mandatory recycling program and the revenues it generates. 
(Code 1966, § 16-46; Ord. No. 1994-37, § II, 6-13-94; Ord. No. 1996-57, § XV, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 1997-96, § VII, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 1998-91, § 4, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 1999-86, § 1, 10-11-99; Ord. No. 2006-103, § 8, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2009-05, § I, 2-2-09; Ord. No. 2012-14, § I, 2-27-12; Ord. No. 2014-72, § I, 12-8-14; Ord. No. 2016-44, § I, 7-11-16; Ord. No. 2018-83, § I, 11-26-18)  
Sec. 90-81. - Individual offices maintained on residential lot with no residence use. 
Nonresidential uses maintained on a residential lot shall be treated as commercial for the purposes of establishing and charging for sanitation services. 
(Code 1966, § 16-48; Ord. No. 1996-57, § XVI, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 90-82. - Property with combined residential and nonresidential uses. 
The rate for property with combined residential and nonresidential uses shall be 1½ times the basic residential unit rate established by this division for the collection and removal of garbage. The basic residential lot rate established by this division shall apply to the collection and removal of brush and recyclables from such property. 
(Code 1966, § 16-47; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 90-83. - Property where no garbage or trash collects. 
On those commercial, industrial or multifamily properties where no garbage or trash collects in connection with its operation and/or maintenance, or where no service is required or necessary, there shall be a minimum service charge of $12.68 per month which shall be considered as the fair and reasonable cost to the city to keep its records on such properties, and to make necessary inspections thereof to see if the service is required or necessary, and as payment of the cost of such record keeping, inspection and personnel costs. 
(Code 1966, § 16-49; Ord. No. 1996-57, § XVII, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 1997-96, § VIII, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 1998-91, § 5, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 2006-103, § 8, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2018-83, § I, 11-26-18)  
Sec. 90-84. - Rates for commercial trash, roll-off pick ups and disposal service. 
On all commercial business, construction projects, and other properties where a roll-off system is required, or a compactor is serviced, the basic rates and fees charged shall be as follows: 
Roll-off/compactor size 	Daily Rental for Roll-Off 	Hauling per load 	Disposal Fee 
20 cubic yard 	$3.74/day 	$166.56 	$18.00/ton 
30 cubic yard 	$3.74/day 	$174.89 	$18.00/ton 
40 cubic yard 	$4.20/day 	$190.55 	$18.00/ton 
 
On roll-offs utilized for the collection and disposal of City of McAllen municipal wastewater sludge, a rate of $461.44 shall be charged for each haul inclusive of hauling, disposal and rental charges. 
An overweight disposal rate of $25.00 per ton shall be assessed for tonnage exceeding 14 tons (28,000 lbs.). 
(Ord. No. 1996-57, § XIX, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 1997-96, § IX, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 1998-91, § 6, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 2006-103, § 8, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2014-72, § I, 12-8-14; Ord. No. 2016-44, § I, 7-11-16; Ord. No. 2018-83, § I, 11-26-18)  
Sec. 90-85. - Maintenance charges for depositing wet slop in city containers. 
Should any person cause damage to any city-owned approved container to the extent that maintenance or repair is needed, then the public works director or designee shall compute the cost for the repair, including the charge to wash and deodorize. Where applicable, the responsible customer's bill in the next monthly billing cycle will reflect an additional charge for the services rendered under this chapter. The charge to wash and deodorize the container will be in accordance with subsection 90-80(b). 
(Code 1966, § 16-50; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 90-86. - Rate hearings. 
(a)  The charges and rates for collection as provided for in this division shall be applicable only when city collection services are provided to the customer or where the minimum charge is levied where licensed commercial permittees are delivering such services to the customer, as applicable. 
(b)  Any customer receiving city garbage or trash collection services or who is required to pay the minimum service charge, who feels that the rate classification charged to him is not the proper classification shall have the right to appeal the designation of such classification to the city manager by giving written notice of such appeal to the city manager within 30 days of the imposition of such rate for such service. The city manager at such hearing shall give the opportunity to such appellant to present his case, and after deliberation of such case shall determine the appropriate classification for rates for the type of service to such customer as provided for in this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 16-52; Ord. No. 1996-57, § XVIII, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1996-57, § XVIII, adopted Aug. 26, 1996, in addition to changes to § 90-86(b), renumbered § 90-86 as § 90-88. At the editor's discretion, and to preserve the numbering sequence, § 90-86 has not been renumbered § 90-88.  
Sec. 90-87. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, adopted May 27, 2008, repealed § 90-87, which pertained to day care centers with conditional use permits and derived from Ord. No. 1997-96 § X, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 1998-91, § 7, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 2005-43, § 4, 4-25-05; Ord. No. 2006-103, 10-9-06.  
Sec. 90-88. - Brush collection rate. 
(a)  The monthly rate for the collection and removal of brush and bulky debris by the city from single-family residences shall be based on the front footage of the residential lot as follows: 
(1)  On lots with frontage up to 50 feet .....$ 3.24 
(2)  On lots with frontage 51 to 75 feet .....$4.86 
(3)  On lots with frontage 76 to 100 feet .....$6.49 
(4)  On lots with frontage 101 to 150 feet .....$8.11 
(5)  On lots with frontage 151 to 200 feet .....$10.70 
(6)  On lots with frontage over 200 feet .....$15.89 
(b)  The monthly rate for the collection and removal of brush and bulky debris by the city from commercial, industrial, multifamily (apartments, duplexes, triplexes, quads, condominiums, townhouses), mobile homes and/or travel trailer parks shall be $2.50 per month per unit. 
(Ord. No. 2006-103, § 8, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2012-14, § I, 2-27-12; Ord. No. 2016-44, § I, 7-11-16)  
Sec. 90-89. - Recycling fee for residential units. 
In addition to any other charges provided for in this chapter there shall be charged to every residential unit an amount equal to $2.00 for the purposes of funding the operation of the city's recycling services. Such charge shall be reviewed by the board of commissioners from time to time, in relationship to the cost of the city's mandatory recycling program and the revenues derived there from. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41 § 1, 5-17-2008; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2012-14, § I, 2-27-12)  
Secs. 90-90—90-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BILLING PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 90-96. - Billing; when due and payable; collection. 
(a)  In order for the city to effect the collection of charges levied and assessed under this article from the persons who owe the same, and in order to avoid duplication of expense and effort, such charges shall be billed each month as a separate item on the water bill of all persons who receive water bills from the public utilities department of the city or a third party water supply utility with which the city has entered into a contractual agreement to collect charges on behalf of the city. Such charges shall be due and payable at the same time and place and in the same manner as such water bill, and contemporaneously therewith. If a person receives brush and garbage or trash, and if applicable, recyclable, collection service but has no water meter, or where the city has been unable to establish a contractual agreement with an appropriate third party water supply utility, the charge for the brush and garbage or trash collection service shall be billed each month through regular United States mail channels, addressed to such person's address, and shall be due and payable by such person to the city within ten days of the bill date. 
(b)  The public utilities department or where applicable, the third party water utility is hereby authorized to collect all applicable brush, garbage or trash, and recyclables collection charges for the city, and shall account to the city for such collections, and the sum so collected shall be paid into the sanitation fund of the city. The city shall pay the public utilities department or where applicable the appropriate third party water supply utility a reasonable sum for its services in billing, collecting and keeping records of such brush, garbage or trash, and recycling charges. 
(Code 1966, § 16-24; Ord. No. 1996-57, § XX, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 2007-26, § 2, 3-26-07; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 90-97. - Payment of bills. 
(a)  All garbage or trash, brush and recyclables collection bills under any schedule contained in this chapter shall be due and payable and shall become delinquent if not paid by the day from the due date of such bill. The city manager or his authorized representative is hereby authorized to discontinue brush, garbage or trash, and recyclables collection and water service for any delinquent account according to the procedure as set out in section 106-221. 
(b)  The security deposit, as set out in section 106-84, shall be applicable for all new accounts receiving brush, garbage or trash, or recyclables collection services from the city. Such security deposit shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of section 106-84 relating to amounts due for water, sewer, and garbage or trash service. 
(Code 1966, § 16-25; Ord. No. 1994-57, § II, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 1996-57, § XXI, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 2006-83, § 1, 8-14-06; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 90-98. - Roll-off services—Billing and payment of bills. 
(a)  The McAllen Public Utility Department or where applicable, the third party water utility, is hereby authorized to bill and collect all applicable roll-off collection charges for the city, and shall account to the city for such collections, and the sum so collected shall be paid into the sanitation fund of the city. 
(b)  When roll-off accounts become delinquent the public works director or designee shall discontinue roll-off service relating to such delinquent account(s) and assess a late payment fee equal to five percent of the delinquent balance of said account. 
(c)  Whenever a roll-off container is removed following discontinuance of service due to non-payment, a $50.00 container removal fee shall be assessed in addition to any other service charges assessed under this chapter. 
(d)  A security deposit shall be required for all roll-off service customers in the amount of $250.00 for noncommercial use and $500.00 for commercial/contractor use. This deposit shall be required for all new accounts as provided for in this section, save and except for any existing customer who shall transfer an account from one location to another or who shall request additional account(s) to be established under such customer's name. The deposit shall be applied to any final balance due; any credit balance will be refunded to the account holder within three weeks by the McAllen Public Utility Department. 
(e)  An additional $25.00 processing fee shall be added to such account by the McAllen Public Utility Department for any payment not honored by any bank or financial institution for any reason. 
(f)  A container inactivity charge of $173.60 shall be assessed to each customer account for every 30-calendar day period during which no container activity is registered. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41 § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2014-72, § I, 12-8-14; Ord. No. 2018-83, § I, 11-26-18)  
Secs. 90-99—90-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PRIVATE ROLL-OFF COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-41, § 1, adopted May 27, 2008, renamed art. IV. Formerly art. IV was titled Private Collection and Disposal of Brush and Trash. 
 
Sec. 90-121. - City to provide garbage, brush and recyclable collection services; exceptions; license required. 
(a)  Only the duly authorized agents or employees of the city shall provide garbage or trash, brush or recyclable collection service, and roll-off container service to residential or commercial or industrial customers within the city. 
(b)  Except as may otherwise be specifically provided herein, no one may provide hauling services, including roll-off services, without a private hauler's permit issued by the public works director. 
(c)  The provisions of this article relating to license requirements shall not apply to persons who haul trash or brush for hire incidental to services otherwise provided relating to yard cleanups or minor remodeling projects, where such service is provided on an interim basis. 
(Code 1966, § 16-63; Ord. No. 1996-57, § XXII, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 2002-81, § 1, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 90-122. - Application generally; limitations and conditions; permit fee; nontransferability of permit; posting of permit sticker on vehicles; appeal of denial of permit. 
(a)  Any person seeking to provide hauling services, including roll-off services within the city must file an application for a private hauler's permit with the public works director. Such permits may be issued only for the collection, removal and disposal of construction debris and/or land clearing waste. The public works director or designee shall make or cause to be made an investigation as may be necessary in order to determine whether or not the applicant meets the requirements. The applicant shall file an application providing such information as may be required by the public works director, including the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The trade name of the applicant. 
(3)  The number of vehicles the applicant will operate within the city. 
(4)  The class, size and design of the vehicles which the applicant will operate. 
(5)  The nature and character of the services the applicant proposes to render in the city. 
(6)  The experience that the applicant has in rendering the services cited in subsection (a)(5) (for informational purposes only and not related to determination of issuance). 
(7)  Submit a schedule of rates that the applicant will be charging his customers (for informational purposes only and not related to determination of issuance). 
(b)  As a condition for the issuance of a private hauler's permit under this article the applicant shall file: 
(1)  A certificate of general liability insurance showing coverage in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for personal injury and $100,000.00 for property damage for each vehicle to be operated in the city and showing the city as one of the insured thereunder. The applicant shall also maintain business automobile liability limits of no less than $250,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage, and $500,000.00 annual aggregate. This insurance shall apply as primary insurance with respect to any other insurance or self-insurance programs maintained by the city and shall name the "City of McAllen" as an additional insured with a waiver or subrogation. The policy of insurance shall be written on an "occurrence" form. To the fullest extent of coverage allowed under V.A.T.S., Insurance Code ch. 151, the City of McAllen and/or McAllen Public Utility (MPU), shall be included as additional insured under the CGL policy, using ISO additional insured endorsements CG20101001 and CG20371001, or endorsements providing equivalent coverage, including products completed operations. Proof of workers' compensation insurance shall also be provided. 
(2)  A hold harmless indemnity agreement in which the applicant agrees to hold harmless the city from any liability for damages which may occur as a result of the applicant's operation in the city and indemnify the city for liability or damages created as a result of the applicant's operation in the city. 
(3)  A copy of any license agreement, lease, deed or title of ownership and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) approval identifying the landfill site for which the garbage or trash collected in the city will be finally deposited. Such evidence of right to use any landfill site will be for a period of at least one year from the date of the granting of the private hauler's permit by the city. 
(4)  An agreement from the applicant to the city stating that the applicant will furnish to the city on a quarterly basis information updating its customer list, routes to be traveled within the city, and any addi-tional vehicles to be used within the city during the period of the private hauler's permit. 
(5)  An agreement from the applicant to pay to the city a sum equal to five percent of any and all customer-assessed fees and charges derived from the operation of the permitted collection service by such applicant, such payments to be made quarterly no later than by the 15th day of the month following the end of each quarter. On the first day after the date in which such payment shall be due and payable, there is hereby added to such payment a penalty equal to five percent of the amount of such payment. If any such payment remains delinquent for 30 days after such due date, there is hereby added to such payment an additional penalty of ten percent of the amount of such payment. If any such payment remains delinquent for a period of 60 days after such due date, then in addition to such payment and penalty, there is hereby imposed an interest payment on the amount of such delinquent tax equal to ten percent per annum until the amount of such payment or any remaining portion thereof is finally paid in full. In addition to the amount of any payment, penalties and interest owed as provided herein, a private hauler who fails to timely make payment is liable to the municipality for the municipality's reasonable attorney's fees in collecting the same. A statement of fees and charges assessed by the applicant for the applicable period, in such preformatted forms as may be provided by the public works director, shall be filed in hard copy and in digital format on a monthly basis. 
(6)  An agreement from the applicant to the city stating the applicant will terminate service to any residential customer after annexation by the city and upon its existing service contract termination or one year from annexation date, whichever comes first. No new contracts or renewals for residential service will be allowed in annexed areas. Applicants shall provide for such termination contingency in all residential contracts in the extra territorial jurisdiction of the city. 
(7)  An agreement to allow the director of finance, or designee, during reasonable business hours, access to the books and records of any applicant, permittee or other person subject to this article, as shall be necessary to ascertain the accuracy of any report filed as required by this article, to determine whether any calculation of the amount due under any provision of this article needs correction, or to determine whether a report should have been filed and the amount, if any, of fees due. 
Failure to meet any of the obligations as set out in this section for the granting of the private hauler's permit or any of the requirements or restrictions in section 90-123 shall constitute grounds for denial or revocation of a permit by the public works director. The city attorney may enter an appropriate pleading in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent and enjoin the private hauler's permit holder or any person engaging in such activities without any required permit from operating any waste collection service within the city. 
(c)  When all conditions set out in this section have been met, the public works director shall issue an annual private hauler's permit which will cover the period January 1 through December 31 of each year. The fee for this annual private hauler's permit shall be $220.50. The permits granted under this section shall be renewable from year to year upon filing of a new permit application, which shall be filed for existing permits on or before December 1 of the current year for the permit. No grant, right or privilege afforded to the applicant under this article shall be assigned or transferred in any manner without the expressed written approval of the public works director. 
(d)  In addition to the private hauler's permit, a permittee must apply for and receive a vehicle permit for each vehicle operated in the collection of waste. The public works director for the city is hereby authorized to issue a permit sticker or other indicia which must be attached to each vehicle used for the purposes of this article by any private hauler's permit holder as required by the public works director at a cost of $10.00 each. No vehicle may be employed in the permittee's operations within the city unless the vehicle permit is so posted. 
(e)  If the public works director shall refuse to issue a private hauler's permit to any applicant, the action of the public works director shall be final unless the applicant shall, within ten days after such refusal to issue such a permit, file a written appeal with the city secretary addressed to the city manager requesting review. Should the city manager concur in the decision of the public works director, that decision shall be final, unless the applicant shall, within ten days after such concurrence, file a written appeal with the city secretary addressed to the board of commissioners requesting review of the decision of the public works director and the city manager. Such applicant shall have the right to present evidence of why a permit should be granted. The appeal procedure for revocation of a permit shall be the same as stated in this section for refusal to grant a permit. The authority conducting any such hearing shall give written notice of the decision on the appeal within ten days from the closing of such hearing, and the hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted so as to allow necessary due process application to the applicant or permit holder, as applicable. 
(Code 1966, § 16-64; Ord. No. 1996-57, § XXIII, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 1997-96, § XII, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 2006-103, § 8, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2014-72, § I, 12-8-14)  
Sec. 90-123. - Equipment requirements and restrictions for permittees. 
(a)  All vehicles used by any permittee within the city shall meet the minimum specifications relating to safety and health as promulgated and established by any applicable state law or regulation. 
(b)  It shall be the obligation of the permittee to see that all containers used for its collection service meet all the specifications and requirements for such containers under applicable state laws and regulations. 
(c)  Anyone's use of city rights-of-way to place any container is hereby expressly prohibited. 
(d)  Should any customer of a permittee cancel or have service canceled, it shall be the responsibility of the permittee to remove its container and any accumulation of garbage, trash or brush at the location as a final collection. The permittee shall notify the city in writing of the date of termination and the date of the abovementioned final collection. 
(Code 1966, § 16-65; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 90-124. - Duties, authority of director of finance. 
The director of finance may adopt and amend procedures, rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary to effectively collect the fee levied in this article, and shall, upon request of any permittee hereunder, furnish a copy of such procedures, rules and regulations for the guidance of such person and facilitate the collection of such fee as such collection is required in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1996-57, § XXIV, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Secs. 90-125—90-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-41, § 1, May 27, 2008, in effect,repealed the former art. V., §§ 90-146 and 90-149, and enacted a new art. V as set out herein. The former art. V pertained to the city sanitary landfill and derived from Code 1966, §§ 16-72 and 16-76; and Ord. No. 1996-57, § XXVI, adopted Aug. 26, 1996. 
 
Sec. 90-146. - Authorized disposal of waste. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person hauling, conveying or transporting waste upon the streets, alleys or public thoroughfares of the city to unload or dump such waste at or upon any public or private property within the city other than at a citizen collection station, a facility licensed under section 86-66, or at any other approved facility or state-approved public landfill. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of property within the city to permit the unloading or dumping of brush, garbage or trash or recyclables at or upon any property owned or occupied by that person. Notwithstanding such prohibition, this section does not apply to the hauling, conveying, transporting, unloading or dumping of earth or inert materials, otherwise not prohibited by law, including but not limited to concrete materials for landfill and leveling purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41, § I, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 90-147. - Anti-scavenging. 
No person except for the duly authorized agents or employees of the city, or a person with the customer's consent, shall remove any garbage or trash, recyclable materials, or other waste from an approved container. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41 § I, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 90-148. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(b)  In the event of a violation of this chapter, the city may, in addition to other remedies, institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such violation, including the right to restrain, enjoin, correct or abate such violation in any court of competent jurisdiction, in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41 § I, 5-27-08)  
Chapter 94 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, adopted Jan. 14, 2002, amended the title of Ch. 94 to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 94 was entitled, "Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places." See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; alcoholic beverages prohibited in the McAllen Nature Center, § 6-4; McAllen-Miller International Airport, § 18-26 et seq.; structures in rights-of-way of the city prohibited, § 22-29; cemeteries, ch. 26; civic center, ch. 30; smoking prohibited in certain public places, § 54-122; library, ch. 66; parks and recreation areas, ch. 74; parks of the city are considered public places, § 74-79; golf course, § 74-106 et seq.; city sanitary landfill, § 90-146 et seq.; public utility department to be charged rental for the streets, alleys, highways, etc., § 106-52; deposit of sewage in the streets prohibited, § 106-146; closure and vacation of streets, app. C. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 94-1. - Obstruction of streets generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any tree, shrubbery, wire, overhanging roof, awning or other obstacle to obstruct, extend or protrude over or into any street, alley or highway so that same cause damage to or interfere with the free movement of any motor vehicle, or to allow or place any sand, gravel, lumber or other foreign substance, or obstruct any street or alley so that same may or might cause damage to any vehicle or interfere with the free movement of traffic. 
(Code 1966, § 26-1)  
Sec. 94-2. - Use of street or sidewalk as place of business. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk, plaza, park or other public place within the city as a place of business. The phrase "place of business," as used in this section, shall mean a place where such person shall stop, place or station himself for the purpose of selling, promoting, or taking orders for goods or services, or receiving calls by telephone or other means of communication for taxicab, delivery or other services. 
(Code 1966, § 26-2; Ord. No. 2018-40, § 1, 6-25-18)  
Sec. 94-3. - Use of streets, sidewalks or alleys for sale or display of goods, wares, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or alley within the city for the purpose of vending, peddling or displaying goods, wares, merchandise, produce or other articles unless such use meets the requirements for vending vehicles in section 102-153 or pursuant to a city-sponsored event vendor permit under section 10-48. 
(Code 1966, § 26-3; Ord. No. 2017-56, § II, 9-25-17)  
Sec. 94-4. - Banners across streets. 
No person shall display or erect a sign or banner for the purpose of advertising alongside or across any street when any portion of such sign or banner shall extend above the roadway of such street. This section shall not apply to official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1966, § 26-5)  
Sec. 94-5. - Use of North 18th Street regulated. 
(a)  Installation of fences or barricades required; location. A series of fences or appropriate barricades to be determined by the chief of police shall be installed at the following locations, each of which fences or barricades shall be placed across 18th Street from the lot line on the east side of such street to the west right-of-way boundary of such street, such fences to be an extension westward of the north or south lot line as indicated in this section: 
(1)  From the southwest corner of Lot 1, Block 4, Bonita Heights Subdivision; 
(2)  From the northwest corner of Lot 10, Block 3, Bonita Heights Subdivision. 
(b)  Property owners to construct, pay for, maintain fences or barricades; additional or relocation fences. The fences or barricades to accomplish the purpose of this section shall be constructed, paid for, and maintained by property owners east of and adjacent to 18th Street after the approval by the chief of police of the design and type. Any additional fences or relocation of fences shall be at the discretion of the city manager. 
(c)  Fences or barricades to be properly marked, signed; notice that 18th Street not a through street. All of the fences or barricades required by this section shall be properly marked and signed. Appropriate markers shall also be placed at or near the intersection of North 18th Street with the following streets to notify and advise the people that 18th Street is not a through street: Daffodil Avenue. 
(d)  Removing, destroying or damaging fences or barricades; unauthorized use of street prohibited; violation a misdemeanor; penalty. Any willful removal, destruction or damage to the fences or barricades described in this section is hereby prohibited. Any use of 18th Street by persons not authorized to use such street by this section is prohibited. Any person who shall be found guilty of any violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(e)  Applicability of other ordinances. All traffic ordinances and other ordinances of the city shall remain applicable to North 18th Street. 
(f)  Purpose of section; effect on rights of others. The purpose of this section is not to close 18th Street for use by service and utility vehicles and adjacent property owners, but to regulate its use. The right of the city, the city public utilities, and other utilities which have installations in such street to continue to use such street for such proper purposes is not prohibited but is reserved. 
(Code 1966, § 26-6)  
Secs. 94-6—94-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 94-26. - Title. 
This article may be known and cited as the Right-of-Way Management Ordinance for the City of McAllen, Texas (hereinafter "city"). 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02)  
Sec. 94-27. - Construction; governing law; venue. 
This article shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas and the City Charter and City Code to the extent that such Charter and City Code are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas. All obligations of the parties hereunder are performable in Hidalgo County, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02)  
Sec. 94-28. - Scope. 
This article shall be effective within the geographical limits of the city, including any areas subsequently annexed by the city. As to any person holding a franchise agreement or other contract with the city as of the effective date of this article that authorizes the use of the city's public rights-of-way, this chapter shall only be effective to such person to the extent that it does not conflict with said franchise or other contractual agreement. This article shall not apply to the McAllen Public Utilities with respect to the requirements for any fees or costs required herein nor as to any civil or criminal penalties imposed herein nor the obligation to obtain any permit required herein, it being the intent of this article that the McAllen Public Utilities abide by and comply with all of the technical and construction standards contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02)  
Sec. 94-29. - Definitions. 
[As used in this article, the following words shall have the following meaning:] 
Facility or facilities means any type of tangible item placed in the right-of-way. 
Public utility means any water, sewer, gas, electric, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication, cable television or similar type facility. 
Street or public way or public right-of-way or public rights-of-way or rights-of-way or right-of-way means the surface of, and the space above and below a public street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive, or other easement now or hereafter held by or under the control of the city, to which the city holds the property rights in regard to the use for utilities, excluding easements not intended for public works or public utility facilities but shall not include property of city which is not a dedicated public right-of-way, street, highway, or alley. Neither the inclusion of this definition nor the provisions hereof shall be construed to grant any right or privilege to utilize or occupy the city rights-of-way absent an expressed agreement of the city or by authority expressly granted by state law, 
User means any person or entity of any type that places or seeks to place, or uses, facilities of any type in the city's public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02)  
Sec. 94-30. - Reserved.  
Sec. 94-31. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  If the city has reason to believe that a user is in violation of this article, the city should notify the user in writing of the violation setting forth the nature of the violation. Within a reasonable time, but not less than ten calendar days of receipt of such notice, the user shall respond in writing to provide explanation or documentation to support the user's position that either (1) the violation did not occur; or, (2) that the user has cured or is taking reasonable steps to cure the violation in an appropriate and timely manner. If the user fails to comply with this provision, the penalties set out in this article may be imposed and the provisions of section 90-40 of this chapter may be applied. In addition, if in the reasonable judgment of city, a violation of this article is ongoing and such violation represents an immediate threat to the health, safety, and/or welfare of the citizens or an imminent danger which might result in the loss of property, the city may issue an immediate stop work and/or other appropriate order and/or take other appropriate action to remedy such situation. 
(b)  Civil penalties may be imposed for the violation of any provision of this chapter, as follows: 
(1)  Up to $1,000.00 for each violation, and each day of a continuing violation may be considered a new violation; and/or 
(2)  If applicable, default and revocation of any or all permits granted to allow work in the rights-of-way, subject to the procedural guidelines noted in this chapter and any agreement which applies to the right-of-way user, and further subject to any limitations imposed by federal or state law. 
(c)  In imposing the penalties and the amount, the city may weigh all applicable factors, such as damages caused by the violation, reasons for the violation, the seriousness of the violation, and all other factors. 
(d)  Monetary civil penalties may be imposed in the manner prescribed by either local or state law. 
(e)  In addition, the city commission may order specific performance of any actions required by this chapter or required by a franchise, license or permit, including the permit authorizing work to be performed in the right-of-way, or any other agreement or authorization. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02)  
Sec. 94-32. - Right-of-way construction. 
(a)  No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of facilities in, on, under or above the rights-of-way in the city except as provided by the ordinances of the city and the directives of the engineering department. Further, no person shall continue with the operation of facilities in, on, under or above the rights-of-way if that person lacks the necessary authority from the city or state or federal law. 
(b)  No person shall erect, install, construct, repair, replace or maintain its facilities in such a fashion as to unduly burden the present or future use of the streets or public ways. If city, in its reasonable judgment, determines that any portion of a facility is an undue burden, the person who installed same, at their expense, shall modify its facilities or take such other actions as city may determine is in the public interest to remove or alleviate the burden, within a reasonable time period. A decision by the city pursuant to this section is subject to the appeal process set out in section 94-45 of this chapter. 
(c)  The cost of the installation, construction, operation, or removal of facilities shall be borne by the person installing and/or using same. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02)  
Sec. 94-33. - Registration and construction permits. 
(a)  Registration certificate. In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, all public utility installation constructors, including public utility companies and all other users using or desiring to use the rights-of-way of city must register with the city. Registration and permits will be issued in the name of the person who will own the facilities. 
Registration shall include: 
(1)  The name of the ultimate user of the right-of-way; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons who will be contact person(s) for the installer and owner of the public utility facility user; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of any contractor or subcontractor who will be working in the right-of-way on behalf of the user, to the extent such information is known and available at the time of registration and, if not known at that time, said information shall be provided as soon as practical following registration; 
(4)  The name(s) and telephone number of an emergency contact who shall be available 24 hours a day. 
(b)  Construction permits. 
(1)  No person, entity, user or proposed user shall perform any construction or installation of facilities in the rights-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit, except as provided herein, if such construction or installation will require the breaking of pavement and/or the closure of a traffic lane for a period of time greater than four hours. For purposes of this subsection, the phrase "construction or installation of facilities" does not include the installation of facilities necessary to initiate service to a customer's property or the repair or maintenance of existing facilities, unless such repair or maintenance requires the breaking of pavement or the closure of a traffic lane for a period of time greater than four hours. 
a.  Emergency responses related to the repair or replacement of existing facilities or the restoration of existing utility service to customers that would otherwise require a permit but for the emergency nature of that work may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit; however, the city's engineering department should be notified, verbally or in writing, as soon as possible after receipt of notice of the emergency, additionally, the user should provide a reasonably detailed description of the work performed in the right-of-way before the close of business the next business day following any construction related to an emergency response, such description to include a reasonably detailed description of the work performed in the right-of-way. An updated map of any facilities that were moved, repaired or constructed shall be submitted to the city within 60 days following such emergency work. 
(2)  The permit shall state to whom it is issued, location of work, location of facilities, and estimated dates and times work is to take place and any other special, reasonable conditions set out by the city engineer or his/her designee. 
(3)  The person requesting a permit will provide the city engineer or his/her designee with the following: 
a.  The proposed, approximate location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and the applicant's plan for right-of-way construction; 
b.  Engineering plans which will be on a scale acceptable to the city engineering department, but in no event larger than one inch equals 50 feet unless otherwise approved by the engineering department; 
c.  Description of the location of all right-of-way and utility easements which applicant plans to use; 
d.  Description of all known existing public utilities in the area of applicant's proposed route; 
e.  Detail of what applicant proposes to install, such as pipe size, number of interducts, valves, etc.; 
f.  Detail of plans to remove and replace asphalt, concrete in street to City of McAllen standards; 
g.  Drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals, etc., including depth; 
h.  Handhole and/or manhole typical of type of manholes and/or handholes applicant plans to use or access; 
i.  Complete legend of drawings submitted by applicant which may be provided by reference to previously submitted documents; 
j.  Four sets of engineering plans; 
k.  If known at the time application is made, and if not, within a reasonable time thereafter and not later than 24 hours prior to the start of construction, the name, address and telephone numbers of the contractor who will perform the actual construction, including the name and telephone number of an individual with the contractor who will be available at all times during construction; provided, however, that such information will not be necessary to make the application administratively complete. 
l.  The construction and installation methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the right-of-way, and the estimated dates and times work will occur, all of which (methods, dates, times, etc.) are subject to approval of the city engineer or his/her designee; and 
m.  Proof of insurance or net worth as required. 
n.  A nonrefundable application fee of $350.00, unless the applicant has an existing franchise or other contractual agreement that establishes the fee to be paid for the use of the city's rights-of-way or is otherwise exempt from the payment of such fee by applicable law. The permit application must also be signed by a representative of the owner of the facilities to be constructed. 
Upon the receipt of all necessary information and necessary documentation the city engineer may issue the permit; provided, however, the city specifically reserves the right to deny access to any user where, in the judgment of the city, the use or proposed use of the rights-of-way are inconsistent with and/or unreasonably impair the public use of the rights-of-way. In the event that the city engineer denies any permit, the applicant will be informed of the basis for such denial and, if applicable, the conditions under which the work might be permitted. 
(4)  All construction and installation in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit for the facilities. The city engineer or his/her designee shall be provided access to the work and to such further information as he or she may reasonably require to ensure compliance with the permit. 
(5)  A copy of the construction permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the city engineer or his/her designee at all times when construction or installation work is occurring. 
(6)  All construction or installation work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the construction permit. If the work cannot be completed in the specified time periods, the permittee may request an extension from the city engineer or his/her designee. The request for extension should be submitted to the city engineer prior to the expiration of the specified time period and, if such extension is so requested, construction or installation work authorized by the initial permit may be continued during the time period that the city engineer is considering the request for an extension. 
(7)  Insurance and bonds. 
a.  An applicant must provide proof of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 as approved by the city's legal department. Such requirements may be waived by the city engineer or his/her designee, if the applicant provides acceptable evidence of self-insurance backed by assets equal to but not less than a net worth in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00 as approved by the city engineer or his/her designee and the director of financial services or his/her designee. 
b.  The coverage must be on an "occurrence" basis and must include coverage for personal injury, contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, underground, explosion and collapse hazards. 
c.  Each policy must include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the city in writing not fewer than 30 days before canceling, refusing to renew, or reducing policy limits. 
d.  The applicant shall file the required original certificate of insurance prior to any commencement of work. The certificate shall state the policy number; name of insurance company, name and address of the agent or authorized representative of the insurance company; name, address and telephone number of the insured; policy expiration date; and specific coverage amounts. 
e.  Applicant shall file a surety bond from a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Texas in the amount of $15,000.00 to guarantee the restoration of the right-of-way in the event the applicant leaves a job site in the right-of-way unfinished, incomplete, unsafe or otherwise not restored according to city specifications, unless the applicant has an existing franchise or other contractual agreement that establishes the fee to be paid by the user for the use of the city's rights-of-way or is otherwise exempt from the payment of such a surety by applicable law. This requirement may be waived or modified upon a showing of good cause. Such good cause may include, but is not necessarily limited to, a showing of sufficient financial responsibility to adequately protect the city in an amount at least equal to the bond requirement. 
(8)  A request for a permit must be submitted at least seven working days before the commencement of work proposed in the request, unless waived by the city engineer or his/her designee or exempted pursuant to subsection (b)(1)a. of this section for emergency responses. 
(9)  Request for permits will be approved or disapproved by the city engineer or his/her designee within a reasonable time of receiving all the necessary information. The city engineer or his/her designee will use his/her best efforts to approve or disapprove a request for permit as soon as possible. Should a user need expedited approval of a permit, that fact should be made known to the city engineer at the time the request for permit is filed with the city. 
(10)  The engineering department may require a pre-construction meeting with the permittee and their construction contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02)  
Sec. 94-34. - Construction standards. 
(a)  For any work requiring the issuance of a permit, the engineering department must be notified 24 hours in advance that construction is ready to proceed by either the right-of-way user, their contractor or representative. 
(b)  All construction shall be in conformance with all city codes and applicable local, state and federal laws. 
(c)  For any work requiring the issuance of a permit, three feet by three feet informational signs stating the identify of the person doing the work, telephone number and permittee's identity and telephone number shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur 24 hours prior to the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring. 
(d)  Erosion control measure (i.e. silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones and barricades must be in place before work begins. Plans must be approved at least 24 hours prior to construction. 
(e)  Permittee may be required to show proof of EPA approved plans relating to stormwater and erosion when applicable or a letter stating they are not required to obtain such plans. 
(f)  Except for emergency responses described in subsection (b)(1)a. of section 94-33, no lane closure on major thoroughfares will be allowed between 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. unless the engineering department grants prior approval. Arrow boards will be required on lane closures, with all barricades, advance warning signs and 36-inch reflector cones placed according to the specifications of the engineering department. 
(g)  Without affecting the legal relationship between a permittee and it's contractors, permittees are responsible for the workmanship and any damages by all contractors or subcontractors. A responsible representative of the permittee will be available to the engineering department at all times during construction. 
(h)  Permittee shall be responsible for stormwater management erosion control that complies with city, state and federal guidelines. Requirements shall include, but not be limited to, silt fencing around any excavation that will be left overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing around open holes, and high erosion areas will require wire-backed silt fencing. 
(i)  Permittee or contractor or subcontractor will notify the engineering department and the effected utility immediately of any damage to other utilities, either city or privately owned. 
(j)  Except as otherwise required by an emergency situation or condition, when a street or sidewalk cut is required, prior approval must be obtained from the engineering department and all requirements of the engineering department shall be followed. Repair of all street and sidewalk removals must be made promptly to avoid safety hazards to vehicle and pedestrian traffic. Trench plates may be required by the engineering department. 
(k)  Newly installed facilities must not interfere with other existing public utilities, in particular gravity-dependent facilities. 
(l)  Underground utilities must be installed at a minimum depths as specified by the engineering department, which minimum depth shall be consistent with applicable laws, rules, regulations and other safety codes. 
(m)  The permittee will be responsible for verifying the location both horizontal and vertical of all potentially affected facilities prior to any excavation or boring. All directional boring shall have locator place bore marks and depths while bore is in progress. Locator shall place mark at each stem with paint dot and depth at least every other stem. 
(n)  Except for emergency responses described in subsection (b)(1)a. of this section, the working hours in the rights-of-way shall be 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Work that needs to be performed during hours other than those set out above shall be performed only with the approval of the city engineering department which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Requests to perform work outside the above-described working hours should be, to the extent reasonably possible, requested least 24 hours in advance. Any inspections outside the hours described above shall be at the expense of the permittee. 
(o)  Contractors working for permittee are responsible for obtaining line locates from all affected public utilities prior to any excavation. 
(p)  Placement of all manholes and/or manholes must be approved in advance by the engineering department. 
(q)  Unless otherwise required by law, no underground installation or other work activities may be initiated when it is reasonably foreseeable that weather conditions will prohibit proper restoration of disturbed areas in a timely manner. The city engineer or his/her designee may waive the preceding requirement on a case by case basis, with conditions appropriate to the circumstances. 
(r)  While any portion of the streets or public ways are open, reasonable barriers, lights at night and other warnings shall be utilized for the safety of the users of the streets or public ways in compliance with applicable government regulations requiring and pertaining to such barriers or as reasonably requested by the city engineer or his/her designee. 
(s)  For all work in the streets or public ways which may disturb the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, roadway closure or partial closure practices, as delineated in the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices or comparable manual and in the standards established by the city engineer or his/her designee shall be used and an alternate traffic routing plan shall be submitted to the engineering department prior to change in traffic flow. 
(t)  With the prior approval of the engineering department, users of the rights-of-way may trim trees upon and overhanging the streets so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into contact with facilities. No trimming shall be performed in the streets or public ways without previously informing the engineering department. Except in emergencies all trimming of trees on public property shall have the advance approval of the city engineer or his/her designee and all trimming of trees on private property shall require notice to the property owner. Users of the public rights-of-way shall use reasonable efforts to avoid or minimize the disturbance of trees, shrubs, and ground cover properly within the public rights-of-way. 
(u)  Throughout the period of construction or reconstruction, the city shall be given notice a reasonable time before the commencement of construction or reconstruction in any block (meaning an area typically bounded by four streets) preferably not less than three business days before such commencement. The city shall be given a monthly estimated schedule of construction or reconstruction areas and planned street disturbances. 
(v)  All users of the public's rights-of-way shall endeavor to provide advance notice, appropriate to the circumstances, prior to entry whenever desiring to enter or cross any private property within the city or work in abutting streets or rights-of-ways. Work performed in an emergency in easements or rights-of-way is exempted from this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02)  
Sec. 94-35. - "Plans of record" plans. 
(a)  Rights-of-way users will provide the city engineer or his/her designee with "plans of record" within a reasonable time after completion of facilities in the right-of-way and on an annual basis thereafter indicating the location of new utility facilities that have been installed within public rights-of-way and, to the extent possible, pre-existing facilities. Users, that have facilities in the right-of-way existing as of the date of this article who have existing and available plans indicating the location of those facilities shall provide copies of those plans to the city not later than 90 days after the effective date of this article. The plans for existing facilities shall be provided to the city in the format specified by the city engineer or his/her designee, if readily available; otherwise, such plans shall be provided in the user's existing format. Submittal of "plans of record" for newly installed facilities should be provided in digital format, if readily available, as well as written format, or in any other format mutually agreed between the city engineering department and the user. 
(b)  If the release of information related to the location of any utilities or of plans of record submitted under this section would jeopardize public safety, the information shall be considered confidential. In addition, if plans of record submitted under this section include information expressly designated by the user as a trade secret or other confidential information protected from disclosure by state law, the city may not disclose that information to the public without the consent of the user unless otherwise compelled by an opinion of the Attorney General pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act, as amended, or by a court having jurisdiction over the matter pursuant to applicable law. This subsection may not be construed to authorize a user to designate all matters in its plans of record as confidential or as trade secrets. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02)  
Sec. 94-36. - Conformance with public improvements. 
To the extent not prohibited by applicable federal or state law, whenever, by reasons of widening, straightening or relocation of streets, water or sewer line projects, or any other public works projects, (i.e. install or improve storm drains, water lines, sewer lines) it shall be deemed necessary by the governing body of the city to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform the underground or overhead facilities of a right-of-way user, such alterations shall be made by the owner of the facilities at their expense within 30 days from receipt of notice to make the alterations, unless a different schedule has been approved by the city engineer or his/her designee. In such cases, users shall, at their own cost and expense, protect, support, disconnect, relocate or remove from the streets or public ways any portion of their facilities required to do so by city. The city may also temporarily disconnect, remove or relocate any user's facilities which have not been disconnected, removed or relocated within a reasonable period of time after a request from the city and the user shall reimburse city its entire expense incurred in doing so. Neither city nor any agent, contractor or employee thereof shall be liable to any user, their customers or third parties for any damages caused them or the facilities due to any activities described in this section. In areas of the city where the city engineer or his/her designee finds that the streets or public ways will not readily accommodate further underground facilities, users or proposed users shall meet with the city engineer or his/her designee in conjunction with other right-of-way users to devise a plan to manage future undergrounding. The city may require, among other things, that user's conduits be oversized, duplicated, or placed in multiple configurations, and user's shall share the use of their underground conduits and multiple configurations at such locations at reasonable rates. Such rates shall be determined by city if user's and third parties cannot agree on same. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02)  
Sec. 94-37. - Ground equipment. 
(a)  Ground equipment near street corners and intersections. Ground equipment should be minimal and the least intrusive. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.102(1), to minimize any obstruction, impediment, or hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way the maximum line of sight required to add to safe travel of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and in order to maximize that line of sight at street corners and intersections and to minimize hazards at those locations, ground equipment may not be installed within 250 feet of a street corner or a street intersection. 
(b)  Ground equipment near municipal parks. For the safety of municipal park patrons, particularly small children, and to allow full line of sights near municipal park property, the user shall not install ground equipment in a right-of-way that is within a park or within 250 feet of the boundary line of a park, unless approved by the city manager and parks director in writing. 
(c)  In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.102(1) to enhance the safety requirements of line of sight of pedestrians, particularly small children, the city's designee may deny a request for a proposed location if the user installs network node ground equipment where existing ground equipment within 300 feet already occupies a footprint of 25 square feet or more. 
(Ord. No. 2017-44, § III, 8-14-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-44, § I, adopted Aug. 14, 2017, amended the Code by redesignating former §§ 94-37—94-41, 94-43—94-45 as §§ 94-49—94-56. Section I also provided that § 94-42 be deleted from the Code, which pertained to vacation, discontinuance and removal of system, and derived from Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, adopted Jan. 14, 2002. Section III of said ordinance added new provisions to be included as §§ 94-37—94-48 to read as set out herein.  
Sec. 94-38. - Concealment. 
(a)  Concealment of network nodes and node support poles shall be required by the city in design districts with decorative poles and in historic districts pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.105. 
(b)  It is also the city's preference that all new node support poles be camouflaged, except those located in an area zoned or predominantly industrial area. Companies shall submit their proposal for camouflage with the permit application. 
(c)  The network node facilities shall be concealed or enclosed as much as reasonably possible in an equipment box, cabinet, or other unit that may include ventilation openings. External cables and wires hanging off a pole shall be sheathed or enclosed in a conduit, so that wires are protected and not visible or visually minimized to the extent possible in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(Ord. No. 2017-44, § III, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-39. - Allowed colors. 
Colors in historic districts and design districts must be approved by the city manager from a palette of approved colors. Unless otherwise provided, all colors shall be earth tones or shall match the background of any structure the facilities are located upon and all efforts shall be made for the colors to be inconspicuous. Colors in areas other than in historic districts and design districts shall conform to colors of other installations of telecommunication providers in the immediately adjacent areas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-44, § III, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-40. - Vacation, discontinuance, removal or relocation. 
(a)  In the event that city closes, abandons, or vacates any rights-of-way that contains facilities, any such closure, abandonment, vacation, or conveyance effectuating same shall be subject to, and conditioned upon, the rights of the users of such rights-of-way. 
(b)  In accordance with applicable law, upon the revocation, termination, or expiration and non-renewal of an applicable franchise agreement, license, or permit, either (a) by mutual agreement of city and a user, (b) by the user's acquiescence or failure to challenge same, or (c) by a final order of a court which a user either does not appeal or from which there is no further right of appeal, then the following shall occur: The user shall immediately discontinue the use of its facilities and all rights of said user to use the streets and public ways shall cease. The user, at the direction of city, shall remove its facilities, including all supporting structures, poles, transmission and distribution portions of the system and other appurtenances, fixtures or property from the streets and public ways, in, over, under, along, or through which they are installed within six months of the revocation, termination, or expiration except that (a) user may abandon its facilities in place with city's consent, and (b) user cannot remove underground facilities without city's consent in advance, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. Prior to any removal the user shall notify city and persons owning property abutting public ways where removal will occur. The user shall also restore any property, public or private, to the condition in which it existed prior the installation, erection or construction of its facilities, including any improvements made to such property subsequent to the construction of its facilities. Restoration of streets and city property, including, but not limited to, the public ways, shall be in accordance with the directions and specifications of city's engineering department, and all generally applicable laws, ordinances and generally applicable regulations, at the user's sole expense. If such removal and restoration is not completed within six months after the revocation, termination, or expiration, all of the user's property remaining in the affected streets and public ways shall, at the option of city, be deemed abandoned and shall, at the option of city, become its property or city may obtain a court order compelling the user to remove same. In the event the user fails or refuses to remove its facilities or to satisfactorily restore all areas to the condition in which they existed prior to the original construction of the facilities, city, at its option, may perform such work and if such work is performed within four years of the revocation, termination or expiration of the applicable franchise agreement, license, or permit collect the costs thereof from the user. No surety on any performance bond shall be discharged until city has certified to the user in writing that the facilities have been dismantled, removed, and all other property restored, to the satisfaction of city. 
(c)  Removal or relocation by user. 
(1)  If the user removes or relocates a micro network node, network node facilities, node support pole or related ground equipment at its own discretion, it shall notify the city manager in writing not less than ten business days prior to removal or relocation. User shall obtain all permits required for relocation or removal of its micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment prior to relocation or removal. 
(2)  The city shall not issue any refunds for any amounts paid by user for micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles or related ground equipment that have been removed. 
(d)  Removal or relocation required for city project. 
(1)  In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.107, except as provided in existing state and federal law, a user shall relocate or adjust micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment in a public right-of-way in a timely manner and without cost to the municipality managing the public right-of-way 
(2)  User understands and acknowledges that the city may require user to remove or relocate its micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or any portion thereof from the right-of-way for city construction projects as allowed by state and federal law, including the common-law. 
(3)  User shall, at the city manager's direction, remove or relocate the same at user's sole cost and expense, except as otherwise provided in existing state and federal law, whenever the city manager reasonably determines that the relocation or removal is needed for any of the following purposes: required for the construction, completion, repair, widening, relocation, or maintenance of, or use in connection with, any city construction or maintenance project of a street or public rights-of-way to enhance the traveling publics use for travel and transportation. 
(4)  If user fails to remove or relocate the micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment, or portion thereof as requested by the city manager within 90 days of user's receipt of the request, then the city shall be entitled to remove the micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment, or portion thereof at user's sole cost and expense, without further notice to user. 
(5)  User shall, within 30 days following issuance of invoice for the same, reimburse the city for its reasonable expenses incurred in the removal (including, without limitation, overhead and storage expenses) of the micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment, or portion thereof. 
(e)  Removal required by city for safety and imminent danger reasons. 
(1)  User shall, at its sole cost and expense, promptly disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment within the timeframe and in the manner required by the city manager if the city manager reasonably determines that the disconnection, removal, or relocation of any part of a micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment (a) is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, or city property, (b) the micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or portion thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of streetlights or city property, or (c) user fails to obtain all applicable licenses, permits, and certifications required by law for its micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or use of any location under applicable law. If the city manager reasonably determines that there is imminent danger to the public, then the city may immediately disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment at the user's sole cost and expense. 
(2)  The city manager shall provide 90 days written notice to the user before removing a micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment under this section, unless there is imminent danger to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(3)  User shall reimburse city for the city's actual cost of removal of micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment within 30 days of receiving the invoice from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-44, § III, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-41. - Installation and inspections. 
(a)  User shall, at its own cost and expense, install the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the requirements promulgated by the city manager, as such may be amended from time to time. User's work shall be subject to the regulation, control and direction of the city manager. All work done in connection with the installation, operation, maintenance, repair, modification, and/or replacement of the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment shall be in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the city, applicable county, the state, and the United States ("laws"). 
(b)  The city manager, or designee, may perform visual inspections of any micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment located in the right-of-way as the city manager deems appropriate without notice. If the inspection requires physical contact with the micro network node, network node, node support poles or related ground equipment, the city manager shall provide written notice to the user within five business days of the planned inspection. User may have a representative present during such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-44, § III, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-42. - As-built maps and records. 
User shall maintain accurate maps and other appropriate records of its network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment as they are actually constructed in the rights-of-way, including, upon request, the use of autoCAD/GIS digital format. User will provide additional maps to the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2017-44, § III, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-43. - Drug policy. 
It is the policy of the city to achieve a drug-free workforce and workplace. The manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, sale, or use of illegal drugs or alcohol by user's employees, contractors, subcontractors, sub-user's, or vendors while on city rights-of-way is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2017-44, § III, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-44. - Ownership. 
No part of a micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment erected or placed on the right-of-way by user will become, or be considered by the city as being affixed to or a part of, the right-of-way. All portions of the micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment constructed, modified, erected, or placed by user on the right-of-way will be and remain the property of user and may be removed by user at any time, provided the user shall notify the city manager prior to any work in the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-44, § III, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-45. - Signage. 
(a)  User shall post its name, location identifying information, and emergency telephone number in an area on the cabinet of the network node facility that is visible to the public. Signage required under this section shall not exceed four inches by six inches, unless otherwise required by law (e.g. RF ground notification signs) or the city manager. 
(b)  Except as required by laws or by the utility pole owner, user shall not post any other signage or advertising on the micro network node, network node, node support pole, service pole or utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 2017-44, § III, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-46. - Graffiti abatement. 
As soon as practical, but not later than 14 calendar days from the date user receives notice thereof, user shall remove all graffiti on any of its micro network node, network node, node support pole, and related ground equipment located in the right-of-way. The foregoing shall not relieve the user from complying with any city graffiti or visual blight ordinance or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-44, § III, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-47. - Restoration. 
User shall repair any damage to the right-of-way, or any facilities located within the right-of-way, and the property of any third party resulting from user's removal or relocation activities (or any other of user's activities hereunder) within ten calendar days following the date of such removal or relocation, at user's sole cost and expense, including restoration of the right-of-way and such property to substantially the same condition as it was immediately before the date user was granted a permit for the applicable location or did the work at such location (even if user did not first obtain a permit), including restoration or replacement of any damaged trees, shrubs or other vegetation. Such repair, restoration and replacement shall be subject to the sole, reasonable approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2017-44, § III, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-48. - User's responsibility. 
User shall be responsible and liable for the acts and omissions of user's employees, temporary employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, sub-user's and subcontractors in connection with the installations of any micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, as if such acts or omissions were user's acts or omissions. 
(Ord. No. 2017-44, § III, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-49. - Improperly installed facilities. 
(a)  Any person doing work in the city rights-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade and maintain facilities and shall do so in accordance with this chapter, applicable law, applicable safety codes, and the reasonable directives of the city engineering department. 
(b)  To the extent not prohibited by applicable federal or state laws, rules, regulations or tariffs, facilities shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained if: 
(1)  The installation, repairs, upgrade or maintenance endangers people; 
(2)  The facilities do not meet the applicable city codes; 
(3)  The facilities are not capable of being located using standard practices; 
(4)  The facilities are not located in the proper place in accordance with the directions provided by the engineering department; 
(5)  The facilities are placed in an area that interferes with city-owned facilities, such as water or sewer lines or streets. Privately owned facilities shall be considered to interfere with city-owned facilities if the privately-owned facility is within three feet horizontally or one foot vertically of city-owned facilities; 
(6)  The facilities cause subsidence/settlement or under deterioration to pavement infrastructure; 
(7)  The facilities are not installed in accordance with this chapter; or 
(8)  The facilities are deemed to be improperly installed by the city engineer or his/her designee. 
(c)  In the event that the city determines that facilities are improperly installed, the user shall be given notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure the improper nature of the installation prior to any remedial action and or civil penalties being imposed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § I, 8-14-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 94-37.  
Sec. 94-50. - Type and location of facilities. 
(a)  The city engineer may require or approve the location of facilities underground. 
(b)  When poles are used, the types of poles, location, depth, upgrades, etc., shall be subject to the review of the engineering department as part of the permit review process. 
(c)  City engineer or his/her designee may approve size of facilities to be installed pursuant to a permit application or require proof of need to install size of system requesting to be permitted. 
(d)  Users shall identify all facilities placed in the rights-of-way (by color code, stamping, engraving, tags, stickers, or other appropriate method selected by user) so as to distinguish user's facilities from that of all other users. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § I, 8-14-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 94-37.  
Sec. 94-51. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Users of the right-of-way shall restore property affected by construction of facilities to a condition that is substantially similar to or better than the condition of the property prior to the performance of the work. 
(b)  Restoration includes, but is not limited to, replacing all ground cover with equal to the type of ground cover damaged during work or better either by sodding or seeding, as directed by the engineering department. In addition user shall at its sole cost and expense restore and replace any other property, real or personal, properly within the rights-of-way, which is disturbed, damaged or in any way injured by or on account of user or by its acts or missions, to the same condition as such property was in immediately prior to the disturbance, damage or injury. 
(c)  Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the engineering department. Nothing herein shall require the user to restore or replace improvements that have been placed within the public rights-of-way in violation of other city ordinances, applicable laws, or other regulations. The restoration shall include, but not necessarily be limited to: 
(1)  Installation of all manholes and handholes, as required; 
(2)  Backfilling or covering of all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes daily, unless other safety measures are approved by the engineering department; 
(3)  Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines; 
(4)  Restoration of excavation side to city specifications; 
(5)  Restoration of all landscaping. 
(d)  All locate flags shall be removed during the cleanup process by the permittee or his/her contractor at the completion of the work. 
(e)  Restoration must be made in a timely manner as specified by approved engineering department schedules and to the satisfaction of the city engineer or his/her designee. If restoration is not satisfactory and performed in a timely manner, after notice and a reasonable opportunity to properly restore, all work in progress, except that related to the problem, may be halted and a hold may be placed on any related permits or permit applications until all restoration is complete. 
(f)  In the event that a user and/or its contractors and/or subcontractors fail to make such restorations or repairs within the time specified by the city, city shall be entitled to complete the repair or restoration and the user shall pay the reasonable costs of city for such repair. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § I, 8-14-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 94-37.  
Sec. 94-52. - Failure to comply with chapter. 
If any of the provisions of this chapter are not followed, and following the notice and opportunity to cure provisions of section 94-31 of this chapter, a permit may be revoked by the city manager or the city engineer or his/her designee. If a person has not followed the terms and conditions of this chapter in work done pursuant to a prior permit, new permits may be denied or additional terms required. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § I, 8-14-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 94-37.  
Sec. 94-53. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Removal of obsolete facilities/cooperation. When a user opens a trench, accesses a conduit or boring, or is working on aerial locations, to the extent the user is reasonably able to do so, it shall remove all unusable and/or obsolete facilities (excluding those held for future use) from such locations. When a user opens a trench or access to borings, it shall, to the extent it is reasonably able to do so, notify all other recipients of franchise agreements, franchisees, permittees, and other user's of such locations in advance of such work, so that they may remove their obsolete facilities from such locations or add new facilities. Users shall cooperate with one another in such activities. When a user receives notification from another user that it is opening a trench or access to borings, said user shall, to the extent it is reasonably able to do so, remove all of its obsolete facilities from such location while they are open. 
(b)  Location of facilities other than public rights-of-way. 
(1)  Easements: Any easements over or under private property necessary for the construction or operation of facilities shall be arranged by the user thereof. Any easements over or under property owned by City other than the public ways shall be separately negotiated with city. 
(c)  Joint use by city. To the extent not prohibited by applicable state or federal law, users shall permit, without charge, the joint use of excess height, space and capacity in its poles, conduits and facilities located in the streets or public ways by city or other governmental entities. 
(d)  Temporary re-location. Upon ten business days notice and in compliance with all applicable federal and state laws, rules, regulations and tariffs and applicable safety codes, users shall either temporarily raise or lower wires or other equipment upon the request of any person, including without limitation, a person holding a building moving permit issued by city. A user so affected may charge a reasonable rate for this service, not to exceed its actual costs with an advance deposit of the estimated cost, or as otherwise provided by applicable federal or state law, rule, regulation or tariff. 
(e)  Pavement cut coordination/additional fees. Users shall coordinate construction programs and all other work in the streets and public ways with city's program for street construction, rebuilding and resurfacing (collectively, "street resurfacing"). All users shall meet with the city engineer or his/her designee at least twice per year to this end. 
(f)  Temporary license. The city manager, in consultation with the city engineer and the city attorney, may grant a temporary license on a month-to-moth basis if a license, franchise, or abandonment application is being processed by the city and if failure to grant a temporary license will subject the applicant to a substantial hardship. 
(g)  Waiver. Any provision of this chapter that is not required by state law or the city Charter may be waived or modified by the city commission, in its sole discretion, in the license or franchise granting use of the city's rights-of-way. Additionally, if on the effective date of this chapter, a person holds a franchise agreement or other contract with the city that authorizes the use of the city's rights-of-way, that person will be exempted from any provision of this chapter that would impose additional fees upon that person that are not contained within the franchise agreement or contract or that are in direct conflict with the terms of the franchise agreement or contract. 
(h)  Effect on existing facilities. Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to require facilities previously installed and existing in the rights-of-way as of the effective date of this article to be removed and/or re-installed so as to be in compliance herewith; provided, however, that the city engineer may require existing facilities to be re-installed, relocated, repaired, and/or removed if the city engineer determines that the facilities were improperly installed and such facilities create a threat to the public health or safety. In all other respects, all facilities, whether installed prior or subsequent to the effective date of this article, shall be subject to and in compliance with this chapter. 
(i)  Landscaping. Landscaping and other improvements placed within the rights-of-way must not unduly interfere or impair the use of those rights-of-way for roadway, transportation, communication, utility, or other such uses and such landscaping and other improvements shall conform to the guidelines as may be issued from time to time by city's engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § I, 8-14-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 94-37.  
Sec. 94-54. - Franchise required. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to permit a use of the public rights-of-way within the city without first obtaining any required permission and/or franchise from city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § I, 8-14-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 94-37.  
Sec. 94-55. - Fee for use of public rights-of-way. 
Except for those persons holding an existing franchise agreement or other contract with the city as of the affective date of this chapter that authorizes the use of the city's public rights-of-way are those persons whose fees for the use of the city's public rights-of-way are established by applicable federal or state law, rule, regulation or tariff, persons using the city's public rights-of-way shall be charges filing fees for such use: unless otherwise specifically set out in an applicable franchise agreement or controlling state law, the fees for use of the city's public rights-of-way are as follows: 
(1)  The annual fee for a license to use a public right-of-way for the following uses is: 
a.  Fee for railroad crossing: not less than $50.00 per track crossing the public right-of-way or an amount determined by the city engineer or his/her designee and established in this article granting the franchise. The fee will not be assessed for a railroad crossing where the railroad crossing existed before the public right-of-way was established. 
b.  Fee for encroachment of historically significant structures (as determined by city) into public right-of-way: $350.00. 
c.  Fee for newspaper racks placed in the public right-of-way: $5.00 each. 
d.  Fee for landscaping and appurtenant irrigation systems: $350.00. 
e.  Fee for awnings and other uses determined to be in the best interest of the public: as established by the city commission. 
(2)  The annual fee for use of the public right-of-way for uses other than those listed in subsection (1) is $350.00 or as calculated in accordance with one of the following formulas, whichever is greater: 
a.  Fee for use of public right-of-way, including but not limited to sidewalk vendors (where allowed): area × market value × 85 percent × 12 percent. 
b.  Fee for subsurface use only: area × market value × 30 percent × 12 percent. 
c.  Fee for air rights only: area × market value × 85 percent × 85 percent × 12 percent. 
Fee for commercial parking (if permitted by city): 50 percent of gross receipts. 
(3)  Whether or not stated in this article granting the license, franchise, or permit, the city commission retains the right to increase or decrease the annual fee. 
(4)  As used in this section, and unless otherwise determined by the city commission, the "market value" of the area licensed shall be based on the per square foot appraised value, as determined by the Hidalgo County Appraisal District, of a fee simple interest in a useable tract of abutting property. 
(5)  The city engineer shall, not less than biannually, review the market value of licensed areas for which fees are based upon market value. If it is determined that the market value of a licensed area has decreased, the city shall notify the licensee/franchisee in writing that the annual fee has been decreased. If it is determined that the market value of a licensed area has increased, the city shall notify the licensee/franchisee in writing that the annual fee has been increased. If the licensee/franchisee is unwilling to accept the increased fee, the licensee/franchisee may terminate the license/franchise and receive any refund due for the prepaid portion of the current year's fee. All increases/decreases in licensee/franchise fees made pursuant to this section shall be reported to the city commission before taking effect. 
(6)  It shall be presumed for purposes of this section and the formulas contained herein that a linear foot of right-of-way usage equates to a square foot of area in the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § I, 8-14-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 94-37.  
Sec. 94-56. - Appeal process. 
Appeal from a denial or revocation of a permit or from any other decision, direction, or requirement issued pursuant to this chapter shall be first to the city manager. The city manager shall allow or deny the appeal within three business days of receipt of same by the city. If the appeal is denied, the city manager shall issue a written statement setting out the reasons for the denial. If the city manager denies the appeal, the user may then appeal the city manager's decision to the city commission by filing a written notice of the user's intention to appeal, in writing, with the city secretary and a copy to the city attorney. Any such appeal shall be filed within 15 days after the city manager's denial. If an appeal to the city commission is filed, the city commission shall set a time and a place for hearing the appeal and shall notify the user in writing of said time and place. Such hearing shall be held within 20 business days of the filing of the appeal and the user shall be provided at least five business days notice of the date, time and place of the hearing, unless such time periods are waived by the user. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § I, 8-14-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 94-37.  
Secs. 94-57—94-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - IMPROVEMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-44, § II, adopted Aug. 14, 2017, amended Art. III, §§ 94-46—94-52, by redesignating as Art. III, §§ 94-71—94-77. 
 
Sec. 94-71. - Violation of article provisions. 
In addition to any penalty which may be prescribed for the failure of any person to construct, reconstruct, repair or otherwise improve any street, sidewalk, curb or gutter in violation of the provisions of this article, such street, sidewalk, curb or gutter may be corrected or made to comply with this article under such rules and regulations as may be adopted or prescribed by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 26-17; Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § II, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-72. - Power of board of commissioners. 
The board of commissioners shall have the power in their discretion by resolution passed by a majority vote, to order the construction, reconstruction, repair or improvement of dedicated streets, sidewalks, curbs or gutters along any street, avenue, public place, alley or part or section thereof within the city, or in front of any property abutting upon the same. Such resolution shall in general terms describe such dedicated streets, sidewalks, curbs or gutters, and the street, avenue, square, alley or place, or part or section thereof, along which any such street, sidewalk, curb or gutter is to be constructed, reconstructed or repaired. The city shall have the power to assess the whole cost of such dedicated street, sidewalk, curb or gutter, or part of same, against the property abutting or fronting thereon, and against the owner thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 26-18; Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § II, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-73. - Specifications. 
Specifications for street, sidewalk, driveway and curb and gutter construction, repair or other improvement within the city shall be as prescribed by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Code 1966, § 26-19; Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § II, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-74. - Permit required. 
No person shall construct, reconstruct, repair or otherwise improve any sidewalk, curb, gutter or any street paving within the city without first obtaining from the city building official a permit to do so. 
(Code 1966, § 26-20; Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § II, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-75. - Bond required. 
No person shall construct, reconstruct, repair or otherwise improve any sidewalk, curb, gutter or street paving in the city without first having executed and delivered to the city a bond in the sum of $1,000.00, payable to the city with two or more good and sufficient personal sureties thereon, or an approved surety company as surety, which bond shall be conditioned as follows: 
(1)  That all work shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner, and that such person shall faithfully and strictly comply with the specifications and with the terms of this article and such other applicable provisions of this Code, ordinances, resolutions or regulations that may be passed by the board of commissioners. 
(2)  That the city shall be fully indemnified and be held whole and harmless from any and all cost and expense of damage, whether real or asserted, on account of any injury done to any person or property in the prosecution of such work, or that may arise out of or be occasioned by the performance of such work. 
(3)  That the person shall, without additional cost to the person for whom the work was done, maintain all sidewalks, curbs, gutters or street paving so constructed, reconstructed or repaired by such person for a period of one year from the date of such construction, reconstruction or repair, to the satisfaction of the city engineer, and shall reconstruct or repair such sidewalk, curb, gutter or street paving, to the satisfaction of the city engineer, at any time within one year after the construction, reconstruction or repair of such sidewalk, curb, gutter or street paving after ten days' notice from the city engineer to reconstruct or repair the same. The opinion of the city engineer as to the necessity of such reconstruction or repair shall be binding on the parties thereto. 
(4)  That such bond shall be in force for one year after any sidewalk, curb, gutter or street paving is constructed, reconstructed or repaired, and one recovery shall not exhaust such bond, but such bond shall be a continuing obligation against the sureties thereon until the entire amount therein provided for shall have been exhausted. 
(5)  That if such bond shall be decreased on account of any recovery which may be obtained, arising out of the violation of any condition of such bond, the board of commissioners shall require, upon notice of such a fact, an additional bond to be given by any such person in accordance with this article in an amount sufficient, when added to the unexhausted amount of the original bond, to be at all times equal to the sum of $1,000.00. 
(6)  That the city may for itself or for the use and benefit of any person injured or damaged by reason of any defective construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk, curb, gutter or street paving by any person, maintain suit on such bond in any court having jurisdiction thereof, or suit may be maintained thereon by any person injured or damaged by reason of the failure of any person who shall construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk, curb, gutter or street paving in the city to observe the conditions of such bond. 
(7)  That such bond shall expire on January 1 of each year, and shall thereafter be reexecuted by any such person for a period of one year from such date; provided that any person constructing, reconstructing or repairing any sidewalk, curb, gutter or street paving at any time after January 1 of any year shall execute a bond for the unexpired portion of such year; that is, until January 1 of the succeeding year, it being the intention of this section that all bonds shall expire on January 1 of each year, and as near as practicable that all bonds shall be executed for a period of one year. 
(8)  That the board of commissioners shall have the right to increase the amount of the bond of any such person at any time it deems it necessary to protect the interests of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 26-21; Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § II, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-76. - Supervision of work. 
Any person who shall construct, reconstruct, repair or otherwise improve any sidewalk, curb, gutter or street in the city shall do so under the supervision of the city engineer and in accordance with the specifications set forth in this article or such other specifications as may be prepared by the city engineer and adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 26-22; Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § II, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-77. - Paving, curb and gutter in subdivisions. 
(a)  In all cases wherein subdivision plats are submitted for approval by the board of commissioners as a prerequisite to filing of such plats for record in the office of the county clerk, it shall be a prerequisite to final approval thereof by the board of commissioners that paving, curb and gutter have been laid by the owner or subdivider over all streets shown on such subdivision, in accordance with plans and specifications provided by the city for street paving, and as approved by the city engineer. In lieu of actual paving, such owner or subdivider may deposit with the city a sum of money equal to the estimated costs of such paving as determined by the city engineer, or such owner or subdivider may file with the city a good and sufficient bond executed by himself as principal and a good reputable surety company doing business in the state as surety, subject to approval by the board of commissioners, guaranteeing that such paving, curb and gutter will be laid in accordance with city plans and specifications and subject to approval of city engineer within a period of one year from date of approval of such plat. If money deposit is made, the city may, at its option, proceed with such work at any time and pay for such work from such deposit. If bond is filed and the owner fails to comply with the paving requirement within the required period, the city may thereupon proceed with such paving and the principal and surety on such bond shall be liable for the cost of such paving, curb and gutter. 
(b)  No approval of any plat by the city planning and zoning commission shall waive any of the provisions of this article. The city reserves the right to withhold all city utility connections to any lot in any subdivision until such paving, curb and gutter are laid. 
(Code 1966, § 26-23; Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § II, 8-14-17) 
Charter reference— Platting of property, art. 1, § 5.  
Secs. 94-78—94-88. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SIGHT OBSTRUCTIONS AT INTERSECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-44, § II, adopted Aug. 14, 2017, amended the Code by redesignating §§ 94-56—94-60 of Art. IV as §§ 94-78—-94-85. In order to maintain the style of the Code, and at the editor's discretion, said sections have been redesignated as Art IV, §§ 94-89—94-93. 
 
Sec. 94-89. - Obstructions prohibited. 
No person shall erect, permit or maintain the existence of any wall, fence or other structure, except utility poles, traffic signs and devices, and street name signs, or plant or permit the growth or existence of any tree, hedge, shrub or other similar growth of a height greater than three feet from the street gutter flow line upon his property where such property is bounded on two adjacent sides by the public right-of-way for a road, street, alley, or other public passageway, at angles to each other, the area so restricted being the area of the corner of such property, more particularly described as being that area in the form of a triangle, bounded by two intersecting boundaries of the present or future street curbline for a distance of 25 feet (ten feet for alleys) on each of such boundaries from the points of intersection, and bounded by a third side determined by drawing of a straight line from the points of the two intersecting boundaries 25 feet (ten feet for alleys) from their intersection. 
(Code 1966, § 26-52; Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § II, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-90. - Preexisting structures excepted; application against preexisting shrubs, etc. 
Section 94-56 shall not apply to any business building, family building, apartment house, or other structures existing as of March 20, 1962, and not in violation of any applicable provision of this Code, or state law or city ordinance. Also, section 94-56 shall not apply to a single tree existing in the specified triangle as of December 1, 1973; provided, however, that no limbs, leaves, or other growth on the tree shall be allowed to exist at a height of more than three feet and less than eight feet above the street gutter flow line. No other exceptions shall be granted for the existence of other trees, shrubs, or other growth in any area prohibited by section 94-56 in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 26-53; Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2006-83, § 2, 8-14-06; Ord. No. 2017-44, § II, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-91. - Minimum clearance of trees. 
(a)  No person who is an owner or occupant of any private premises or property within the city shall permit the growth or existence of any tree, hedge, shrub or other similar growth where such tree, hedge, shrub or other similar growth shall overhang or project onto any public street or right-of-way so designated as a state highway or major arterial as defined and delineated in the thoroughfare plan as contained in Foresight McAllen, the official comprehensive plan for the city, adopted and on file with the city secretary, at a height of not less than 13 feet, six inches, and on all other city streets at a height of not less than 12 feet from the street level. No person as owner or occupant of any private premises or property located in the city shall permit the growth or existence of any tree, hedge, shrub or other similar growth where such obstruction interferes with the visibility of traffic control signs or devices by operators of vehicles upon public streets or by pedestrians upon public streets or sidewalks. 
(b)  There is hereby imposed a penalty as prescribed in section 1-14, plus state court cost, for the conviction of any person for violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 26-54; Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § II, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-92. - Flashing lights and signs. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words shall have the following meaning: 
Flashing light or sign means any light-producing device wherein any one or any group of light sources goes on and off, or gives the appearance of going on or off, from any direction from which the source is visible at a frequency of between 30 and 180 times per minute. 
High intensity light means any light-producing device which uses internal or external reflectorization or magnification to increase light intensity or directional focusing. 
(b)  Prohibited uses. It shall be unlawful, whether individually or through an agent, employee or representative, to place, erect, install or use any flashing light or sign of a red, yellow, amber or orange color within 100 feet horizontal distance of any public street or highway right-of-way line within the city, or for any high intensity light to be used within 100 feet of a street or highway in a manner such that the rays of the high intensity light are directed horizontally upon the roadway of any street or highway within the city. 
(c)  Exemptions. Exemptions from the provisions of this section are official traffic control devices, street lights, emergency vehicles, construction warning lights, aircraft beacons or warning lights, and any other lights or signs required by law. 
(Code 1966, § 26-54.1; Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § II, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 94-93. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
The existence of any structure or growth prohibited by this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a danger to the free uninterrupted flow of traffic upon the public ways and a danger to the use of such public ways by operators of vehicles and by pedestrians. In addition to any penalty which may be imposed for the violation of this article, the city shall have the right, without being guilty of trespass and without being liable for damages, to enter onto any property to trim and remove such obstructions in order to carry out the purpose and intent of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 26-55; Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2017-44, § II, 8-14-17)  
Chapter 98 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-271 et seq.; fiscal year, § 2-272. 
State Law reference— City tax assessor and collector authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 6.22; taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 98-1. - Tax on sale of telecommunications services. 
(a)  A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  The application of the exemption provided for in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210(a) is hereby repealed by the city as authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210(b). 
(c)  The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the state legislature. 
(d)  The city secretary shall forward to the state comptroller by United States registered or certified mail a copy of this section along with a copy of the minutes of the board of commissioners' vote and discussion on this section. 
(e)  This section shall become effective as of October 1, 1987. 
(Code 1966, § 27-5)  
Sec. 98-2. - Tax on sale of residential use of gas and electricity within the city. 
(a)  A tax is hereby authorized and imposed on all receipts from residential use of gas and electricity within the city, as is provided for by state law. 
(b)  The exemption provided for in § 321.105, Tax Code, V.A.T.C.S., is hereby vacated by the city as authorized by § 321.105 thereof. 
(c)  The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state. 
(d)  The city secretary shall forward to the comptroller of the state by United States registered mail a copy of this section along with a copy of the minutes of the city commission's vote on this section. 
(e)  This section shall be and is hereby declared to be cumulative of all other ordinances of the city, and this section shall not operate to repeal or affect any such other ordinances. The tax provided for hereunder shall not serve as an offset to, be in lieu of or in any way reduce any amount payable to the city pursuant to any franchise, street use, ordinance, charter provision, or statute or, without limitation by the foregoing enumeration, otherwise payable by any provider of gas or electricity within the city, it being the express intent hereof that all such obligations, impositions and agreements of every kind and nature shall remain in full force and effect without reduction or limitation hereby. 
(Ord. No. 2012-13, § II, 2-27-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-13, § II, adopted Feb. 27, 2012, enacted provisions which did not specify manner of inclusion. Hence, to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been codified herein as § 98-2.  
Secs. 98-3—98-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 98-26—98-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-89, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 2004, amended former Art. II, Div. 2, Subdivs. I—III, §§ 98-46—98-50, 98-61—98-66, to read as herein set out in Art. II, Div. 2, Subdivs. I and II, §§ 98-36, 98-37, 98-46, 98-47. Former Subdivisions II and III pertained to elderly persons and disabled persons. See also the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
 
Subdivision I. - Tax Code Sec. 11.13 (d)—(f) Exemption 
 
Sec. 98-36. - Amount of and type of exemption. 
Upon complying with and maintaining all of the requirements for an exemption under Section 11.43 and Sections 11.431 Texas Tax Code as such sections presently exists or may hereinafter be amended, $10,000.00 of the appraised value of a residence homestead of an individual who is disabled or is 65 years of age or older shall be exempt from ad valorem taxes levied by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-89, § 1, 10-25-04)  
Sec. 98-37. - Effective date. 
The exemption provided in section 98-36 shall be effective for the tax year commencing January 1, 1979. Eligibility for such exemption shall be determined as of January 1 of each successive year unless such exemption is otherwise amended or repealed as authorized under Section 11.13(f). 
(Ord. No. 2004-89, § 1, 10-25-04)  
Secs. 98-38—98-45. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Tax Code Sec. 11.261 Limitation 
 
Sec. 98-46. - Limitation of total taxes. 
(a)  There is hereby established a limitation on the total amount of taxes that may be imposed by the City Of McAllen on the residence homestead of a disabled individual or an individual 65 years of age or older as authorized under Section 1-b(h), Article VIII, Texas Constitution and in accordance with and as restricted by the provisions of Section 11.161, Texas Tax Code as such Section presently exists. 
(b)  If an individual makes improvements to the individual's residence homestead that is subject to the tax limitation provided in subsection (a), other than repairs and other than improvements required to comply with governmental requirements, then the amount of taxes on the homestead shall be increased in the first year the value of the homestead is increased on the appraisal roll because of the enhancement of value by the improvements, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2004-89, § 1, 10-25-04)  
Sec. 98-47. - Effective date. 
Section 98-46 became effective October 25, 2004. 
(Ord. No. 2004-89, § 1, 10-25-04)  
Secs. 98-48—98-66. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - HISTORIC PROPERTIES 
 
Sec. 98-67. - Definitions. 
Terms used in this division shall have the same meaning as the same terms as defined in section 138-411 of this Code, unless otherwise specifically provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2007-97, § 1, 12-10-07)  
Sec. 98-68. - Qualification and eligibility. 
Properties that are designated as "landmark property" or "heritage property" or that are located within a designated "historic district" pursuant to Article VII of Chapter 138 of the McAllen Code of Ordinances are hereby qualified as historically significant sites in need of tax relief to encourage their preservation, pursuant to § 11.24 of the Texas Tax Code. Except where no historic or replica building or structure exists on the property, designated properties are eligible for tax relief under this section, provided, that: 
(1)  An historic property may not simultaneously benefit from more than one tax exemption under this division. Tax exemptions for terms certain that are granted under this division are non-renewable. No tax exemption may be granted for any period of time that precedes the filing of an application for historic designation, if voluntary, or historic designation by the board of commissioners, if involuntary. 
(2)  A property shall be disqualified and ineligible for tax relief pursuant to sections 98-72 and 98-73. 
(3)  No property shall be eligible for tax relief hereunder if granting the same will cause the potential annual revenue foregone by the city as a consequence of the tax relief granted under this article to exceed one-half of one percent of the city's ad valorem tax revenues for the year immediately preceding the year in which the application is being considered. 
(4)  It shall be presumed that the lot in which the historic structure is located is "land necessary for access to and use of the structure" (§ 11.24 of the Texas Tax Code), except that if the lot is larger than one acre the historic preservation council may submit its recommendation to the board of commissioners which, after consideration of the same shall specifically determine what, if any additional portion of the lot is "land necessary for access to and use of the structure." 
(5)  In the event the board of commissioners repeals this division all properties designated as "landmark property" or "heritage property," and all properties located within a designated "historic district" shall no longer qualify nor be ineligible for tax relief pursuant to section 98-69. 
(Ord. No. 2007-97, § 1, 12-10-07)  
Sec. 98-69. - Tax exemption. 
(a)  The following properties qualify for tax exemptions, which shall expire at the end of the exemption period granted, unless otherwise provided in this division: 
(1)  Landmark property. The owner of a landmark property so designated by the City of McAllen may apply for an ad valorem tax exemption in perpetuity equal to 50 percent of the assessed value of the qualified building and/or structure and land. 
(2)  Heritage property. The owner of a heritage property so designated by the City of McAllen may apply for an ad valorem tax exemption for ten years equal to 100 percent of any increase in the assessed value of the qualified building and/or structure and land at the time the designation application was filed, if voluntary, or at the time the property was designated, if involuntary. 
(3)  Properties in an historic district. Except for properties designated as either landmark or heritage, the owner of a property in an historic district so designated by the City of McAllen may apply for an ad valorem tax exemption for five years equal to 100 percent of any increase in the assessed value of the qualified building and/or structure and land at the time the designation application was filed, if voluntary, or at the time the historic district designation was granted, if involuntary. Any property located in an historic district that is individually designated as landmark or heritage property may apply for any tax exemptions available on the basis of such designation. Whenever an individual landmark or heritage designation is granted any historic district exemption applicable to the property shall immediately terminate upon it being granted another exemption based on such individual designation. Such property shall then be entitled to the full benefit and period of tax exemption it has individually qualified for. 
(4)  Federal or state designation. The owner of any property designated as landmark property by the board of commissioners that has been granted federal or state historic designation or that is granted such designation during any period of exemption granted under this division, may apply for an ad valorem tax exemption equal to 100 percent of the assessed value of the qualified building and/or structure and land. 
(b)  At the expiration of a tax exemption period granted under subsection (a)(2) hereof, the assessed value for taxation of such property shall gradually increase to full appraised value on an annual basis, and shall be the sum of the prior year's assessed value plus 20 percent of the difference between the then-current appraised value and the prior year's assessed value, until the property's appraised value and its assessed value for taxation are the same. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to properties that are disqualified and ineligible pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2007-97, § 1, 12-10-07)  
Sec. 98-70. - Application for exemption. 
(a)  The tax relief provided for by this division shall not be granted unless the person claiming such tax relief shall file an application as provided in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.43 and other applicable provisions of Chapter 11 of the Tax Code. 
(b)  Any property owner claiming tax relief provided under this division shall be required to annually request and obtain from the director of planning a certification of qualification, a copy of which must be attached to the application for historic or archeological site property tax exemption required to be filed as provided in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.43 in the form prescribed by the Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts. 
(Ord. No. 2007-97, § 1, 12-10-07)  
Sec. 98-71. - Determinative date for exemption. 
January 1 of each tax year shall be the determinative date for eligibility for exemption under this division and qualification therefor shall be determined each year as of that date. Determination of eligibility for such exemption shall be for only the year in question with each subsequent year requiring application and determination of eligibility as provided in this division. There shall be no proration of the exemption provided for in this division for any taxable year either in the event of qualification or disqualification of either any applicable person or property for such exemption after January 1 of the applicable year. 
(Ord. No. 2007-97, § 1, 12-10-07)  
Sec. 98-72. - Disqualification and ineligibility; penalty. 
(a)  Any withdrawal of a property's official city, state or federal historic designation shall subject the property to disqualification as an historically significant site in need of tax relief to encourage preservation, pursuant to the provisions of section 98-73 hereof. In the event of such disqualification the property shall become ineligible for any tax relief granted hereunder. Such ineligibility shall be effective as of the year in which the designation was withdrawn. 
(b)  Except when the withdrawal of historic designation directly resulted from an Act of God a penalty shall be imposed against such property equal to the difference, if any, between the taxes imposed on the property for each of the five years preceding the year in which such historic designation is withdrawn, and the taxes that would have been imposed had it not benefited from the exemption, plus interest at an annual rate equivalent to the rate established by § 11.181 of the Texas Tax Code, calculated from the dates on which the taxes would have become due. 
(Ord. No. 2007-97, § 1, 12-10-07)  
Sec. 98-73. - Declaration of disqualification; appeal. 
(a)  Whenever there is good cause to believe that, pursuant to section 98-72, a property for which tax relief is being claimed under this division has ceased to qualify for designation as an historically significant site in need of tax relief to encourage preservation, the historic preservation council shall conduct a fact-finding investigation to determine whether the property should be declared disqualified. 
(b)  Within ten calendar days of the council's decision to conduct an investigation, the planning director shall notify the property owner in writing of the investigation. The notice shall state that the owner has the opportunity to submit, within ten calendar days of the date of said notice, any relevant factual information for consideration by the council. 
(c)  After concluding its investigation the council shall deliberate and decide whether or not the subject property should be declared disqualified. The planning director shall notify the property owner in writing of the councils' decision within ten calendar days of the same. In the event the decision is to declare the property disqualified, the notice shall also advise that the council's decision may be appealed to the board of commissioners as provided for in this section. 
(d)  Whenever the council finds that a property should be disqualified the planning director shall so advise the city tax office, indicating as well that the decision is subject to appeal by the property owner. The provisions of section 98-72 shall then be applied if the council's decision is not appealed, or if it is appealed and upheld by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  The affected property owner may present to the board of commissioners a petition setting forth that the council's decision to disqualify the property under section 98-72 is unjust, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of injustice. Such petition shall be presented to the board of commissioners within ten days after the final decision of the council, and not thereafter, for notification and calling of a public hearing to hear and act on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-97, § 1, 12-10-07)  
Secs. 98-74—98-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
Sec. 98-86. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consideration means the cost of the room in a hotel and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy, and shall not include any tax assessed for occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency. Any charge or fee assessed or paid that relates or is attributable to smoking in a hotel room or space is a cost of cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy and subject to the occupancy tax. 
Director of finance means the director of finance of the city. 
Hotel means any building in which the public may for a consideration obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodginghouses, inns, roominghouses, apartments or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but hotel shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes. 
Occupancy means the use or possession of any room or rooms in a hotel for any purpose. 
Occupant means anyone who for a consideration uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms in a hotel under lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
Person means any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
Quarterly period means the regular calendar quarter of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March, the second being the months of April, May and June, the third quarter being the months of July, August and September, and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
(Code 1966, § 27-4(1); Ord. No. 2005-67, § 1, 9-12-05) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-87. - Levy of tax; rate; exception. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished in any hotel, where such cost of occupancy is at a rate of $2.00 or more per day; such tax shall be equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space or utility of such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies; provided, however, not less than the amount of revenue received by the city from the tax at a rate of one percent of the cost of the room shall be used for the purposes of advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the city or its vicinity. It is further provided that this money is hereby authorized to be contracted with the chamber of commerce for the purposes of providing such services on behalf of the city in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 351.101. 
(b)  No tax shall be imposed under this article upon a permanent resident of such hotel. 
(Code 1966, § 27-4(2))  
Sec. 98-88. - Collection. 
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed by this article for the city. 
(Code 1966, § 27-4(3))  
Sec. 98-89. - Reports, payment of tax. 
The person responsible for collecting the tax due on the occupancies described in section 98-87 shall remit the tax to the city on the 15th day following each month of collection as required in this article. Along with such payment, the person required to collect the occupancy taxes levied in this article shall file a report with the director of finance of the city showing the consideration paid for all room or sleeping space occupancies in the preceding monthly period, the amount of tax collected on such occupancies and any other information as the director of finance may reasonably require. Such report shall be in writing. In addition to such report, the person collecting such occupancy tax shall also forward to the city, on a quarterly basis, the report required to be filed with the state relating to the hotel occupancy tax imposed by the state on such occupancy. 
(Code 1966, § 27-4(4); Ord. No. 1993-43, § I, 5-24-93; Ord. No. 1993-48, § I, 6-14-93)  
Sec. 98-90. - Duties, authority of director of finance. 
The director of finance shall adopt such procedures, rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary to effectively collect the tax levied in this article, and shall, upon request of any person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel, furnish a copy of such procedures, rules and regulations for the guidance of such person and facilitate the collection of such tax as such collection is required in this article. Such procedures, rules and regulations shall be in writing and a copy thereof shall be placed on file with the city collector. The director of finance shall be permitted to have access to books and records during reasonable business hours as shall be necessary to enable the director of finance to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article, and to determine the correctness of the amount due under the provisions of this article, or to determine whether a report should have been filed and the amount, if necessary, of taxes due. 
(Code 1966, § 27-4(5))  
Sec. 98-91. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  On the first day after the date on which any tax imposed by this article shall be due and payable, there is hereby added to such tax a penalty equal to five percent of the amount of such tax. If any such tax remains delinquent for 30 days after such due date, there is hereby added to such tax an additional penalty of ten percent of the amount of such tax. If any such tax remains delinquent for a period of 60 days after such due date, then in addition to such tax and penalty, there is hereby imposed an interest payment on the amount of such delinquent tax equal to ten percent per annum until such tax or portion thereof is finally and fully paid in full. In addition to the amount of any tax, penalties and interest owed as provided in this article, a person who violates any term of this article is liable to the municipality for the municipality's reasonable attorney's fees in pursuing compliance therewith. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedies provided by law or by this article for the collection of the tax imposed under this article, the city attorney, or other attorney acting for the city attorney, may bring suit against a person who is required to collect the tax imposed by this article, and pay the collections over to the city, and in addition, such attorney may bring suit against any person who has failed to file a report or pay the tax when it is due, and enjoin such person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report is filed, or both, as applicable and as provided in the injunction. 
(Code 1966, § 27-4(6); Ord. No. 2005-67, § 2, 9-12-05)  
ARTICLE IV. - TWO PERCENT HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
Sec. 98-92. - Definitions. 
Approved venue project shall mean the planning, design, development, renovation and construction of a performing arts center, or operating or maintaining a performing arts center, and related facilities, infrastructure and improvements necessary for same including, but not limited to, buildings, sitework, utilities, plumbing, roads, walkways, sidewalks, plazas, bridges, parking lots and/or parking garages, traffic control devices, signage, landscaping, real estate, easements, rights-of-way and other improvements that were approved by the voters of the City of McAllen, Texas at an election conducted within and throughout the city on November 8, 2011. 
City shall mean the City of McAllen, Texas and shall include its designee. 
Consideration shall mean the price of a room in a hotel and does not include the cost of food served by the hotel or the cost of personal services rendered to the occupants or the room not related to cleaning and readying the room for occupancy. 
Governmental entity or governmental entities shall mean the United States, the State of Texas, or an agency, institution, board or commission of the State of Texas other than an institution of higher education. 
Hotel shall mean a building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn, rooming house or bed and breakfast, but does not include a hospital, sanitarium, nursing home, or a dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Education Code § 61.003, and used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution. A hotel shall also not include an oilfield portable unit, within the definition of V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 152.001. 
Occupancy or occupancies shall mean the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession or right to use or possess extends for a period of less than 30 days. 
Occupant shall mean a person who, for consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room ordinarily used for sleeping in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement. 
Person shall mean any individual, partnership, trust, company, corporation, association or other entity. 
State legal holiday shall mean a date included on the list of legal holidays for banking purposes, which is published in the Texas Register before January 1 of each year by the treasurer, or its successor, and distributed to each Texas state agency that receives reports or payments, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 111.053(b). 
(Ord. No. 2012-69, § I, 10-8-12)  
Sec. 98-93. - Tax imposed. 
There is hereby levied and imposed a tax upon the occupant of any room in a hotel within the city limits that is ordinarily used for sleeping, and for which the cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day, and such tax shall be equal to two percent of the price paid for the occupancy of a room in the hotel, except that no tax shall be imposed on the cost of a room occupied as follows: 
(1)  By an occupant with the right to use or possess the room for at least 30 consecutive days without interruption of payment during such period; and 
(2)  By governmental entities or officers and employees of a governmental entity when traveling on or otherwise engaged in the course of official duties for the governmental entity, which exception is more fully described in section 98-96 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-69, § I, 10-8-12)  
Sec. 98-94. - Collection of tax and reimbursement for collection of tax. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed by this article on behalf of the city on every occupancy and such persons shall report and pay the tax to the city in accordance with all requirements and procedures set forth in this article. 
(b)  Each bill or other receipt for a hotel charge subject to the tax imposed by this article shall contain a statement in a conspicuous location stating the tax rate collected by the hotel from the customer from the state (including the state rate of tax), and the tax rate and identity of each other taxing authority - including all taxes imposed by the city - that has imposed a tax for the room (including those other rates of tax). 
(Ord. No. 2012-69, § I, 10-8-12)  
Sec. 98-95. - Reports, payments and fees. 
(a)  On the 15th day of the month following each month in which a tax is earned, every person required by this article to collect the tax shall file a report with the director of finance of the city showing: 
(1)  The Consideration paid for all occupancies in the preceding month; 
(2)  The amount of the tax collected on the occupancies; and 
(3)  Any other information the city may reasonably require in order to assist the city in properly accounting for the collection of the taxes imposed herein. 
In addition to such report, the person collecting such occupancy tax shall also forward to the director of finance of the city, on a quarterly basis, the report required to be filed with the state relating to the hotel occupancy tax imposed by the state on such occupancy. 
(b)  Every person required by this article to collect the tax shall pay the tax due on all occupancies in the preceding month to the city at the time of filing the report required under Subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  If the 15th day falls on a weekend or state legal holiday, the city must receive the tax by the next day that does not fall on a weekend or state legal holiday. If the tax is paid by mail, the date of receipt by the city is the date postmarked by the U.S. Postal Service. 
(d)  Each person required by this article to collect and pay the tax to the city shall submit one combined tax report to the city addressing both the seven percent hotel occupancy tax imposed under chapter 98, article III of this Code and this two percent hotel occupancy tax imposed under chapter 98, Article IV of this Code. The combined tax report shall contain separate line items for the seven percent and two percent taxes. 
(e)  Each remittance of a tax required by this article must contain the following statement and representation: 
The Tax Remitted and Paid to the City of McAllen with this Report was Collected Pursuant to the Requirements of the Ordinance Imposing A Hotel Occupancy Tax by the City Of McAllen Board of Commissioners, as Amended. 
(f)  After the city gives reasonable notice to a person that the city intends to inspect the books or records of the person, the city shall have access to the person's books or records necessary for the city to determine the correctness of a report filed under this section or the amount of taxes due under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-69, § I, 10-8-12)  
Sec. 98-96. - Exemptions and refunds. 
(a)  A United States Governmental Entity described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(a) is exempt from the payment of tax imposed under this article. 
(b)  A state governmental entity described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(b) shall pay the tax imposed by this Article, but is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(c)  An occupant who is described by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.101 or V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(d) is exempt from the payment of the tax authorized by this article. 
(d)  An occupant who is described by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(c) shall pay the tax imposed by this article, but the state governmental entity with whom the occupant is associated is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(Ord. No. 2012-69, § I, 10-8-12)  
Sec. 98-97. - Penalties, interest and corrective actions for late filings and non-compliance. 
(a)  On the first day after the date on which any tax imposed by this article shall be due and payable, there is hereby added to such tax a penalty equal to five percent of the amount of such tax. If any such tax remains delinquent for 30 days after such date, there is hereby added to such tax an additional penalty of ten percent of the amount of such tax. 
(b)  If any such tax remains delinquent for a period of 60 days after such due date, then in addition to such tax and penalty, there is hereby imposed an interest payment on the amount of such delinquent tax equal to ten percent per annum until such tax or portion thereof is finally and fully paid in full. 
(c)  In addition to the amount of tax, penalties and interest, the city shall be entitled to all its costs (inclusive of costs of an audit) and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in enforcing this article against the person owning, controlling, operating or managing a hotel and in collecting any tax owed by the person under this article. 
(d)  If a person required to file a tax report under this article does not file the report as required by the city, the city may determine the amount of the tax due under this article by: 
(1)  Conducting an audit of each hotel in relation to which the person did not file the report as required by the city; or 
(2)  Using the tax report file for the appropriate reporting period under V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.151 in relation to that hotel. 
(e)  If the person did not file a tax report under V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.151 of the Texas Tax Code for that reporting period in relation to that hotel, the city may estimate the amount of tax due by using the tax reports in relation to that hotel filed during the previous calendar year under this article or V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.151. An estimate made is prima facie evidence of the amount of tax due for that period in relation to that hotel. 
(f)  The authority to conduct an audit under this section 98-97 is in addition to any other audit authority provided by statute, charter or ordinance. The city may directly perform an audit authorized in this section or contract with another entity to perform the audit on an hourly rate or fixed-fee basis. The city shall provide at least 30-days' written notice to a person who is required to collect the tax imposed by this article with respect to a hotel before conducting an audit of the hotel. 
(g)  V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies § 16.061 applies to the collection of a tax under this article. A limitations period provided by V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Title 2 relating to the time allowed to assess taxes and bring a suit to collect taxes does not apply to a tax imposed under this article or to a suit brought under this section. 
(h)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 334.253 and V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.004, the city, by ordinance, may authorize a misdemeanor punishment for a violation of the requirements of this article. 
(i)  An attorney acting on behalf of the city may bring suit against a person who is required to collect the tax imposed hereby and who has failed to file a tax report or pay the tax when due in order to either (i) collect the tax not paid, or (ii) enjoin the person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report is filed. The remedies provided by this section are in addition to other available remedies available under Texas law, and shall not be interpreted to limit the city's ability to take corrective actions. 
(Ord. No. 2012-69, § I, 10-8-12)  
Sec. 98-98. - Tax collection on purchase of a hotel. 
(a)  If the person who is liable for the payment of a tax under this article is the owner of a hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to the seller or the seller's assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price sufficient to pay the amount of tax due until the seller provides a receipt from the person designated by the city to provide the receipt showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate showing that no tax is due. 
(b)  The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the purchase price as required by this section is liable for the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price. 
(c)  The purchaser of a hotel may request that the person designated by the city to provide a receipt under subsection (a) of this section issue a certificate stating that no tax is due or issue a statement of the amount required to be paid before a certificate may be issued. The person designated by the city shall issue the certificate or statement not later than the 60th day after the date the person receives the request. 
(d)  If the person designated by the city to provide the receipt under subsection (a) of this section fails to issue the certificate or statement within the period provided by subsection (c) of this section, the purchaser is released from the obligation to withhold the purchase price or pay the amount due. 
(Ord. No. 2012-69, § I, 10-8-12)  
Sec. 98-99. - Use of revenue derived from imposition of tax. 
The revenue derived from the tax imposed under this article must be deposited into the hotel occupancy tax account of a venue project fund of the city and be used only for the purposes specified in the order of the city board of commissioners that created the venue project fund, as it may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2012-69, § I, 10-8-12)  
Sec. 98-100. - Rulemaking. 
The city is hereby authorized to do all things necessary or convenient and within its legal authority to carry out the terms of this article and reserves the right to make rules in connection with the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-69, § I, 10-8-12)  
Chapter 102 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Operation of vehicles and parking at the airport, § 18-76 et seq.; ambulances, § 42-76 et seq.; regulations regarding vehicles and parking in parks and recreation areas, § 74-81; closure and vacation of streets, app. C. 
State Law reference— Uniform Traffic Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 102-1. - Definitions. 
Whenever any words and phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this section, but are defined in the state laws regulating the operation of vehicles, any such definition therein shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this chapter. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means any street having no legal or official name, other than alley, of 20 feet or less in width. 
Authorized government vehicle means a motor vehicle owned by the United States, the State of Texas or a political subdivision of the State of Texas. 
Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Digging out means the practice of starting any motor vehicle from a standing position by applying a sudden burst of power, recognized by spinning rear wheels and noise of tires on the surface of the roadway. 
Electronic message means a self-contained piece of digital communication that is designed or intended to be transmitted to or from a wireless communication device, other than a voice message. An electronic message includes, but is not limited to, a text-based communication, a nonverbal command or request to access or receive information from an internet site, electronic mail, a text message, an instant message or such other data that uses a commonly recognized electronic communications protocol. 
Operate or operating means to drive or be in physical control of a motor vehicle that is in motion. 
Operator means a person who drives or has physical control of a motor vehicle. 
School zone means each street, alley, public ground, or any part thereof within 250 feet of any school, school grounds or area, public or private, having a regular school attendance of 50 or more pupils, whereabout signs or markers of appropriate nature have been placed by order of the police department and are conspicuously displayed on such streets, alleys and public grounds, indicating the approach to or the delineation or marking of the boundary line of such school zone. 
Wireless communication device has the meaning assigned in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.425 ("use of wireless communication device; offense"). 
(Code 1966, § 29-1; Ord. No. 2011-04, § I, 1-24-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 102-2. - Compliance with chapter; penalty for violation. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, any person found guilty of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 29-10)  
Sec. 102-3. - Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers. 
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of passengers. This section shall not apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1966, § 29-18)  
Sec. 102-4. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles. 
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1966, § 29-19)  
Sec. 102-5. - Throwing objects from moving vehicle. 
No person shall throw any object or thing of whatever nature from a moving vehicle while such vehicle is meeting or passing another vehicle or person. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to permit such an act. 
(Code 1966, § 29-14)  
Sec. 102-6. - Tampering with, injuring, etc., vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, to climb upon or into such vehicle, whether such vehicle is in motion or not, or to attempt to manipulate any of the levers, the starter or other devices, brakes or mechanisms on a vehicle not in motion, or to set such vehicle in motion. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully break, injure, tamper with or remove any part of any vehicle for the purpose of injuring, defacing or preventing its useful operation or for any other purpose against the will or without the consent of the owner of such vehicle, or to maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle. 
(Code 1966, § 29-15)  
Sec. 102-7. - Use of roller skates, coasters, etc., on roadway. 
(a)  No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and, when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(b)  A parent or guardian of any minor child shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such minor child to violate this section. 
(Code 1966, § 29-20)  
Sec. 102-8. - Pedestrian crossings on U.S. Highway 83 Expressway. 
It shall be unlawful for any person acting as a pedestrian to cross the traffic lanes at U.S. Highway 83 Expressway within the city limits, except at designated crossings (overpasses) specifically designed and designated as a crossing on the U.S. Highway 83 Expressway. 
(Code 1966, § 29-27)  
Secs. 102-9—102-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 102-31—102-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-76 et seq.; procedure for appointment and terms and qualifications of board members, § 2-77; substantial evidence rule in effect regarding appeals from decisions of boards, commissions and committees, § 2-82. 
 
Sec. 102-41. - Created; name; composition; appointment, etc. 
There is hereby created a traffic commission, to be known as the "McAllen Citizens Traffic Commission," which shall be composed of not more than 25 members. Such members shall be appointed and serve as provided in sections 2-76 through 2-82. 
(Code 1966, § 29-2(a))  
Sec. 102-42. - Quorum. 
A quorum for the transaction of business on the traffic commission shall be five members. 
(Code 1966, § 29-2(h); Ord. No. 2017-20, § I, 4-10-17)  
Sec. 102-43. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The traffic commission shall be an advisory body. It may establish its own rules and regulations for its meetings and proceedings. It shall make a study of traffic conditions in the city and make recommendations to the board of commissioners designed to improve traffic efficiency and to reduce and eliminate traffic accidents, injuries and deaths. The traffic commission may evaluate transportation infrastructure a as directed by the city commission to promote safe and orderly movement and make recommendations to the board of commissioners to improve mobility, circulation, and reduce traffic congestion. It is desired that the traffic commission undertake a campaign of education of the general public as to traffic problems and its cooperation in reducing and eliminating traffic accidents, injuries and deaths. It shall seek the cooperation and coordination of any and all other civic groups created and working for the same common purpose of improving traffic conditions in the city. It shall make reports to the board of commissioners of its work from time to time. 
(b)  The traffic commission shall not be authorized to create any debts or incur any liability on behalf of the city unless first authorized so to do by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 29-2(f), (g); Ord. No. 2009-70, § 1, 11-9-09)  
Secs. 102-44—102-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TRAFFIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-196 et seq.; traffic safety coordinator to enforce the provisions regarding transit vehicles, § 114-155. 
 
Sec. 102-56. - Established. 
The traffic safety department is hereby established to be headed by a traffic safety coordinator appointed by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 29-3)  
Sec. 102-57. - Duties of traffic safety coordinator. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic safety coordinator to: 
(1)  Conduct analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures. 
(2)  Conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions. 
(3)  Place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Supervise the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices. 
(5)  Designate and maintain by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at any intersection where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(6)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(7)  Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city and laws of the state. 
(8)  Administer and supervise the issuance of parking violation citations by non-police officer personnel as authorized by this chapter, and to administer the collection of fines therefor. 
(9)  Designate any street as a stop intersection and designate the streets upon which vehicles shall stop before entering such intersections. 
(10)  Establish no parking or limited parking zones in areas not reserved for board of commissioners' consideration and where an established need exists based on vehicular and pedestrian safety considerations. 
(11)  Inspect taxicabs and transit vehicles pursuant to section 114-29. 
(Code 1966, § 29-4)  
Sec. 102-58. - Authority of traffic safety coordinator to make traffic regulations. 
Using the procedures and criteria prescribed in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and in conformance with state and federal law and city ordinances, the traffic safety coordinator is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city and to make temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulations shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(Code 1966, § 29-5)  
Sec. 102-59. - Traffic regulations reserved to the board of commissioners. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other section of this chapter or any other city ordinances, the board of commissioners shall approve by ordinance any regulations, except of a temporary or emergency type, which involve the following: 
(1)  Designation of one-way streets or alleys. 
(2)  Authorization of traffic signals (three-phase light signal). 
(3)  Establishment of speed limits. 
(4)  Prohibition of parking on city streets or alleys which exceeds two continuous city blocks (approximately 660 feet) on one side of a street or one city block (approximately 330 feet) on both sides of the street. 
(5)  Designation of parking meter zones. 
(6)  Time limits and amount of deposit in metered zones. 
(Code 1966, § 29-6)  
Sec. 102-60. - Authority of police to direct traffic. 
Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with this chapter and other traffic laws. In the event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter and other traffic laws. 
(Code 1966, § 29-7) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of police officers, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(2).  
Sec. 102-61. - Authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic. 
Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 29-8)  
Sec. 102-62. - Obedience to traffic officers. 
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official given to direct or control traffic as authorized in this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 29-9) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 22; procedure upon arrest, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 145 et seq.  
Sec. 102-63. - Records of traffic violations. 
The police department shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of the city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Such record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent three-year period. 
(Code 1966, § 29-29)  
Sec. 102-64. - Annual traffic report. 
(a)  The traffic safety coordinator shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city manager. Such report shall contain information on the traffic matters in this city as follows: 
(1)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data. 
(2)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police. 
(3)  The plans and recommendations of the traffic safety coordinator for future traffic safety activities. 
(b)  All reports made in accordance with this section shall be kept on file for a period of three years. 
(Code 1966, § 29-31)  
Secs. 102-65—102-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ACCIDENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Wreckers, § 114-226 et seq.; wreckers to be summoned by police or fire department in case of accident, § 114-231. 
State Law reference— Accidents, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 38 et seq. 
 
Sec. 102-86. - Accident reports. 
(a)  The police department, acting through any officer of the department or the chief of police, may require any driver of a vehicle involved in an accident of which a report must be made as provided by law, to make a supplemental oral or written report whenever the original report is found to be insufficient or inadequate in the opinion of the department, and may require witnesses of accidents to render reports to the department. 
(b)  The police department shall receive and properly file all accident reports made to it under state law or under this section, but all such accident reports made by drivers shall be for the confidential use of the police department, and no such report shall be admissible in any civil or criminal proceedings other than upon request of the person making such report or upon request of the court having jurisdiction to prove a compliance with the law requiring the making of such report. 
(c)  The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the traffic safety coordinator. 
(d)  Every law enforcement officer, other than members of the police department and state department of public safety, who, in the regular course of duty, investigates a motor vehicle accident of which a report must be made as required by law, either at the time of and at the scene of the accident or thereafter by interviewing participants or witnesses shall, within 24 hours after completing such investigation, forward a written report of such accident to the police department. Every such accident report shall be made on the appropriate form approved by the police department and shall contain all of the information required therein unless not available. Such reports shall be without prejudice to the officer so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police department and the traffic safety coordinator. 
(Code 1966, § 29-21)  
Sec. 102-87. - Removal of vehicles from scene of accident. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the driver or any other person to remove a vehicle from the scene of an accident concerning which a report is required by law until authorized to do so by a police officer of this city. This subsection shall not apply if there exists or arises a duty on the part of such driver or other person in control of such vehicle to use the vehicle in carrying any person injured in the accident to a physical or medical facility for medical treatment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the driver or any person in charge of any vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist, winch or towing device, who has answered a call to, or is attending the scene of, any collision or accident of one or more vehicles in the city, to remove or attempt to remove any vehicle involved in such collision or accident, or in any way to interfere with or change the position of any such vehicle, except upon authority or direction and in the presence of a police officer of the city, unless such change is made or attempted for the purpose of releasing a person imprisoned within or under such vehicle. It shall likewise be unlawful for the driver or person in charge of any such vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist, wench or towing device to remove any vehicle from the scene of the accident or collision without the consent of the owner of the vehicle so removed, unless directed by a police officer to remove such vehicle as a public safety measure or for the protection of private property. 
(Code 1966, § 29-22)  
Sec. 102-88. - Investigation and study of accidents. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police department to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(b)  Whenever accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police department shall cooperate with the traffic safety coordinator in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(Code 1966, § 29-24)  
Secs. 102-89—102-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of traffic control devices and signals, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 27(a)(2), 31. 
 
Sec. 102-126. - Conformity with manual and specifications of state highway department; uniformity. 
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state highway department. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1966, § 29-60)  
Sec. 102-127. - Obedience to devices. 
(a)  Obedience required; exception. The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(b)  Not required of prosecution. In any prosecution for any violation of this chapter, it shall not be necessary for the state to prove the installation or authority therefor of any traffic control device or signal. 
(c)  Defense's right of rebuttal. Any person charged with a violation of this chapter shall have the right to prove the sign, signal or device was not so installed or authorized as a defense to prosecution. 
(Code 1966, § 29-61) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 32.  
Sec. 102-128. - Necessity of signs. 
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Code 1966, § 29-62)  
Sec. 102-129. - Ratification of existing devices. 
All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings placed or erected and in use for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be official traffic control devices, provided such traffic control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law. 
(Code 1966, § 29-63)  
Sec. 102-130. - Installation of signals. 
The traffic safety coordinator of the city is hereby authorized to install traffic light signals in accordance with the requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices at the street intersections within the city according to specifications provided in this chapter and as provided by the laws of the state, which are on file in the office of the traffic safety coordinator. 
(Code 1966, § 29-64) 
State Law reference— Authority to require accident reports, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 49.  
Secs. 102-131—102-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Operation of vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 54 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 102-151. - Interference with traffic. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any conduct upon any street or sidewalk in the city which shall be reasonably calculated to interfere with the passage of traffic thereupon. This section shall not apply to duly authorized parades, funeral processions or similar functions. 
(Code 1966, § 29-11)  
Sec. 102-152. - Confiscation of unauthorized sirens. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and all persons acting under him to seize any siren which is being operated contrary to the provisions of this chapter or state laws and take the siren before the municipal court judge. If in the judgment of the city judge such siren is being operated contrary to the provisions of this chapter or state laws he may order the siren permanently confiscated and provide for the disposal of the siren, or the judge may order such siren to be held as evidence in the trial of such case. 
(Code 1966, § 29-12)  
Sec. 102-153. - Vending vehicles, flashing warning lights required; use. 
(a)  Flashing warning lamps required. All vending vehicles which operate upon the public streets or ways in the city for the purpose of vending merchandise on such streets, such as, but not limited to, ice cream, candy, sandwiches, drinks, or other similar merchandise, shall be required to have installed on such vehicles and in good operating condition at all times while vending such merchandise on the public streets or ways some type of flashing warning lamps as follows: 
(1)  The lamps used to display such warnings to the front shall be mounted at the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable and shall display simultaneously flashing white or amber lights or any shade of color between white and amber. 
(2)  The lights used to display such warning to the rear shall be mounted at the same level and as widely separated laterally as practicable and shall show simultaneously flashing amber or red lights or any shade between amber and red. 
(3)  These warning lights shall be visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet in normal atmospheric conditions at night. 
(b)  Police chief to approve type. The flashing warning lights required by this section shall be of a type first approved by the chief of police. 
(c)  Operation of flashing warning light. The lights required by this section shall be turned on and operating at any and all times when the vehicle on which such lights are located is stopped on any of the public streets or ways in the city and the owner or operator is at the time engaged in the selling of merchandise, and for a period of at least one minute prior to coming to a stop and for one minute after the vehicle again begins to move. 
(d)  Unlawful use of vending vehicle. An owner or operator of a vending vehicle shall not engage in the vending of merchandise on any street except those streets in areas zoned R-1 Residential District under the city's zoning regulations and only in those streets on which parking or standing is not prohibited. An operator of a vending vehicle shall not stop on any street except for the purpose of obeying any traffic control device or law or for a period greater than is necessary to serve the immediate customers purchasing merchandise. 
(e)  Hours of operation restricted. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a vending vehicle to engage in the vending of any merchandise from such vehicle on any public street or way in the city between the period of one-half hour before sunset and 9:00 a.m. In the prosecution of any offense under this section, the prosecutor may introduce as prima facie evidence as to the time which constitutes one-half hour before sunset for the particular violation the notation of sunrise/sunset as reported in the paper of general circulation in and for the city. 
(Code 1966, § 29-13) 
Cross reference— Peddlers and solicitors, ch. 78.  
Sec. 102-154. - Obstructing intersection or crosswalk. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1966, § 29-46)  
Sec. 102-155. - Digging out/peeling out prohibited. 
Any driver of any motor vehicle who shall willfully cause such vehicle to dig/peel out or shall cause any such vehicle to make unnecessary noise by reason of operating such vehicle in such manner as to cause the wheels thereof to spin or slide on the roadway of any street or public school parking lot or roadway when starting such vehicle, accelerating or while making any turning movement shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1966, § 29-49; Ord. No. 2004-51, § 1, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 2018-80, § I, 11-12-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-80, § I, adopted Nov. 12, 2018, changed the title of § 102-155 from "Digging out prohibited" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 102-156. - Negligent collision. 
No person while driving or operating or in charge of any vehicle shall wilfully or with negligence cause or suffer or permit such vehicle to come into collision with any other vehicle of any nature whatever, or with any animal or property in or on any street or public or private property. 
(Code 1966, § 29-50)  
Sec. 102-157. - Prohibiting through traffic on certain residential alleys. 
(a)  The traffic safety coordinator, with the written consent of the city manager, is hereby authorized to designate and prohibit through traffic on any alley or part thereof within a residential district where, in his opinion, there is adequate access to through streets or highways otherwise available and such designation would lessen the number of intersections on through streets and highways in such locations. After a residential alley has been designated as a non-through traffic alley, the traffic safety coordinator shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such prohibition shall be effective unless the signs are in place. 
(b)  Whenever alleys or parts thereof are designated as non-through traffic alleys, no person shall drive any vehicle on such alley where the sole purpose of driving on such alley is to travel from one through street, highway or through alleyway to another. 
(Code 1966, § 29-51)  
Sec. 102-158. - No passing zones. 
The traffic safety coordinator is hereby authorized to determine those portions of any street where overtaking and passing or driving to the left of the roadway would be especially hazardous and may, by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of such zones, and when such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 29-40)  
Sec. 102-159. - One-way streets and alleys. 
(a)  The following streets or portions thereof located in the city shall be one-way streets according to the direction as so designated and it shall be unlawful for any driver of any vehicle to operate such vehicle so as to travel in any direction other than as specified for such one-way street: 
(1)  The 1000 and 1100 blocks of Dallas Avenue (between 11th and 12th Streets), one-way westbound. 
(2)  The 800 block on North Broadway (between Hackberry and Ivy Avenues), one-way southbound. 
(3)  North 5½ Street between the 2600 through 2700 block, one-way, northbound. 
(4)  On South Twelfth Street, South Main Street, South Sixteenth Street, between U.S. Highway 83 (Loop No. 374) and Houston Avenue, in a northerly direction only. 
(5)  Austin Avenue from 15th Street to 16th Street. 
(b)  The following alleys or portions thereof located within the city shall be one-way alleys according to the direction as so designated and it shall be unlawful for any driver of any vehicle to operate such vehicle to travel in any direction other than as specified in such one-way alley: 
(1)  The 200 block between North Main Street and North 15th Street, northbound. 
(2)  The 200 block between North Main and North 15th Streets and Beech and Cedar Streets, southbound. 
(c)  There is hereby imposed a penalty as prescribed in section 1-14, plus state court costs, for the conviction of any person for violation of the one-way alley designations imposed in this section. 
(d)  All ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners designating one-way streets or alleys in the city which have not, however, been codified in this Code are hereby ratified and confirmed and shall remain in full force and effect, notwithstanding the lack of codification in this Code. 
(e)  Whenever any ordinance of the board of commissioners designates any one-way street or alley, the traffic safety coordinator shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1966, § 29-45; Ord. No. 1995-39, § I, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1, 2-29-00; Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, 1-12-09)  
Sec. 102-160. - Use of a wireless communication device; offense. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an operator of a motor vehicle to use a wireless communication device to view, send or compose an electronic message or manually engage other application software while operating a motor vehicle upon any roadway in the city, including when stopped, except as provided in subsection (b)(2). 
(b)  It is an exception to the prohibition in subsection (a) if: 
(1)  An operator of a motor vehicle uses a wireless communication device to strictly engage in a telephone conversation or to listen to a voicemail message, including dialing or deactivating a phone call; 
(2)  An operator of a motor vehicle uses a wireless communication device while stopped or standing at a position parallel to and as close as possible to the right hand edge or curb or a roadway where parking, standing or stopping in a nonemergency situation is not otherwise prohibited; or 
(3)  An operator of a motor vehicle uses a wireless communication device solely in a voice-activated or other hands-free mode. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of conduct prohibited in subsection (a) if: 
(1)  An operator of an authorized government vehicle uses a wireless communication device to respond to an emergency while acting in an official capacity while operating an authorized government vehicle; 
(2)  An operator of a motor vehicle uses a wireless communication device to: 
i.  Operate only a global positioning or navigation system; 
ii.  Obtain emergency assistance by contacting an emergency response service, including a rescue, emergency medical, or hazardous material response service; a hospital; a fire department; a law enforcement agency; a medical doctor's office; or an individual to administer first aid treatment; 
iii.  Obtain emergency assistance to prevent a crime about to be committed; 
iv.  Report a traffic accident or serious traffic hazard; or 
v.  Communicate with the reasonable belief that a person's life, safety or property is in immediate danger. 
(d)  Conflicting regulations. To the extent that any clause, phrase, provision, sentence or part of this section conflicts with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.424, regarding the use of wireless communications devices while operating a motor vehicle by minors, or V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.425, regarding the use of wireless communication devices in school crossing zones, this section does not apply. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § II, 1-24-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-04, § II, adopted Jan. 24, 2011, enacted provisions intended for use as § 102-60 of this chapter. To preserve the style of this Code, and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as § 102-160.  
Secs. 102-161—102-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TURNS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Turning, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 65 et seq. 
 
Sec. 102-171. - Indicated course of travel at marked intersections. 
The traffic safety coordinator is authorized to place markers, buttons and/or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles at such intersections, and it shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the instructions of any such marker, buttons or sign. 
(Code 1966, § 29-41)  
Sec. 102-172. - Prohibited turns at intersections. 
The traffic safety coordinator is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event such time restrictions shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Code 1966, § 29-42)  
Sec. 102-173. - U-turns. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street, unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(b)  No driver of a vehicle shall turn so as to proceed in the opposite direction where sight restriction is such that the section of street being traversed lies within a no passing zone as determined and marked in accordance with the provisions of section 102-158. 
(Code 1966, § 29-43)  
Sec. 102-174. - Left and right turn lanes. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions apply: 
Left turn only or right turn only lane means that portion of any roadway that has been divided into a clearly marked turning lane for traffic by use of any or a combination of pavement markings, traffic signal arrows, street signs, or overhead signs. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  Whenever any roadway has been divided so as to contain a clearly marked and designated left turn only lane, the driver of a vehicle on such roadway is hereby prohibited from doing the following: 
a.  Using the left turn only lane to pass a vehicle going in the same direction in a through lane of traffic by driving out of the through lane of traffic into the left turn only lane of traffic and then reentering the through traffic lane. 
b.  While proceeding in the same direction, to enter the lane at such an angle and such a distance from the intended left turn point that the driver of the car using such left turn only lane has not removed such car completely from the adjacent through lane of traffic. 
c.  Enter the lane more than 300 feet in advance of the left turn point. 
d.  Cross an intersection at any intersecting street by driving in a left turn only lane, or to cross the intersection from or into a left turn only lane. 
e.  From driving at a rate of speed in the left turn only lane which is not prudent or safe under the facts and circumstances then and there existing. 
f.  Weaving in or out of a left turn only lane. 
(2)  Whenever any roadway, immediately prior to a street intersection, has been divided into clearly marked turning lanes, either for a right turn or a left turn, the driver of a vehicle in such designated turn lane shall make only the turn so indicated. 
(Code 1966, § 29-44)  
Secs. 102-175—102-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SPEED LIMITS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Speed limits, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 166 et seq. 
 
Sec. 102-186. - Court costs. 
Court costs may be imposed upon the conviction of anyone violating the provisions of this division regarding speed limits. 
(Ord. No. 1987-51, § X, 10-5-87)  
Sec. 102-187. - Maximum limits generally. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle on any street within the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the circumstances then existing, except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speeds for compliance with subsection (b) of this section, and operation of a vehicle at a speed greater than the limits specified in this division shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent, and that it is unlawful. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, no person shall drive a vehicle on a street at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(c)  Unless another speed limit is or has been previously determined by the board of commissioners to be reasonable and prudent at certain locations and such other speed limit is there posted, the speed of 30 miles per hour is determined to be reasonable and prudent on every street located within an urban district of the city. The term "urban district" is defined as the territory contiguous to and including any highway or street which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses, situated at intervals of not less than 100 feet for a distance of one-quarter mile or more on either side. 
(d)  All speed limits in effect and posted at the time of the adoption of this section are deemed to have been properly determined reasonable and prudent for the streets or portions thereof so posted, and are hereby ratified. 
(Code 1966, § 29-70) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 166.  
Sec. 102-188. - Maximum limits on specific streets. 
(a)  The traffic safety coordinator may set the maximum speed limit on any street or portion thereof within the city, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation. Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such limit. 
(b)  The following speed limits have been found to be reasonable and prudent, subject to the additional limitations of subsection 102-187(b), for those portions of the streets set forth in this subsection: 
Bicentennial Boulevard. The speed zones on Bicentennial Boulevard shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the North line of Wichita Avenue to the South line of Business 83, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Beginning at the South line of Business 83 to the South line of Pecan Boulevard, the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Beginning at the South line of Pecan Boulevard to a point 120 feet North of Camelia Avenue, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
From such point North to Trenton Road, the speed limit shall remain 45 miles per hour. 
Business 83. The maximum speed limit on Business 83 shall be as follows: 
Beginning at a point at the west city limit lines at Taylor Road, east to a point 523 feet west of the centerline of Ware Road, the maximum speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. 
Beginning at a point 523 feet west of the centerline of Ware Road, east to a point 190 feet west of the centerline of 24 th Street, the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Beginning at a point 190 feet west on the centerline of 24 th Street, east to a point 300 feet west of the centerline of Bicentennial Boulevard, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Beginning at a point 300 feet west of the centerline of Bicentennial Boulevard, east to a point 60 feet east of the centerline of 8 th Street, the maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Beginning at a point 60 feet east of the centerline of 8 th Street, east to a point at the city limits at Jackson Road, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Daffodil Avenue. The maximum speed limit on Daffodil Avenue shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the west curbline of 23rd Street (F.M. 1926), thence westward on Daffodil Avenue to the east curbline of Taylor Road, the maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Dove Avenue. The speed zone on Dove Avenue shall be as follows: 
Beginning at a point at the west city limit line on Taylor Road, east to the east city limit line, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
El Rancho Road. The maximum speed limit on El Rancho Road shall be as follows: 
Beginning at a point 150 feet west of McColl Road, west to Second Street, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Fern Avenue. The maximum speed limit on Fern Avenue shall be as follows: 
Beginning at a point at the east city limit lines, west to Second Street, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Four Mile Road. From North 23rd Street to Ware Road, the maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Hackberry Avenue from east city limits west to Second Street, 35 miles per hour. 
Jackson Avenue. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of 35 miles per hour on Jackson Avenue between Jackson Road and Second Street. 
Jasmine Avenue. From the west curbline of McColl Road (FM-2061) to the east curbline of Cynthia Avenue (Mustang Drive), the maximum speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour. From the west curbline of North 23rd Street, thence westerly to the beginning of Jasmine Circle, the speed limit shall be 15 miles per hour. 
Jasmine Circle. From Jasmine Avenue to the south curbline of Laurel Street, the speed limit shall be 15 miles per hour. 
McColl Road. The speed zone on McColl Road, also identified as F.M. 2061, shall be as follows: 
Starting at the intersection of McColl Road with Loop 374 (Business U.S. 83), northward and terminating at a point 250 feet north of the centerline of Nolana Loop, the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Beginning at a point 250 feet north of the centerline of Nolana Loop, northward to the north city limit, the maximum speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
Beginning at the south line of Ridge Road to the North line of Yuma Avenue, the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Beginning at the south line of Yuma Avenue to the North line of El Rancho Road, the maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Nolana Avenue. The maximum speed limit on Nolana Avenue shall be as follows: 
Beginning at a point at the east city limit line at Jackson Road, west to a point 525 feet west of the centerline of McColl Road, the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Beginning at a point 525 west of the centerline of McColl Road, west to a point 525 feet west of the centerline of 23rd Street, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Beginning at a point 525 feet west of the centerline of 23rd Street, west to a point 130 feet east of the centerline of Bentsen Road, the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Beginning at a point 130 feet east of the centerline of Bentsen Road, west to a point 130 feet east of Taylor Road, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Beginning at a point 130 feet east of Taylor Road, west to the west city limit line at Taylor Road, the maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
North Bentsen Road. The speed zones on North Bentsen Road shall be as follows: 
From the centerline of Business Highway 83, also identified as Loop 374, to 360 feet north of Buddy Owens Boulevard (F.M. 1924), the speed limit shall be 40 mph; from such a point north to the north city limits, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
North Tenth Street. The maximum speed limit on North Tenth Street shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the centerline of Business Highway 83 also identified as Loop 374, and proceeding north to a point of 520 feet north of Hibiscus Avenue, the maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
From such point north to a point 430 feet north of Dove Avenue the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
From such point north to a point 420 feet north of Wisconsin Road the maximum speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. 
From such point north to the centerline of S.H. 107 the maximum speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
Pecan Boulevard. The maximum speed limit on Pecan Boulevard shall be as follows: 
Beginning at a point at the west city limit lines on Taylor Road, east to the west line of Ware Road, the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From the west line of Ware Road to a point 500 feet east of the centerline of Second Street, the maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
From a point 500 feet east of the centerline of Second Street, proceeding east to the east city limits at Jackson Road, the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Ridge Road. The maximum speed limit on Ridge Road shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of Savannah and Ridge Road, thence east to Cynthia Street, the maximum speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
Savannah Avenue. The maximum speed limit on Savannah Avenue shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the east curbline of Tenth Street (S.H. 336), thence eastward on Savannah Avenue to the west curbline of South Second Street, the maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
From the west curbline of South Second Street, thence east to the intersection of Savannah Avenue and Ridge Road, the maximum speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
Second Street. The maxium speed limit on Second Street shall be as follows: 
From the north right-of-way of Lindberg Avenue, thence north to the north right-of-way of Business 83 the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Beginning at the north right-of-way of Business 83 and terminating at the north right-of-way of Dove Avenue, the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Beginning at the north right-of-way of Dove Avenue and terminating at a point 200 feet north of the centerline of Wisconsin Road, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Provided, however, between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, during the regularly scheduled McAllen Independent School District school days, the speed limits shall be as follows: 
Second Street School Zones: 
St. Paul's Lutheran School from a point 150 feet south of the north right-of-way of Pecan Boulevard to a point 250 feet south of the south right-of-way line of Tamarack Avenue, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
Jackson Elementary, from a point being the southernmost curb of the 2500 block to the northernmost curb of the 2600 block, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour. 
Gonzalez Elementary School, from a point 200 feet south of the south right-of-way of Martin Avenue to a point 1330 feet north of the north right-of-way of Martin Avenue, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
Second Street Loop. The speed zones on Second Street Loop shall be as follows: 
From the intersection of Second Street Loop with Tenth Street (State Highway 336), thence east and north right-of-way of Lindberg Avenue, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
South Bentsen Road. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of 40 miles per hour on South Bentsen Road between Business U.S. Highway 83 (Loop 374) and Expressway U.S. Highway 83. 
South Tenth Street. The maximum speed limit on South Tenth Street shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the centerline of Business Highway 83 also identified as Loop 374, and proceeding south to a point of 650 feet south of Wichita Avenue, the maximum speed limit shall be 35 mph; 
From such point south to a point 360 feet south of 2nd Loop Street the maximum speed limit shall be 45 mph; 
From such point south, to the south city limit line the maximum speed limit shall be 55 mph. 
South 23rd Street. The maximum speed limit on South 23rd Street shall be as follows: 
From I-2 Frontage Road to Business Highway 83, the maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
South 29th Street. From the intersection of Galveston Avenue to the intersection of westbound Frontage Road of U.S. Expressway 83, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Taylor Road. The maximum speed limit on Taylor Road shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the north line of U.S. Expressway 83 north, to a point 300 feet north of the centerline of Three Mile Line (Buddy Owens Boulevard) the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. From such a point north of Three Mile Line (Buddy Owens Boulevard) to the south line of Four Mile Line (Lark Avenue), the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Three Mile Line Road (F.M. 1924). From the intersection of Three Mile Line Road and 23rd Street, thence west to the west city limits, the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Trenton Road. The maximum speed limit on Trenton Road shall be as follows: 
Beginning at a point at the east city limit lines west to North Tenth Street, the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Starting at the intersection of Trenton Road with North Tenth Street (S.H. 336), westward and terminating at a point 0.2 mile west of North Main Street, the maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
From a point on Trenton Road 0.2 mile west of North Main Street, westward to the intersection of Trenton Road and Ware Road, the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Twenty-fifth Street. From the north curbline of Ivy Avenue to the south curbline of Laurel, the maximum speed limit shall be 15 miles per hour. 
Twenty-ninth Street. The maximum speed limit on 29th Street shall be as follows: 
Beginning at a point 150 feet north of the centerline of Quince Avenue northward to a point 150 feet north of the centerline of Nolana Avenue, the maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Beginning at a point 150 feet north of the center line of Nolana Avenue northward to Oxford Avenue, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Twenty-third Street. The maximum speed limit on 23rd Street, also known as Spur 115 (south of U.S. Business Highway 83) and F.M. 1926 (north of U.S. Business Highway 83) shall be as follows: 
a.  South 23rd Street (Spur 115) at a point 150 feet south of Lucille Street northward to the north toe of the north floodway, the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From such point proceeding north to a point 150 feet south of U.S. Highway Expressway 83, the maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
b.  North 23rd Street (F.M. 1926) from its intersection with F.M. 495 (Pecan Boulevard) and proceeding north to a point 300 feet south of the centerline of Eagle Avenue, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
From such point proceeding north to a point 250 feet south of the centerline of Emory Avenue, the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From such point proceeding north to the north city limit line, the maximum speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
Uvalde Avenue. The maximum speed limit on Uvalde Avenue shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the west curbline of South Main Street, thence west to the east curbline of South 23rd Street (F.M. 1926), the maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Vine Avenue. From Bicentennial Boulevard to 23rd Street, 20 miles per hour. 
Violet Avenue. The maximum speed limit on Violet Avenue shall be as follows: 
From McColl Road to 2 nd Street, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Ware Road. The maximum speed limit on Ware Road shall be as follows: 
From F.M. 1016 to 300 feet south of the centerline of Neuhaus Drive, the maximum speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. 
From 300 feet south of the centerline of Neuhaus Drive to Expressway 83, the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
From Expressway 83 to Business 83, the maximum speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. 
From such point proceeding north to a point 528 feet north of the centerline of Daffodil Avenue, the maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From such point proceeding north to the north city limit, the maximum speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. 
(Code 1966, § 29-71; Ord. No. 1978-9, § 1, 2-20-78; Ord. No. 1992-59, § II, 7-13-92; Ord. No. 1998-101, § 1, 10-26-98; Ord. No. 1998-108, § 1, 11-9-98; Ord. No. 1999-73, § 1, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 2000-70, § 1, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 2001-53, § 1, 8-15-01; Ord. No. 2003-06, § 1, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2003-15, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 2003-27, § 1, 4-14-03; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2004-84, § 1, 10-25-04; Ord. No. 2004-99, § 1, 12-13-04; Ord. No. 2005-14, § 1, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2005-48, § 1, 5-9-05; Ord. No. 2006-78, § 1, 7-24-06; Ord. No. 2008-16, § 1, 3-10-08; Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1, 3-10-08; Ord. No. 2009-64, § 1, 10-26-09; Ord. No. 2011-37, § 1, 7-11-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § I, 4-9-12; Ord. No. 2012-23, § I, 4-9-12; Ord. No. 2012-56, § I, 9-10-12; Ord. No. 2012-77, § I, 11-12-12; Ord. No. 2012-81, § I, 11-26-12; Ord. No. 2013-14, § I, 2-25-13; Ord. No. 2013-15, § I, 2-25-13; Ord. No. 2013-57, § I, 8-12-13; Ord. No. 2013-59, § I, 8-12-13; Ord. No. 2013-105, § I, 12-9-13; Ord. No. 2014-19, § I, 5-12-14; Ord. No. 2015-78, § I, 9-14-15; Ord. No. 2016-11, § I, 2-8-16; Ord. No. 2017-17, § I, 4-10-17) 
State Law reference— Speed of vehicles in cities and authority of cities to alter prima facie speed limits established by state law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 166, 169.  
Sec. 102-189. - Maximum limit in school zones. 
(a)  The maximum speed limit authorized on any street in the city adjacent to any public school shall be as posted and during the times indicated on the signs or whenever the flashing beacon is activated for the posted speed limit. The independent school district may request in writing, by and through its authorized officers, that the times specified therefor be increased or reduced in order to coincide with the arrival or dismissal of students at any particular school or schools, and the traffic safety coordinator is authorized to change the hours of maximum speed limitations on school signs and flashing beacons as applicable, and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street so marked at a greater speed than as posted thereon, which speed is hereby found to be reasonable and prudent under the conditions aforesaid. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions as set out in subsection (a) of this section, during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on the days when school is in session, the maximum speed limit authorized on the following street in the city adjacent to any public school is fixed at 35 miles per hour: 
On McColl Road (F.M. 2061) beginning at a point 1,350 feet north of the north curbline of Nolana Loop and proceeding northward to 200 feet south of the south curbline of Violet Avenue. 
Provided, however, should the administration of Good Shepherd School request in writing, by and through its authorized officers, that the times as specified in this subsection be increased or reduced in order to coincide with the arrival or dismissal of students at any particular school or schools, the traffic safety coordinator is authorized to change the hours of maximum speed limitations on school signs and flashing beacons, as applicable, and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street so marked at a greater speed than 35 miles per hour, which speed is hereby found to be reasonable and prudent under the conditions aforesaid. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions as set out in subsection (a) of this section, during the times the beacon is activated, the maximum speed limit authorized on the following street in the city adjacent to any public school is fixed at 30 miles per hour: 
On Ware Road beginning at a point 75 feet north of the curbline of Quince Avenue proceeding northward to a point 500 feet north of Vine Avenue. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions as set out in subsection (a) of this section, during the hours the flashing beacon is activated, the maximum speed limit authorized on the following street in the city adjacent to any public school is fixed at 30 miles per hour: 
On Three Mile Line (Tulip), F.M. 1924, from a point 500 feet east and 500 feet west of Rooth Road (North 29th Street). 
(e)  The traffic safety coordinator is hereby authorized to construct and install proper traffic control signs, signals and markings at designated areas to carry out the purposes of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 29-72)  
Sec. 102-190. - Maximum limit in residential alleys. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "alley" shall mean any improved right-of-way, whether caliche or asphalt, having no legal or official name, other than an alley of 20 feet or less in width. The term "residential alley" shall mean any alley located within a residential area or designated on the city zoning map or located in an area where residential-type structures are located. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any vehicle on any residential alley within the city at a speed greater than ten miles per hour. This speed limit shall be enforceable whether or not signs are erected designating such speed in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1966, § 29-73)  
Secs. 102-191—102-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TRUCK ROUTES 
 
Sec. 102-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous material means a substance or material, including a hazardous substance, which has been designated as such under 49 U.S. Code Section 5103 and determined by the United States Secretary of Transportation to be capable of posing an unreasonable risk to health, safety, or property when transported in commerce. 
Hazardous material route means a roadway designated as such in this article and upon which hazardous materials are authorized to be transported. 
Non-radioactive hazardous material route means a roadway designated as such in this article and upon which non-radioactive hazardous materials are authorized to be transported. 
Road tractor means a motor vehicle designed or used for drawing other vehicles or loads, and not so constructed as to independently carry thereon a load or any part of the weight of the vehicle or load being drawn. 
Semi-trailer means a vehicle or trailer used or designed to be used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that carries or supports some part or all of its weight or load. 
Truck means any motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property with a manufacturer's rated gross vehicle weight exceeding 10,000 pounds, and is not intended to include those trucks commonly known as pickup trucks, panel delivery trucks, and carryall trucks. 
Truck route means a roadway designated as such in this article and upon which the operation of trucks, semi-trailers or road tractors is authorized. 
Truck traffic means vehicular traffic of trucks, semi-trailers or road tractors. 
(Code 1966, § 29-52; Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1, 3-8-04; Ord. No. 2011-09, § I, 2-28-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 102-202. - Truck routes established. 
(a)  Designated truck routes. All state-maintained roadways are hereby designated as truck routes, unless signed otherwise. Truck traffic on city-maintained roadways is prohibited, unless signed otherwise. 
(b)  Prohibition. The operation of any truck, semi-trailer or road tractor on any street within the city other than those streets or highways specifically designated in subsection (a) of this section is expressly prohibited as against the public health and safety, and declared to be unlawful. 
(c)  Exceptions. The prohibition set forth in this section does not apply to: 
(1)  The operation of trucks, semi-trailers and road tractors traveling on streets other than designated truck routes strictly for the purposes of pickup or delivery to specific locations, or to obtain service, repairs, lodging or fuel in the normal course of business, when there is no other alternate designated truck route of access to such location requiring a stop within the city provided that all vehicles departing from an established truck route under one of the stated exceptions shall immediately thereafter return to a designated truck route by the most direct means practical; 
(2)  Recreational vehicles and personal trailers. As used in this ordinance recreational vehicles means a vehicular portable structure designed for a temporary or short-term occupancy for travel, recreational or vacation uses, including vacation travel trailers, converted buses, tent trailers or similar devices used for temporary portable housing. As used in this section a personal trailer means a wheeled device hauled by a personal motor vehicle upon a road or highway for other than commercial purposes, including a horse trailer, dog trailer, car trailer, motorcycle trailer, boat trailer, lawn equipment trailer, gooseneck trailer, and any other trailer designed or used to carry animals, boats, large items, or motor-driven means of transportation; 
(3)  Street construction, maintenance and repair vehicles engaged in the construction, maintenance, or repair of city streets; 
(4)  Authorized emergency vehicles responding to emergency calls; 
(5)  Vehicles used or operated by the city performing city business, including transit uses, or 
(6)  Vehicles used by a city franchisee for the franchisee's approved activities. 
(d)  Affirmative defense. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for an offense under this section that the defendant was operating the motor vehicle for a purpose specified in subsection (c) hereof. 
(e)  Signs. The traffic safety coordinator shall place and maintain traffic control signs evidencing the prohibition or permission of truck traffic on the portion or portions of roadways set out in subsection (a) of this section, which such signs shall conform to current standards as set out in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices with regard to shape, size, color, letter size and style, mounting and location. 
(Code 1966, § 29-53; Ord. No. 2004-23, § 2, 3-8-04)  
Sec. 102-203. - Non-radioactive hazardous material routes established. 
(a)  The following roadways, approved under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 644-202, are the designated non-radioactive hazardous material routes in the City of McAllen: 
(1)  U.S. 83 Expressway between Jackson Road and Taylor Road. 
(2)  Military Highway (F.M. 1016) between 10th Street (SH 336) and Taylor Road. 
(3)  10th Street (SH 336) between Military Highway (F.M. 1016) and the southern city limit. 
(b)  Prohibition. The operation of any truck, semi-trailer or road tractor carrying non-radioactive hazardous material on any street within the city other than those streets or highways specifically designated in subsection (a) of this section; is expressly prohibited as against the public health and safety, and declared to be unlawful. 
(c)  Exceptions. The prohibition set forth in this section does not apply to the operation of such vehicle carrying non-radioactive hazardous material traveling on streets other than designated non-radioactive hazardous material routes strictly for the purposes of pickup or delivery to specific locations when there is no other alternate designated non-radioactive hazardous material truck route to such location requiring a stop within the city and provided that after such deviation that such vehicle immediately thereafter return to a designated non-radioactive hazardous material truck route by the most direct means practical. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 3, 3-8-04; Ord. No. 2011-09, § I, 2-28-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-09, § I, adopted Feb. 28, 2011, changed the title of § 102-203 from hazardous material routes established to non-radioactive hazardous material routes established.  
Secs. 102-204—102-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - VULNERABLE ROAD USERS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-47, § 1, adopted June 24, 2013, set out provisions intended for use as div. 5, §§ 102-230—102-232. To avoid duplication of section numbers and to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as div. 5, §§ 102-211—102-213. 
 
Sec. 102-211. - Definitions. 
In this division: 
Commercial motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles used to transport passengers or property that: 
(1)  Has a gross combination weight or a gross combination weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds, including a towed unit with a gross vehicle weight or a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds; 
(2)  Has a gross vehicle weight or a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds; 
(3)  Is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver; or 
(4)  Is transporting hazardous materials and is required to be placarded. 
Roadway means any public right-of-way that may be used for motor vehicle traffic, including any highway, road, street or alley, and any similar or equivalent street or vehicular passageway in a private subdivision. 
Vulnerable road user means a person who is: 
(1)  A pedestrian, including a runner or physically disabled person; 
(2)  Using or operating equipment other than a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, a bicycle, handcycle, or other type of human-powered vehicle; or 
(3)  Highway construction and maintenance worker, tow truck operator, utility worker, stranded motorist or passenger. 
(Ord. No. 2013-47, § 1, 6-24-13)  
Sec. 102-212. - Vulnerable road users—Rules of the road. 
(a)  An operator of a motor vehicle passing a vulnerable road user operating on a highway or street shall: 
(1)  If the highway has two or more marked lanes running in the same direction, vacate such lane; or 
(2)  Pass the vulnerable road user at a safe distance. 
(b)  For the purpose of subsection (a)(2), when road conditions allow, safe distance is at least: 
(1)  Three feet if the operator's vehicle is a passenger car or light truck; or 
(2)  Six feet if the operator's vehicle is a truck, other than a light truck, or a commercial motor vehicle. 
(c)  An operator of a motor vehicle that is making a left turn at a roadway intersection, including an intersection with an alley or private road or driveway, shall yield the right-of-way to a vulnerable road user who is approaching from the opposite direction and is in the intersection, or is in such proximity to the intersection as to be an immediate hazard. 
(d)  An operator of a motor vehicle may not overtake a vulnerable road user traveling in the same direction and subsequently make a turn in front of the vulnerable road user unless the operator is safely clear of the vulnerable road user and shall continue to remain safely clear throughout the course of turn, taking into account the speed at which the vulnerable road user is traveling and the braking requirements of the motor vehicle making the turn. 
(e)  An operator of a motor vehicle may not maneuver the vehicle in a manner that: 
(1)  Causes intimidation or harasses a vulnerable road user; or 
(2)  Threatens a vulnerable road user. 
(f)  An operator of a motor vehicle may not throw or project any object or substance at or against a vulnerable road user. 
(g)  An operator of a motor vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any vulnerable road user on a roadway or in an intersection of roadways. 
(h)  Vulnerable road users must use hand signals to signal their intent to stop, turn left, or turn right. The vulnerable road user must use the following signals: 
(1)  Stop - Extend the left hand and arm downward. 
(2)  Left turn - Extend the left hand and arm horizontally. 
(3)  Right turn - Extend the left hand and arm upward, or extend the right hand and arm horizontally. 
(i)  A vulnerable road user may not operate at nighttime unless equipped with the following: 
(1)  Headlamp - A lamp on the front of the user that emits a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet in front of the user. 
(2)  Red reflector/red lamp - A user must be equipped with either a red reflector which is visible from a distance of 300 feet from the rear of the user, or a red lamp visible from a distance of 500 feet from the rear of the user. 
(j)  A vulnerable road user operating a bicycle shall: 
(1)  Ride only on or astride a permanent and regular seat attached to the bicycle. 
(2)  Not use a bicycle to carry more persons than the bicycle is designed or equipped to carry. 
(3)  Ride as near as practicable to the right curb or edge of the roadway when moving slower than the other traffic on the roadway, unless: 
a.  The person is passing another vehicle moving in the same direction; 
b.  The person is preparing to turn left at an intersection or onto a private road or driveway; 
c.  A condition on or of the roadway, including a fixed or moving object, parked or moving vehicle, pedestrian, animal, or surface hazard prevents the person from safely riding next to the right curb or edge of the roadway; or 
d.  The person is operating a bicycle in an outside lane that is: 
1.  Less than 14 feet in width and does not have a designated bicycle lane adjacent to that lane; or 
2.  Too narrow for a bicycle and a motor vehicle to safely travel side by side. 
(4)  Be equipped with a brake capable of making a braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(5)  Not ride more than two abreast unless they are riding on a part of a roadway set aside for the exclusive operation of bicycles. 
(k)  Both the operator of a motor vehicle and vulnerable road user on a roadway or public right-of-way shall exercise due care and comply with all applicable city ordinances and state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-47, § 1, 6-24-13)  
Sec. 102-213. - Penalty for violation of division. 
Any person who violates any provision of this division shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-14 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-47, § 1, 6-24-13)  
Secs. 102-214—102-225. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Operation of vehicles and parking at the airport, § 18-76 et seq.; regulations regarding vehicles and parking in parks and recreation areas, § 74-81; wreckers, § 114-226 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate standing and parking of vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(1). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 102-226. - Prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  Any parking place where official signs prohibiting stopping are installed or may be installed by the traffic safety coordinator. 
(2)  a.  In a fire lane established around or adjacent to any building where such area has prominently displayed thereon a sign on the pavement, a stand or other object adjacent thereto, the words "Fire Lane — Parking Prohibited," and the fire lane is clearly delineated by proper markings. No person shall be guilty of a violation of this subsection unless the fire lane is clearly marked and identified. 
b.  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this subsection, if a parking space is marked within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
c.  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger. 
d.  In front of a public or private driveway except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger. 
e.  On all or part of a sidewalk. 
f.  On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(3)  On the westbound and eastbound access roads of U.S. Highway Expressway 83 from South Second Street to South Tenth Street. 
(4)  On the westbound access or frontage road of U.S. Highway Expressway 83 from the northwest corner of Tenth Street along the north curbline of such access or frontage road to the existing curb cut entrance to the civic center parking lot. 
(5)  On the east and west sides of McColl Road (F.M. 2061) from Loop 374 north to Jasmine Avenue. 
(6)  On the west and east sides of the roadway of South 33rd Street from Loop 374 South to Dallas Avenue. 
(7)  On the east side of the roadway of 17th Street (Guerra Avenue) from U.S. Business 83 to Austin Avenue. 
(8)  On the west side of the roadway of 12th Street from Lindberg Avenue to U.S. Expressway 83. 
(9)  On the south side of roadway in the 1600 through 1700 blocks of U.S. Business 83 (Loop 374). 
(10)  On the north side of frontage road westbound 2100 through 2200 U.S. Expressway 83. 
(11)  On the east and west sides of South Tenth Street (S.H. 336) between Wichita Avenue and a point 300 feet south of the intersection of South Second Street Loop and South Tenth Street. 
(12)  On the north and south sides of Dove Avenue, from North Tenth Street (State Highway 336) to 23rd Street (F.M. 1926 or Depot Road). 
(13)  On the east and west sides of Main Street, from South Frontage (U.S. 83 Expressway) to McAllen-Miller International Airport parking lot. 
(14)  On both sides of South Second Street, from Ridge Road to South Tenth Street. 
(15)  On the north and south sides of Uvalde Avenue, from South Main Street to South 23rd Street. 
(16)  On the north side of Military Highway (F.M. 1016), also known as Acapulco Avenue, from South 42nd Street, thence west 200 feet. 
(17)  On the north and south sides of Savannah Avenue between South Second Street and its intersection with Ridge Road. 
(18)  On the north and south sides of Ridge Road between South Second Street and Cynthia Street. 
(19)  On the east side of South 26th Street between the south curbline of Tyler Avenue and the north curbline of Yuma Avenue, Saturday and Sunday between 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(20)  On the north and south sides of Jasmine Avenue from McColl Road (F.M. 2061) to Mustang Boulevard. 
(21)  On the north and south sides of the roadway of Vine Avenue from Ware Road (F.M. 2220), thence west to the canal. 
(22)  On the east and west sides of Ware Road (F.M. 2220) from a point 300 feet north of the north curb of Vine Avenue thence north to the south curb of Quince. 
(23)  On the east and west sides of Ware Road (F.M. 2220) from a point 300 feet south of Loop 374, thence south to U.S. 83 Expressway westbound frontage road. 
(24)  On the north and south sides of Trenton Road between North Main Street and North 16th Street (Morris Jr. High School). 
(25)  On the east and west sides of South Ware Road from Old Military Highway (F.M. 1016) south to the existing railroad tracks crossing on F.M. 1016. 
(26)  On the north and south sides of the Ursula Avenue from Ware Road, west a distance of 950 feet. 
(27)  On the east and west sides of South Ware Road for a distance of 100 feet north and a distance of 100 feet south of its intersection with Ursula Avenue. 
(28)  On the north and south sides of Military Highway (F.M. 1016), also known as Acapulco Avenue, from South 23rd Street (F.M. 1926), thence west 1,000 feet on Military Highway. 
(29)  Within ten feet of a mailbox located on the sidewalk or street right-of-way located in a residential district or on the premises of a residential use from 8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., except Sundays and federal holidays. 
(30)  On Broadway Avenue from a point beginning at the southeast intersection of Broadway and Fresno Avenue for a distance of 36 feet along the east side of Broadway Avenue and on the south side of Fresno Avenue beginning from its southeast intersection with Broadway along the south side of Fresno Avenue for a distance of 42 feet. 
(31)  Along both sides of South 23rd Street (Spur 115) from Sarah Avenue, south for a distance of approximately 7,910 feet, to the McAllen city limits. 
(32)  Along the east and west sides of 35th Street, from Military Highway (F.M. 1016), also known as Acapulco Avenue, to Sarah Avenue. 
(33)  Along the east and west sides of International Parkway from Tanya Avenue to F.M. 1016. 
(34)  Along the east and west sides of International Parkway from F.M. 1016 to Honduras Drive. 
(35)  Along the north and south sides of Tanya Avenue from International Parkway west to the McAllen city limits. 
(36)  Along the north and south sides of Wanda Avenue from International Parkway to Bentsen Road. 
(37)  Along the north and south sides of George McVay Drive from International Parkway to Shary Road. 
(38)  Along the north and south sides of Honduras Avenue from International Parkway west 1,000 feet. 
(39)  Along the north and south sides of Buddy Owens (3 Mile Line) from 29 th Street to Taylor Road. 
(40)  Along the north and south sides of Ash Avenue from 26 th Street west 486 feet. 
(41)  Along east and west sides of North Cynthia Street from East Hackberry Avenue to East Laurel Avenue. 
(42)  Along North Cynthia Street between Pecan Boulevard and Cobra Avenue. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any prohibited area specified in this section or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(c)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, including a semi-trailer or truck, for the purposes of loading or unloading, during the hours from 6:00 a.m. through 12:00 p.m. on either side of 23rd Street, from Pecan Avenue to Expressway 83. 
(d)  (1)  A person commits an offense by stopping, parking or standing any motor vehicle upon a public street, alley, parkway, boulevard or public place located: (A) within or abutting any City of McAllen residentially zoned area; and (B) within one-quarter mile of a major arterial street or highway. 
(2)  This section will not apply to the following: 
a.  Residents of the geographic area described hereinabove, and their guests; 
b.  Street construction, maintenance and repair equipment; 
c.  Trucks, equipment, trailers and other vehicles used by public service utility companies engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities; 
d.  Motor buses when taking on or discharging passengers at bus stops; 
e.  Where it is lawful to park a commercial motor vehicle for the purpose of accepting or delivering transportable goods; or 
f.  A motor vehicle with a mechanical defect, making it unsafe to proceed further, in which event, it shall be lawful to stand or park the vehicle during the time necessary to make emergency repairs, not to exceed 48 hours. 
(3)  Further, this section will not apply during any public event sponsored by the City of McAllen, including an hour before and after such an event. 
(43)  Ursula Avenue between North Ware Road and North 42nd Street. 
(44)  The south side of La Vista Avenue from I Street to the drainage ditch east of J Street. 
(Code 1966, § 29-80; Ord. No. 1993-75, § I, 10-11-93; Ord. No. 1994-54, § I, 8-8-94; Ord. No. 1994-58, § I, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 1998-07, § I, 1-12-98; Ord. No. 2004-22, § 1, 3-8-04; Ord. No. 2004-51, § 1, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 2006-91, § 1, 8-28-06; Ord. No. 2006-94, § 1, 9-11-06; Ord. No. 2015-36, § I, 4-27-15; Ord. No. 2015-65, § I, 7-27-15; Ord. No. 2016-68, § I, 10-10-16; Ord. No. 2016-85, § I, 12-12-16; Ord. No. 2017-02, § I, 1-23-17; Ord. No. 2018-49, § I, 7-9-18; Ord. No. 2020-10, § I, 3-9-20) 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing or parking restricted in certain places, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 95.  
Sec. 102-227. - Prohibited for certain purposes. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing, dismantling or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1966, § 29-81)  
Sec. 102-228. - Prohibited for more than 48 hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle owned by him or under his control on any street, alley or other public way in the city for a period of time in excess of 48 hours. 
(Code 1966, § 29-82)  
Sec. 102-229. - Designation and marking of parking spaces and areas where parking is prohibited or limited. 
(a)  The traffic safety coordinator shall cause parking spaces to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as he may designate, and he shall cause spaces or areas in which parking is prohibited at any time, or where parking is restricted to time limits, to be marked off, identified as to type of parking allowed or prohibited, and maintained in and on such part or parts of streets. All such spaces or areas shall be clearly indicated by appropriate signs or by markings on the pavement or curb. 
(b)  In areas designated as time limit parking areas, parking may be limited to any period prescribed by the traffic safety coordinator, such areas to be designated with clearly distinguished markings or signs at both ends of the time limit area and at reasonable intervals between the beginning and ending of such time limit area, indicating the time allowed for parking in such area. 
(c)  Any prohibition of or time limit on parking established under this section shall apply on such days and between such hours as prescribed by the traffic safety coordinator. 
(Code 1966, § 29-83)  
Sec. 102-230. - Parking in prohibited areas; overtime parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain in any space or area in which parking is prohibited as provided in this division or in a time limit parking area for a longer period of time than that designated by the markings on the street or by signs clearly visible. 
(Code 1966, § 29-84)  
Sec. 102-231. - Parallel and angle parking. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except that where a space is signed or marked, then no part of the vehicle, or any trailer, extension or projection therefrom may extend beyond the perimeter represented by the curb or edge of the roadway, the signs or markings within which the vehicle must be stopped or parked, and an imaginary line on the space's side closest to the roadway running between the ends of the signs or markings On one-way roadways, unless signs prohibit it, vehicles may also stand or be parked on the left side of the roadway, with the left-hand wheels within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, and the same aforementioned exception will apply where a space is signed or marked. 
(b)  The traffic operations division shall determine upon which streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal aid or state highway within this city unless the state highway engineer has determined that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street or upon any railway tracks. 
(c)  Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(d)  In any parking facility maintained by the city or upon any street where parking spaces have been marked by lines on the pavement as determined by the traffic operations division, whether for parallel or angle parking, no person shall stand or park a vehicle outside of the lines of such marked parking space in such a manner as to obstruct traffic or another parking space. 
(Code 1966, § 29-86; Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 2-25-08) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 96.  
Sec. 102-232. - Parking in alleys. 
(a)  Residence district. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in a residence district in such a manner or under such conditions as to block the alley or leave less than ten feet of the width of the roadway available for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance or exit to any abutting property. 
(b)  Business district. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in a business district and no person shall stop or stand a vehicle within an alley in a business district in such a manner or under such conditions as to block the alley or leave insufficient width of the roadway available for the free movement of vehicular traffic or to block the driveway entrance or exit to any abutting property. In no case shall a stop for loading or unloading of materials or merchandise exceed 30 minutes in an alley in a business district. 
(c)  Central Business District (CBD). No person shall park and leave unattended a vehicle within any portion of an alley in the CBD. Notwithstanding the general prohibition against parking as provided in this section, a person may stop a vehicle for loading or unloading of materials or merchandise and may remain parked while actively participating in loading or unloading operations and related activities. Any operator of a vehicle that is parked for such purposes within any portion of an alley shall remove the vehicle from the alley upon request of a peace officer or fire department personnel or a staff member of the traffic safety division. 
(Code 1966, § 29-87)  
Sec. 102-233. - Parking of wide vehicles in residential and commercial zones. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle, including, but not limited to, a house trailer or mobile unit, having a width at its widest part in excess of 80 inches, to park or station such vehicle on a street of the city which is in or adjacent to any property zoned as residential or commercial property under the city's zoning ordinance, subject however, to the exception that such vehicles may be parked temporarily for loading or unloading which must be completed within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1966, § 29-88; Ord. No. 2018-36, § 1, 6-11-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-36, § 1, adopted June 11, 2018, changed the title of § 102-233 from "Parking of wide vehicles in residential zones" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 102-234. - Parking of trucks in angle parking space. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle or truck having a designated carrying capacity in excess of one-half of one ton in any angle parking space on any street in the city. This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle or truck temporarily parked in such space for the purpose of loading or unloading furniture, fixtures or other merchandise, provided that the owner, driver or other person in charge of such motor vehicle or truck is at the location and is in the act of loading or unloading the motor vehicle or truck, and provided further that proper flares, signs or other protective signals are placed at the parked truck or vehicle for the protection of the public and persons using the street. 
(Code 1966, § 29-89)  
Sec. 102-235. - Permit to back to curb for loading or unloading. 
The traffic safety coordinator is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials, subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized in this section, and it shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Code 1966, § 29-90)  
Sec. 102-236. - Loading zones. 
(a)  The traffic safety coordinator is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones, and he shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating such loading zones and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when regulations applicable to such curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
(d)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1966, § 29-91)  
Sec. 102-237. - Bus stops, etc. 
(a)  The traffic safety coordinator is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such numbers as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such bus stop or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(b)  The driver of a bus shall not park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers. 
(c)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop when any such stop has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus. 
(Code 1966, § 29-92)  
Sec. 102-238. - Presumption that owner of vehicle illegally parked vehicle. 
In any prosecution charging a violation of any ordinance or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such ordinance or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Code 1966, § 29-93)  
Secs. 102-239, 102-240. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-78, § 1, adopted Dec. 10, 2001, repealed §§ 102-239 and 102-240, which pertained to moving parking or standing vehicles and fees for impoundment of vehicles. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 102-241. - Issuance of citations by non-police officer personnel. 
(a)  Any parking violation citation authorized to be issued by a police officer in this chapter may also be issued by other designated and authorized agents of the traffic safety department. 
(b)  That the traffic safety coordinator may appoint any disabled person who is a citizen of the United States, is a resident of the city, and who has not previously been convicted of a felony to enforce the provisions of Texas Transportation Code, Subtitle H, Parking, Towing and Storage of Vehicles, Chapter 681, and section 102-242 of this Code. 
(c)  That each person appointed pursuant to this section shall complete an application promulgated by the traffic safety coordinator and satisfactorily complete a course of training on disabled parking enforcement. 
(d)  Any qualified disabled person so appointed shall have the power to serve citations and file charges for violation for failure to comply with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 681, and section 102-242 of this Code, in the same manner as any law enforcement officer of the city subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  No person so appointed shall be deemed a peace officer, nor an employee of the state, the county or the city, nor receive any compensation therefrom. 
(2)  No appointed person shall be required to complete training as a peace officer. 
(3)  No appointed person shall have the power or duty to enforce other traffic or criminal laws nor have the power of arrest or commit an assault or breach of the peace in carrying out the authority hereunder. 
(4)  No appointed person shall possess or carry firearms or other weapons for the purpose of enforcing the disabled parking law. 
(5)  No appointed person shall be entitled to any indemnification from the state, the county, or the city for any injury or property damage sustained as a result of enforcement activities. Each appointed person shall specifically acknowledge that such person has no rights to any claim of injury or property damage resulting from disabled parking enforcement activities. 
(6)  No government, agency, department or officer of the state, the county or the city shall be liable or accountable for any act or omission of any person appointed to issue disabled parking citations pursuant to this section. Each authorized person shall specifically hold harmless the city, its employees, officers, and agents, from liability for any such act or omission by such authorized person. 
(Code 1966, § 29-95; Ord. No. 1994-2, § I, 1-10-94; Ord. No. 1995-44, § I, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 2004-51, § 1, 6-28-04)  
Sec. 102-242. - Designation of parking spaces and areas for exclusive use of vehicles transporting disabled persons. 
(a)  The city engineer or his or her designee is hereby authorized to designate any parking space or area on any public street or in any parking lot maintained by the city for public use for the exclusive use of properly designated vehicles transporting temporarily or permanently disabled persons. Vehicles used for transporting disabled persons as provided for under this section shall meet the registration requirements of Chapter 502 Subchapter F, Transportation Code and such parking areas shall be marked as required by subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The city engineer or his or her designee is hereby authorized and directed to establish rules and regulations setting out the minimum dimensions and identification markers for delineating exclusive parking spaces for vehicles transporting temporary or permanently disabled persons, which such rules shall at least comply with the rules promulgated by the state purchasing and general service commission relating thereto; provided; however, such rules may require greater designation criteria than required by the state purchasing and general service commission. A copy of such rules shall be kept on file with the city engineer or his designee, the traffic safety director and the city secretary. 
The parking spaces designated for the exclusive use of properly designated vehicles transporting temporarily or permanently disabled person shall be in compliance with: 
(1)  Section 5(c), Article 9102, V.A.C.S.; 
(2)  Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS); 
(3)  Transportation Code Subtitle H, Parking, Towing, and Storage of Vehicles, Chapter 681, 
as such laws or regulations exist or may hereinafter be amended. A copy of the current laws or regulation aforementioned laws or regulations shall be kept on file with the city engineer or his or her designee, the traffic safety director and the city secretary. 
(c)  Any person who owns or controls private property used for parking of motor vehicles in accordance with article VII of chapter 138 of the McAllen Code, may designate one or more uncovered parking spaces or areas on such property for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting temporary or permanently disabled persons by designating and identifying such parking spaces according to the standards established under subsection (b) of this section relating to the identification requirements for handicapped parking. 
The city engineer or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to issue city approval to each such space or area exclusively designated for handicapped parking which meets the requirements as set out in subsection (b). Any person owning or controlling private property that has been designated for handicapped parking shall be eligible for inspection by the city engineer or his designee who shall cause an inspection to be made on such parking space or area, and if such parking space or area meets with the requirements as set out in subsection (b) of this section, he shall issue such approval certificate for each parking space or area so designated which shall be displayed on the parking area or space. 
(d)  Section 681.011 Transportation Code, relating to offenses for illegally parking in a parking space or parking area designated specifically for the disabled, is hereby made applicable to any parking space or parking area for the disabled in any parking space or area on any public street or in any parking areas maintained by the city for which such exclusive use is designated or on any private parking area or parking space designated for exclusive use as provided for in (c) of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section by illegally parking in any of such areas or spaces shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed by Section 681.011 Transportation Code. 
(Ord. No. 2000-42, § 1, 5-22-00)  
Sec. 102-243. - Penalties for violations of article. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed by section 1-14. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this article, as applicable, may voluntarily deposit the notice of violation of the ticket provided in this article along with the following fine, depending on the type of the violation: 
(1)  Parked overtime: 
If paid before 6:30 p.m. the next day .....$4.00 
After 6:30 p.m. the next day .....7.00 
(2)  Parked in no parking zone .....15.00 
(3)  Parked out of lines .....15.00 
(4)  Parked in loading zone .....15.00 
(5)  Blocking crosswalk .....15.00 
(6)  Blocking alley .....15.00 
(7)  Parked within 20 fee of intersection .....15.00 
(8)  Parked over 18 inches from curb .....15.00 
(9)  Blocking driveway .....15.00 
(10)  Parked within 15 feet of fire hydrant .....15.00 
(11)  Blocking sidewalk .....15.00 
(12)  Double parking .....15.00 
Such deposit as provided in this subsection shall thereby exempt such person from the penalty provided for such violation in this section, and under such circumstances the penalty for such violation shall be a fine as provided in this subsection. Any person who voluntarily deposits such amount in U.S. currency, as provided in this section, shall be deemed to have entered a plea of guilty to such violation and tendered payment of the fine provided in this section. 
(c)  If the $4.00 fine for overtime parking is not deposited as set forth in subsection (b) of this section in the traf-o-teria box later than 6:30 p.m. on the date following such violation, the fine will be $7.00 payable at the traffic safety department within the city, provided it is paid within ten days of the date of issuance of the overtime parking citation. Thereafter, the accused will be subject to a fine upon conviction in accordance with the provisions of section 1-14 of this Code. If any of the other fines as provided for in subsection (b) of this section are not deposited within ten days of the date of issuance of the notice of violation, thereafter the accused will be subject to a fine upon conviction of not to exceed the amount as set out in section 1-14. If payment is not received or a hearing requested within 60 days of the notice of violation, the fine may be assigned to a third party for collection efforts in accordance with Article 103.0031 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. Notwithstanding the assignment of a fine to a third party, the accused retains the right to request a hearing. 
(d)  Revenues from fines paid for violations of any provision of this article within the Heart of the City shall be deposited into the Downtown Services Parking Fund established by the city for the exclusive purpose of alleviating the parking needs of the Heart of the City. 
(Code 1966, § 29-112; Ord. No. 1992-97, § I, 12-28-92; Ord. No. 1998-64, § 2, 7-13-98; Ord. No. 2001-78, § 3, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2002-51, § 1, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 2005-95, § 2, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-16-06; Ord. No. 2008-30, § 3, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 2017-36, § I, 7-10-17)  
Sec. 102-244. - Vehicle impoundment without notice. 
A vehicle may be impounded with or without citation and without giving prior notice to its owner only under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The vehicle is impeding or likely to impede the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 
(2)  The vehicle poses an immediate danger to the public safety; 
(3)  The vehicle is illegally parked within ten feet of a fire hydrant, 
(4)  The vehicle, without a valid designated plate or placard issued under state law, is parked in a stall or space clearly marked and designated for use by disabled persons; 
(5)  A police officer reasonably believes that the vehicle is stolen; 
(6)  A police officer reasonably believes that the vehicle or its contents constitute evidence of an offense and such impoundment is reasonably necessary to obtain or preserve such evidence; providing, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize seizure of a vehicle without a warrant where a warrant would otherwise be required; 
(7)  The vehicle was in the possession of a person taken into custody by a law enforcement officer and no other reasonable disposition of the vehicle is available, or the vehicle was in the possession of a person arrested for a felony traffic violation; 
(8)  A police officer reasonably believes that the vehicle's operator, in violation of state law, is driving while uninsured or without a valid driver's license and no other reasonable disposition of the vehicle is available; or 
(9)  The vehicle is parked in the public rights-of-way or on other publicly owned or controlled property in violation of any law, ordinance, or regulation, and there are three or more parking citations issued against the vehicle that have not been responded to, either by payment of the penalty or appearance at a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2001-78, § 2, 12-10-01)  
Sec. 102-245. - Vehicle impoundment after notice. 
A vehicle not subject to impoundment under section 102-244 may be impounded with notice in compliance with this section. Notice of such proposed impoundment must be securely attached to and conspicuously displayed on the vehicle for a period of 72 hours prior to such impoundment. Where the vehicle's owner is ascertainable, notice must also be mailed to the owner at the address on the vehicle's registration. A vehicle may only be towed with notice for the following reasons: 
(1)  When such vehicle is parked and/or used in violation of any law, ordinance, or regulation; or 
(2)  When such vehicle is an abandoned or junked vehicle; or 
(3)  When such vehicle is so mechanically defective as to be unsafe for operation, provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to prevent the operation of any such defective vehicle to a place for correction of defective equipment in the manner directed by a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 2001-78, § 2, 12-10-01)  
Sec. 102-246. - Notice of impoundment. 
(a)  After a vehicle has been towed pursuant to this division, notice shall be provided to the registered owner(s) and any other person(s) who reasonably appear to have an interest in the vehicle. Notice will be mailed to such person(s) within 24 hours after the towing of the vehicle, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded, and will state: 
(1)  That the vehicle has been towed, and a description of that vehicle, including the make, model, color, year, license, and vehicle identification number; 
(2)  The location of the vehicle and that it may be reclaimed only upon evidence that the claimant is the owner or person entitled to possession; 
(3)  The address and telephone number of the person or facility that may be contacted for information on the charges that must be paid before the vehicle will be released and the procedures for obtaining the release of the vehicle; 
(4)  That the vehicle and its contents are subject to a lien for the towing and storage charges, and a vehicle not claimed within 30 days after the mailing date of the notice is subject to sale by the storage facility; 
(5)  That the owner may request a hearing concerning the legality of the impoundment, and the method for requesting such a hearing; and 
(6)  An itemized statement of the administrative and parking violation fine amount due to the city at the time of notice. 
(b)  Notice need not be mailed when a vehicle does not display license plates or other identifying markings by which the registration or ownership of the vehicle can be determined, or when the identity of the owner of the vehicle is not available from the appropriate motor vehicle license and registration authority. 
(Ord. No. 2001-78, § 2, 12-10-01)  
Sec. 102-247. - Redemption of impounded vehicles. 
Vehicles impounded by the city shall be redeemed only under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Only the registered owner, or a person authorized by the registered owner, may redeem an impounded vehicle. A person redeeming an impounded vehicle must produce a valid driver's license. A vehicle impounded for reasons of unpaid parking citations or due to the driver's arrest can only be released pursuant to a written order from the police department, traffic safety office, or municipal court that all penalties, fines, or forfeitures owed by the registered owner have been satisfied by full payment or the posting of a bond pending a hearing. 
(2)  Any person redeeming a vehicle impounded by the city shall pay the towing contractor for costs of impoundment and an administrative fee and traffic fines prior to redeeming the vehicle. The administrative fee shall be for the purpose of offsetting, to the extent practicable, the cost to the city of implementing, enforcing, and administering the impounding of vehicles, and shall be deposited in an appropriate account. The administrative fee shall be $50.00 and may be refunded pursuant to section 102-250. 
(Ord. No. 2001-78, § 2, 12-10-01)  
Sec. 102-248. - Request for hearing on impoundment. 
(a)  After a vehicle has been impounded pursuant to this chapter, the registered owner(s) and any other person(s) who reasonably appear to have an interest in the vehicle are entitled to request a hearing to contest the validity of the impoundment of the vehicle. The request for a hearing must be in writing and will state the grounds upon which the person requesting the hearing believes the impoundment invalid or unjustified, and such other information as the municipal court judge may require. 
(b)  The municipal court judge shall set and conduct an administrative hearing on the matter within 14 days of receipt of a proper request filed pursuant to this section, except where a vehicle has not yet been released from impoundment, in which case the municipal court judge will set and conduct the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the request, not including Saturdays, Sundays, or federally sanctioned holidays. 
(c)  The owner(s) and any other person(s) who have an interest in the vehicle are only entitled to one hearing for each tow of that vehicle. Any person who fails to appear at the hearing without good cause will not be entitled to have such hearing rescheduled. 
(Ord. No. 2001-78, § 2, 12-10-01)  
Sec. 102-249. - Hearing procedure. 
(a)  The hearing shall afford a reasonable opportunity for person(s) to demonstrate by the statements of witnesses and other evidence that the impoundment of the vehicle was invalid or unjustified. The municipal court judge shall establish the necessary rules and regulations regarding the conduct of such hearings. 
(b)  The municipal court judge shall determine whether the impoundment was proper and whether the removal, towing, storage, parking violation fines and administrative fees were proper. The municipal court judge has discretion to consolidate the impoundment hearing and the parking citation hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2001-78, § 2, 12-10-01)  
Sec. 102-250. - Result of hearing. 
(a)  If the municipal court judge finds that the impoundment of the vehicle was invalid or unjustified, the municipal court judge will order the vehicle to be immediately released, and the owner(s) or any other person(s) who have an interest in the vehicle shall not be held liable for any tow and/or storage charges. If the costs of impoundment, the administrative fee and parking violation fine have already been paid, the municipal court judge shall enter judgment against the city in the amount of the costs of impoundment and administrative fee, and if applicable the parking violation fine. 
(b)  If the municipal court judge finds that the impoundment of the vehicle was valid and justified, the municipal court judge will order that the vehicle continue to be held until all fee charges and fine charges are paid. The city will be responsible in cases where the impoundment is valid and justified for charges that have accrued from the date that the hearing was requested to be held hereunder. 
(c)  Unless the hearings are consolidated by the municipal court judge, no determination of facts made at a hearing under this section shall have any collateral estoppel effect on subsequent criminal prosecution and shall not preclude litigation of those same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution. 
(d)  The decision of the municipal court judge shall be the final decision by the city. Any person aggrieved by a decision may file a petition for judicial review in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in paragraphs (a) and (b) above, the city shall have no liability for damage that may be caused by removal of a vehicle or for any towing or storage fees. 
(Ord. No. 2001-78, § 2, 12-10-01)  
Secs. 102-251—102-255. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARKING METERS 
 
Sec. 102-256. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Operator means and includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner. 
Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers or merchandise. 
Parking lot means any lot, piece, parcel or tract of land owned, leased or operated by the city for the purpose of providing parking spaces for vehicles and which has been duly designated as a parking meter zone as provided in this division. 
Traf-o-teria box means any box or container erected, installed and maintained by the city for use by the public in depositing in such box or container the notice of violation and money. 
Vehicle means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a street or highway. 
(Code 1966, § 29-100) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 102-257. - Meter zones. 
(a)  The parking meter zones of the city shall consist of such streets or portions thereof and such parking lots as are designated from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(1)  Onstreet parking meter zones. The following parking meter zones for onstreet parking are hereby established: 
Street 	Side 	Extent 
Ash Avenue 	North 	Between North Main Street and North Broadway. 
Ash Avenue 	North 	Between North 12th Street and the north-south alley immediately west thereof. 
Ash Avenue 	South 	Between North Main Street and North Broadway. 
Ash Avenue 	South 	Between North 12th Street to the west a distance of 150 feet. 
Austin Avenue 	North 	Between South 17th and South 18th Streets (except for the area between South 16th Street and the north-south alley immediately west thereof). 
Austin Avenue 	South 	Between South 12th Street and South 16th Street. 
Austin Avenue 	South 	1700 Block. 
Beaumont Avenue 	South 	Between South 12th Street and South 16th Street. 
Beaumont Avenue 	South 	Between the north-south alley between South 16th Street and South 17th Street and 18th Street. 
Beech Avenue 	Both 	Between North Main and North 15th Streets. 
Beech Avenue 	South 	Between North Broadway and North Main Streets. 
Cedar Street 	Both 	Between North Broadway and North 15th Streets. 
Chicago Avenue 	Both 	Between 16th Street and Bicentennial Blvd. (18th Street). 
Chicago Avenue 	North 	Between South 12th and South 16th Streets. 
Chicago Avenue 	North 	Between South 17th Street and north-south alley immediately west thereof. 
Chicago Avenue 	South 	Between South 12th Street and South 16th Street. 
Chicago Avenue 	South 	South 11th Street to South 16th Street. 
Dallas Avenue 	Both 	In the 1600 block, from the north-south alley west to its intersection with South 17th Street. 
Dallas Avenue 	North 	Between South 12th and South 16th Streets. 
Dallas Avenue 	North 	Between 17th and 18th Streets. 
Dallas Avenue 	South 	Between South Broadway and South 16th Street. 
Date Palm Street 	North 	Between North Broadway and North Main Streets. 
Erie Avenue 	North 	Between South 12th and South 15th Streets. 
Erie Avenue 	South 	Between South 12th and South Main Streets. 
Galveston Avenue 	Both 	From north-south alley between South Main and South 15th Streets, westward to the intersection of Galveston Avenue with South 15th Street. 
Galveston Avenue 	North 	Between South Broadway and north-south alley immediately west of South Main Street. 
Galveston Avenue 	North 	Between Broadway and 12th Streets. 
Galveston Avenue 	South 	Between South Broadway and the north-south alley between South Main and South 15th Streets. 
Main Street 	West 	Between Date Palm and Ebony Avenue. 
N. Broadway 	Both 	Between Cedar and Date Palm Streets. 
N. Broadway 	East 	Between Ash and Beech Avenues. 
N. Broadway 	East 	Between Beech and Cedar Avenues. 
N. Broadway 	West 	Between Ash and Beech Avenues. 
N. Broadway 	West 	700 Block, between Galveston and Houston Avenues. 
N. Main Street 	Both 	Between Beech and Date Palm Streets. 
N. Main Street 	East 	Between Ash and Beech Avenues. 
17th Street 	West 	Between Austin and Dallas Avenues. 
16th Street 	East 	From U.S. Hwy. 83 to Dallas Avenue. 
S. Bicentennial Boulevard 	West 	100 Block. 
S. Broadway 	East 	From U.S. Hwy. 83 to Galveston Avenue. 
S. Broadway 	East 	700 Block, between Galveston and Houston Avenues. 
S. Broadway 	West 	From U.S. Hwy. 83 to Galveston Avenue. 
S. 15th Street 	East 	From U.S. Hwy. 83 to Erie Avenue. 
S. 15th Street 	West 	Between U.S. Hwy. 83 and Erie Avenue. 
S. Main Street 	East 	From U.S. Hwy. 83 to Houston Avenue. 
S. Main Street 	West 	Between U.S. Hwy. 83 and Houston Avenue. 
S. 17th Street 	East 	From U.S. Hwy. 83 to Dallas Avenue. 
S. 16th Street 	West 	Between U.S. Hwy. 83 and Dallas Avenue. 
S. 12th Street 	Both 	Between Erie and Fresno Avenues. 
S. 12th Street 	East 	Between U.S. Hwy. 83 and Austin Avenue. 
S. 12th Street 	West 	Between Beaumont and Chicago Avenues. 
S. 12th Street 	West 	Between Dallas and Erie Avenues. 
12th Street 	East 	Between Dallas and Erie Avenues. 
12th Street (north ½) 	West 	Between Erie and Fresno Avenues. 
U.S. Hwy. 83 	South 	Between 12th Street and Broadway Avenue. 
U.S. Hwy. 83 	South 	Between alley west of Broadway Avenue and 17th Street. 
 
_____ 
(2)  Offstreet parking meter zones. The following parking meter zones are hereby established for offstreet parking areas: 
a.  The area bounded by North Main and North 15th Streets and Missouri-Pacific Railroad right-of-way and the north side of Ash Avenue. 
b.  The area immediately east of the chamber of commerce building and bounded on the north by Ash Avenue, on the east by North 12th Street and on the south by Missouri-Pacific Railroad right-of-way. 
c.  The area west of the J.C. Penney Store bounded on the north by Chicago Avenue, on the west by South 15th Street and on the south by J.C. Penney Auto Repair Service. 
d.  All of the area bounded by the following streets: Beaumont Avenue, South 12th Street, Chicago Avenue, South Broadway, except that part of such area occupied by buildings. 
e.  The area immediately east of the Old Federal Building found within Lots 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14, Block 29, original townsite of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, and bounded on the north by Chicago Avenue, on the south by the north lot line of Lot 15, and on the east by the west rights-of-way of an alley. 
f.  The area found within Lot 3, Block 29, original townsite of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, and bounded on the north by the north lot line of Lot 3, on the south by the south lot line of Lot 3, on the east by the west rights-of-way of South Broadway Avenue, and on the west by the east rights-of-way of an existing alley. 
(b)  The following described area is no longer an onstreet parking meter zone and shall be deleted from the map referenced in subsection (c) of this section: 
The streets surrounding and adjacent to Archer Park on the park side only, that is, North Main Street and North Broadway between Ash and Beech Avenues, and Ash Avenue and Beech Avenue between North Broadway and North Main Street. 
(c)  The parking meter zones, both onstreet and offstreet, described in this section are designated on the map which is on file in the office of the traffic safety coordinator. 
(Code 1966, § 29-101)  
Sec. 102-258. - Installation; adjustment, etc., of meters. 
(a)  The city manager, or such other officers or employees of the city as he may select, is hereby authorized to install and maintain, or cause to be installed and maintained, parking meters in and on such parts of the parking meter zones, the installation and maintenance of which meters are or may be authorized by the board of commissioners from time to time; and the city manager shall provide for the regulation, control, operation and maintenance of such parking meters in good workable condition. One parking meter shall be placed or set upon the curb alongside of or next to each of the parking spaces designated on a public street, as provided in this article, or, if such parking space is on a parking lot, such meter shall be placed alongside of or at the inside end of such parking space, and shall be so set as to show or display a signal showing whether the parking space alongside of or next to such parking space is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter shall be installed and set to display upon the deposit of two twenty-five-cent coins (quarters) of the United States therein, a signal indicating legal parking for that period of time conforming to a limit of parking time and charge therefor which is established by this division, which signal shall continue to operate from the time of deposit of such coins therein until the expiration of the time fixed for which such deposited coins are payment. Each parking meter shall also be so arranged that upon the expiration of such legal parking time, it will indicate by a mechanical operation and dropping or appearance of proper signal, that the lawful parking period fixed by this division has expired. 
(b)  No parking meter shall be installed in any loading zone established pursuant to section 102-236. 
(Code 1966, § 29-102; Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, 1-16-06; Ord. No. 2006-122, § 1, 12-11-06)  
Sec. 102-259. - Installation, location, of traf-o-teria boxes. 
The city manager shall cause to be erected in any parking meter zone one or more traf-o-teria boxes. Such traf-o-teria boxes shall be conspicuously located on each parking lot and in each block of a street designated as a parking meter zone and shall have the words "Traf-O-Teria Box" plainly painted thereon. 
(Code 1966, § 29-103)  
Sec. 102-260. - Designation of and manner of parking in metered parking spaces. 
(a)  In the parking meter zone, the city manager and traffic safety coordinator are authorized to cause parking spaces to be designated and maintained. All spaces for parking of vehicles shall be designated by white lines or marks painted on the surface of the street or the parking lot, laid out at an angle to the curb or parallel to the curb, if on a public street, and shall be so laid out that there shall be one parking space for and immediately adjacent to each parking meter. 
(b)  Any vehicle parked in any parking space on a public street in a parking meter zone shall be parked at an angle to the curb or parallel to the curb, as the case may be, and shall be parked wholly within the lines marked on the streets for such parking space as provided in this division. Any vehicle parked in a parking space on a parking lot shall also be parked wholly within the lines marked for such parking space, as provided in this division. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle across any such lines or marks or to park such vehicle in such way that the vehicle shall not be wholly within the area so designated by such lines or marks on the street or parking lot surface. 
(Code 1966, § 29-104)  
Sec. 102-261. - Time limits on parking; amount of deposit. 
The following lengths of time for parking a vehicle in a parking space, and the amounts of money charged for such lengths of time, respectively, for so using parking spaces are hereby established: 
(1)  When such parking space is located upon a public street: 
(a)  60 minutes or one hour for $0.50, and according to the markings and instructions on such meter and the mechanism therein. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle in his possession or under this control to be or remain in any parking space alongside of or next to which any parking meter is placed while the meter is displaying a signal showing that such vehicle shall have already been parked beyond the period of time fixed by this division, for which payment has been made by deposit of a coin or coins in the parking meter alongside of or next to such parking space. The display of a sign showing illegal parking by any parking meter while a vehicle is parked in a parking space adjoining such parking meter shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle has been parked overtime and beyond the period of time fixed by this division. 
(2)  When such parking space is located upon a city owned or leased parking lot: 
a.  Each 60 minutes or one hour for $0.50 up to a limit of ten hours. 
(Code 1966, § 29-105; Ord. No. 2001-28, § 1, 4-9-01; Ord. No. 2001-78, § 4, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2006-04, § 3, 1-16-06; Ord. No. 2006-122, § 2, 12-11-06)  
Sec. 102-262. - Deposit required; overtime parking; parking adjacent to expired meter. 
(a)  When any vehicle shall be parked in any place alongside of or next to which there is located, under this division, a parking meter, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering such marked parking space, immediately deposit one of the coins indicated on the meter for the length of time desired in accordance with the directions or instructions on each particular meter, in the slot made therefor. The coin shall be deposited in the parking meter alongside of or next to the parking space, and the parking space may then be used by such vehicle during the parking time limit for which such deposited coin is payment, as provided by this division. The failure to deposit such coin shall be unlawful and a violation of this division. Further parking time may be secured after expiration of the time secured by deposit of the first coin, by immediately depositing an additional coin or coins in such meter, not to exceed a continuous elapsed parking time of two hours, if such parking space is located upon a public street. If the vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time limit for which such deposited coin or coins is payment, the parking meter shall display a sign showing illegal parking, and in that event, such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of time fixed by this division, and such overtime parking of a vehicle shall be a violation of this division and punished as set out in this division. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle in his possession or under his control to be or remain in any parking space alongside of or next to which any parking meter is placed while the meter is displaying a signal showing that such vehicle shall have already been parked beyond the period of time fixed by this division, for which payment has been made by deposit of a coin or coins in the parking meter alongside of or next to such parking space. The display of a sign showing illegal parking by any parking meter while a vehicle is parked in a parking space adjoining such parking meter shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle has been parked overtime and beyond the period of time fixed by this division. 
(c)  After a notice of a violation of this section has been attached to any vehicle pursuant to this chapter, each additional hour thereafter during which such vehicle remains in such parking space in violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense for which an additional notice shall be attached to such vehicle. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall apply on all days other than legal holidays and Sundays, but only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(Code 1966, § 29-106)  
Sec. 102-263. - Use of metered spaces for loading or unloading. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to stop or park the vehicle in a parking space for which a parking meter has been installed under this division, for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise, supplies or materials, except where the place of business for which the vehicle is to be loaded or unloaded does not have either a usable entrance from an adjoining alley or an officially designated loading zone on that part of the street adjacent to such place of business. Where there is neither a usable entrance from an alley to a place of business nor an officially designated loading zone on that part of the street adjacent to such place of business, the operator of a vehicle may, without making the deposit required by this division, use not to exceed two parking spaces for loading or unloading at such place of business, for the length of time necessary to expeditiously load or unload the vehicle and give or secure delivery receipts therefor. It shall be unlawful for any operator to use more than two parking spaces for such loading or unloading or for a longer time than necessary to expeditiously load or unload and give or secure a delivery receipt therefor. 
(Code 1966, § 29-107)  
Sec. 102-264. - Parking of trucks or trailers in meter zones. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any operator in charge or control of any vehicle which has an overall length of 20 feet or more, or any vehicle having a trailer attached thereto, to park such vehicle in any parking meter space in a parking meter zone. This subsection shall not prohibit the parking of a motor truck for the purpose of loading or unloading as permitted under section 102-263. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any operator or other person to park a motor vehicle or truck having a designated carrying capacity in excess of one-half ton upon a parking lot designated as a parking meter zone. 
(c)  The provisions of this section apply on all days and on all hours of both daytime and nighttime. 
(Code 1966, § 29-108)  
Sec. 102-265. - Deposit of slugs prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or substitute for a coin of the United States. 
(Code 1966, § 29-109)  
Sec. 102-266. - Defacing, injuring, tampering with, etc., meters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this division. It shall also be unlawful for any person to attempt to deface, injure, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this division. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except a police officer of the city, to strike, hit, beat, tamper with, or attempt to strike, hit, beat or tamper with any parking meter for the purpose of taking, removing or obtaining money from such parking meter, or for the purpose of causing such meter to register time thereon, without first depositing money in such meter in coin or coins of the United States, as provided in this division. 
(Code 1966, § 29-110)  
Sec. 102-267. - Collection and disposition of meter and traf-o-teria box funds. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the traffic safety coordinator, with the approval of the city manager, to designate personnel of his department to make regular collections of the money deposited in parking meters and traf-o-teria boxes. It shall be the duty of those persons so designated to pick up the coins as deposited in the meters and traf-o-teria boxes, and to deliver such coins to the director of finance as soon as practicable after removal from such meter or traf-o-teria box. A separate record shall be kept of funds collected from such meters and boxes on parking lots, and from meters and boxes on street parking zones. It shall be the duty of the director of finance to count the funds taken from such meters and boxes. Funds from meters and funds collected from traf-o-teria boxes shall be deposited to the general fund of the city. 
(b)  Revenues from parking meters on parking lot zones within the Heart of the City shall be applied first to the cost of meters within the Heart of the City, their maintenance, supervision of the property lying therein, and the cost of improvements thereon, after which any revenues will be deposited into the Heart of the City Parking Fund, a fund established by the city for the exclusive purpose of alleviating the parking needs of the Heart of the City. 
(c)  Each person designated to collect money from parking meters and traf-o-teria boxes shall, if directed by the city manager to do so, execute a fiduciary bond in the sum of $1,000.00 payable to the city, conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties in collecting and delivering all such monies, which bond shall be executed by a corporate surety duly authorized under the laws of the state to execute such bonds. The premiums for such bonds shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 29-111; Ord. No. 2005-95, § 3, 11-14-05)  
Secs. 102-268—102-280. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC PARKING LOTS 
 
Sec. 102-281. - Texas Uniform Act regulating traffic made applicable to parking lots. 
There is hereby adopted and made applicable to all parking lots in the city the Texas Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, codified as Chapters 541 through 552 of the Texas Transportation Code, and such act is hereby made applicable to private property commonly used by the public, such as supermarket or shopping center parking lots, parking areas provided for business establishments for the convenience of their customers, clients or patrons, parking lots owned and operated by the state, or any other parking area owned and operated for the convenience of and commonly used by the public, including but not limited to the common parking areas of multi-family housing areas. 
(Code 1966, § 19-10; Ord. No. 2004-51, § 1, 6-28-04)  
Sec. 102-282. - Statement of public policy; acts prohibited. 
(a)  Applicability and public purpose statement. As used in this section, the term "parking lot" shall mean any area in, at or adjacent to a restaurant, drive-in restaurant, store retail or whole-sale business establishment, office building, professional building, recreational building, multi-family residential area, referred to in this section as a premises, or any public building or space used, designed or intended for the parking of any type of vehicle, including motor vehicles, by members of the general public, and maintained for the convenience of customers, clients, patients, members or patrons of one or more business establishments, public offices or organizations. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. The following acts or conduct of any person upon entering, driving on, parking on or leaving any parking lot are hereby declared to be unlawful, and any person found guilty of any such act or conduct shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)  To enter a parking lot in a motor vehicle of any kind and use such parking lot for racing or as a shortcut to other property or a street. 
(2)  To race the motor of any vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any vehicle, blow the horn of such vehicle needlessly, or to create any loud or unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbance whereby the quiet and good order of the premises or the adjacent neighborhood are disturbed. 
(3)  For two or more persons to congregate inside or outside of a motor vehicle parked thereon, when not otherwise engaged in a lawful pursuit relating to the use of the premises and without the owner's consent. 
(4)  To throw, deposit, leave or permit to come to rest upon any parking lot any litter, except in the receptacles provided for such litter, as set forth in this division. Litter is defined as any trash; paper; napkins; straws; cups or containers made of paper, plastic or other similar material; bottles; glass; candy or gum wrappers; remnants of food; cans or remnants or parts thereof or any material of an insanitary nature. 
(5)  To leave a motor vehicle unattended on a parking lot, except for the purpose of entering into a premises, or returning therefrom, except with the consent and approval of the owner or operator or manager of such parking lot. 
For the purposes of this section, the fact that a premises is closed shall constitute prima facie proof that a person is not engaged in a lawful pursuit relating to the use of the premises. Furthermore, if any parking lot is clearly marked by any sign or device declaring time limits or other restrictions relating to parking, then a violation by any person of such restrictions shall be prima facie proof of such owner's nonconsent to any person parking or congregating on such parking lot. 
(Code 1966, § 19-23; Ord. No. 2004-51, § 1, 6-28-04)  
Sec. 102-283. - Duties of owner, lessee, manager or operator. 
It is hereby declared to be the duty of the owner, lessee, manager or operator of a drive-in restaurant or parking lot to: 
(1)  Provide on the premises not less than one receptacle for the receipt of litter, readily accessible and available to the customers, patrons or users of such business or parking lot. If more than one receptacle is required in order to hold all of the litter that may be placed therein, then it shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, manager or operator to furnish such additional number of receptacles as is reasonably necessary under normal conditions to hold such litter. 
(2)  Maintain quiet and good order upon the premises, and to prohibit disorderly or immoral conduct or lingering or loitering thereon, and to prohibit noise or nuisances thereon. 
(3)  Clean the premises and to remove all litter therefrom and place such litter within receptacles within one hour after the daily closing time of any business located on or in connection with such parking lot. If the business operates continuously without closing, then the owner or operator shall clean the premises and remove all litter therefrom at least twice a day, between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and noon, and between 11:00 p.m. and midnight. It shall further be the duty of the owner, lessee, manager or operator to prevent any litter from blowing upon or being permitted to come to rest upon the streets of the city or upon any public or private property. 
(Code 1966, § 19-24)  
Sec. 102-284. - Authority to remove vehicles. 
(a)  The owner, lessee, manager or operator of any drive-in restaurant or parking lot shall have the right to tow away or cause to be towed away from any such parking lot any vehicle which has been left there unattended or abandoned, provided that there has been placed on such premises in a conspicuous place a sign in letters at least three inches in height, which states that any vehicle left unoccupied, unattended or abandoned on the parking lot shall be towed away at the cost of the owner thereof. 
(b)  Any person whose vehicle has been towed away pursuant to this section shall, in order to redeem or repossess such vehicle, pay the towing charges, not to exceed the maximum rate of fees authorized to be charged for such services under chapter 114, article V of this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 19-25)  
Sec. 102-285. - Penalty for violation of division. 
The penalty upon conviction for a violation of this division shall be as prescribed in section 1-4. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1966, § 19-26)  
Secs. 102-286—102-305. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 
 
Sec. 102-306. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the parade ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 29-16(a))  
Sec. 102-307. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, pedestrian race, run, marathon or walkathon, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city. 
Parade permit means a permit as required by this article. 
(Code 1966, § 29-16(b)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 102-308. - Parade permit. 
(a)  Required. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the city manager. 
(b)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities. 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(c)  Application. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the city secretary's office on forms provided by such office. 
(1)  Filing period. Unless for good cause shown, an application for a parade permit shall be filed with the city manager not less than 20 days nor more than 60 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(2)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade. 
b.  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
d.  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the city secretary a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
e.  The date when the parade is to be conducted. 
f.  The hours when such parade will start and terminate. 
g.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly areas. 
h.  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
i.  The location by streets of any assembly and disassembly areas for such parade. 
j.  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles. 
k.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
l.  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
m.  Any additional information which the city manager shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether or not a permit should be issued. 
(3)  Continuing application. An applicant may file one application for a number of recurring parades within the same calendar year where the applicant is able to demonstrate that the events are essentially the same format and are to be held on certain dates. The city manager may issue one permit for all such events. 
(4)  Fee. A fee of $20.00 shall be paid at the time an application for a parade permit is filed. However, for applications requesting expedited processing (less than five days), a single fee of $25.00 shall be paid at the time of application for a parade permit is filed. 
(d)  Notice to city and other officials. Upon receipt of a parade permit application, the city secretary shall send a copy thereof to the following officials for their review and recommendations: 
(1)  Chief of police. 
(2)  City attorney. 
(3)  Fire chief. 
(4)  Director of the department of public works. 
(5)  Director of parks and recreation. 
(6)  Traffic safety coordinator. 
(7)  Risk manager. 
The city secretary shall thereafter forward the original application and recommendations to the city manager for his consideration. 
(e)  Standards for issuance. The city manager shall issue a permit as provided for under this article when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. The city manager, at the expense of the applicant, may require the provision of barricades and/or the provision of police or security personnel at the expense of the applicant to ensure the protection and safety of persons and property as a condition of granting such permit. 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provide disorderly conduct or create a disturbance. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(f)  Notice of rejection. Within two business days following the city secretary's receipt of all the recommendations from the officials referred to in subsection (d) hereof, the city manager shall act upon the application for a parade permit and cause the city secretary, within two business days of his decision, to issue the permit or, if denied, to mail to the applicant a notice stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(g)  Appeal procedure. Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the board of commissioners. The appeal shall be taken within three days after denial by filing a notice of appeal with the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall act upon the appeal at the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners at which notice requests under state law can be met. 
(Code 1966, § 29-16(c)—(h); Ord. No. 2006-103, § 6, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 2016-58, § I, 9-26-16; Ord. No. 2016-58, § II, 9-26-16)  
Sec. 102-309. - Alternative permit. 
The city manager, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within three days after notice of the action of the city manager, file a written notice of acceptance with the city manager. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this article. 
(Code 1966, § 29-16(i))  
Sec. 102-310. - Contents of permit. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Date and starting and ending time. 
(2)  Type of parade activity authorized. 
(3)  Special limitations or conditions required. 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade. 
(5)  The starting and ending areas and the portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof. 
(7)  The name of the parade chairperson. 
(8)  Such other information as the city manager shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 29-16(j))  
Sec. 102-311. - Duties of permittee. 
A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Code 1966, § 29-16(k))  
Sec. 102-312. - Possession of permit. 
The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1966, § 29-16(l))  
Sec. 102-313. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parking on parade route. The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police may post signs or take other action to notify the public to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(d)  Handouts prohibited. No person shall throw, give or offer any material, candy, pamphlets or any other article as a participant in a parade to any spectators viewing such parade. 
(Code 1966, § 29-16(m))  
Sec. 102-314. - Compliance with permit conditions. 
It shall be illegal for any person issued a permit under this article to violate the terms thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 29-16(o))  
Sec. 102-315. - Revocation of permit. 
The city manager shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this article upon violation of the standards for issuance as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 29-16(n))  
Sec. 102-316. - Identification of funeral processions. 
A funeral procession shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle therein of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the police department. 
(Code 1966, § 29-17)  
Sec. 102-317. - Driving in processions. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession of vehicles shall drive as near to the righthand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(Code 1966, § 29-47)  
Sec. 102-318. - Driving between vehicles in processions. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this article. This section shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. 
(Code 1966, § 29-48)  
Chapter 106 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; plumbing code adopted, § 22-136 et seq.; swimming pool code adopted, § 22-216; housing code adopted, § 22-241 et seq.; unsafe building abatement standards and procedure, § 22-271; smoking prohibited in certain public places, § 54-122; solid waste, ch. 90; manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, ch. 122; subdivision improvements, § 134-86 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 106-1. - Trespass on canal and right-of-way of Hidalgo County Water Improvement District No. Three. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except when legally authorized, to enter or trespass upon the canal and right-of-way of Hidalgo County Water Improvement District Number Three within the city, and particularly, but not limited to, that part thereof enclosed by a cyclone-type fence, such canal and right-of-way being that property located parallel to and west of 18th Street and its projections within the city and commonly known as Hidalgo County Water Improvement District Number Three canal and canal right-of-way. Exception is made within such right-of-way as to the areas thereof which have been dedicated for public use as street and walk rights-of-way. 
(b)  Appropriate signs and markers, including no trespass signs, in connection with the provisions and intent of this section shall be appropriately placed on the property described in subsection (a) of this section to designate the prohibited area. 
(Code 1966, § 30-7)  
Secs. 106-2—106-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC UTILITY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-27, § II, adopted May 8, 2017, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 106-26—106-31, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1966, §§ 30-1; 30-2(a), 30-3, 30-4; Ord. No. 1992-96, § II, adopted Dec. 32,1992; Ord. No. 2002-69, § 1, adopted Oct. 14, 2002; and Ord. No. 2009-12, § I, 2-23-09). 
Cross reference— Meetings of the public utility board of trustees, § 2-45; boards, committees and commissions, § 2-76 et seq.; procedure for appointment and terms and qualifications of board members, § 2-77; substantial evidence rule in effect regarding appeals from decisions of board, committees and commissions, § 2-82; the planning and zoning commission and the public utility board shall make recommendation regarding any amendments to the subdivision ordinance, § 134-3. 
 
Sec. 106-26. - Appointment of members; rights and duties. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority contained in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., art. 1115, Tex. Water Code § 13.001-13.515 and as provided in the revenue bond ordinances of the city for water and sewer utility improvements, the complete management and control of the sewer, water system and reclaimed water of the city is vested in a board of trustees known as the Board of Trustees of the McAllen Public Utility and referred to in this chapter as the "public utility board." The members of the public utility board shall be elected as provided for in the ordinances providing for the issuance of revenue bonds for the water and utility system. The rights and duties of the public utility board shall be as set out in the water and sewer utility bond ordinances subject to amendment by the board of commissioners, amending such bond ordinances by providing for additional water and sewer revenue bonds or by the amendment of the Code of Ordinances; all such amendments are subject to the rights of all and any outstanding water and sewer utility bondholders. 
(b)  The members of the public utility board, as provided in this section, except for the place reserved for the mayor as member of the public utility board, shall be denominated as place "A", place "B", place "C", and place "D" for the purposes of the election thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-27. - Appointment of officers and employees. 
The public utility board shall appoint and employ all officers and employees which it may deem desirable and necessary in the operation of the water, reclaimed water and sewer system. The utility manager, upon the advice and consent of the public utility board, shall act as manager of the utility system. To the extent practicable, the board shall utilize the personnel and facilities of the city to reduce the expenses of maintaining and operating the utility system. All such services shall be rendered by the city on an actual cost basis to the McAllen Utility Systems. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-28. - Duties and responsibilities of utility manager. 
In carrying out the duties of utility manager of the water, reclaimed water and sewer utility system, the utility manager shall, to the extent practicable, follow the provisions of and have the duties and responsibilities as required under his position as utility manager as set out in section 2-211 et seq. In carrying out such duties, the utility manager shall be under the control of the public utility board. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-29. - Joint purchases and expenditures with the city. 
In carrying out the duties of utility manager of the utility system, it is recognized that it is often advantageous and expedient to provide for joint purchases and/or expenditures by the city and the utility system for certain goods and services rendered to those entities. It is hereby provided that, prior to the entering into of any contract or the letting of any bid by the board of commissioners, wherein such contract or expenditures includes the expenditure by the water, reclaimed water and sewer utility system, that such item shall be referred to and presented to the public utility board for their approval, concurrence and recommendation. At the time of the presentation before the public utility board, the proposed proration formula for the payment on the expenditure between the city and the utility system shall be presented to the public utility board. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-30. - Continuation of prior ordinances, etc. 
The codification of the provisions relating to the public utility board, as set out in this chapter, shall neither enlarge nor diminish the duties, powers, and authority of the public utility board as heretofore provided for in those certain presently outstanding bond ordinances providing for the issuance of water and sewer revenue bonds as heretofore passed by the board of commissioners. The action of the board of commissioners in setting out the provisions relating to the public utility board in this chapter does not create any legal interest or rights not heretofore vested in such public utility board or the board of commissioners relating to the operation of the public utility system or the means of purchases or expenditures for the city or the public utility system. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-31. - Agenda. 
(a)  All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents, petitions or other matters submitted by appointed officials of the city or public utility system, to be considered by the public utility board shall be submitted to the utility manager's office for approval not later than five working days prior to the meeting in which the matter will be heard. The utility manager or the utility board chairman shall have the authority to waive this requirement. 
(b)  Any two utility board members or the chairman may place items on the agenda by giving the utility manager written notice concerning such item by requesting that an item be placed on the next board meeting agenda, or a request to place an item on a subsequent agenda may be made during a meeting of the board. 
(c)  In the case of an item which has been requested by a person not being an elected or appointed official of the city or public utility system, then in such case such items shall be placed in the informational section of the next available utility board agenda. Such item may only be made a regular agenda item upon the majority vote of the utility board members, subject to the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Secs. 106-32—106-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-27, § II`, adopted May 8, 2017, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III, §§ 106-51, 106-52,106-66—106-71, 106-81—106-87, 106-101—106-104, 106-116—106-125 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Plumbing code adopted, § 22-136 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 106-51. - Establishment of rules and regulations for water service. 
The public utility board is authorized and directed to establish such rules, regulations and conditions from time to time for the furnishing of water and reclaimed water to customers as in its judgment shall be proper. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-52. - Public utility department to pay street rental. 
(a)  The public utility department shall be charged, as a rental for the use of the streets, alleys, highways, easements and public places within the city, a sum equal to two percent of the gross receipts of such department received from business conducted within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The rental charged to the public utility department under subsection (a) shall be computed and paid annually on March 15 of each and every year for the preceding year, and shall be paid to the city tax collector. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Secs. 106-53—106-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 106-66. - Prohibited connections and/or line taps. 
(a)  It shall be illegal for any person, corporate or otherwise, or any business enterprise, for profit or otherwise, to connect or tap into a city water service line or city reclaimed water service line prior to having first applied for a water meter or a reclaimed water meter from the city's planning department. This prohibition shall apply with equal force to connections or tappings into fire hydrant plugs, mains, and/or lines. 
(b)  In the case of building construction, residential or otherwise, the application shall have been presented to the city's planning department prior to the placement of such construction's building foundation. 
(c)  A fee of $50.00 for the first occurrence shall be charged in addition to any fines resulting from illegal connections or tappings as set out in this section. Repeat offenders will be charged a fee of $500.00 per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17; Ord. No. 2018-65, § I, 9-24-18; Ord. No. 2018-65, § I, 9-24-18)  
Sec. 106-67. - Notice of proposed connections. 
In the case of connections into a fire hydrant plug, main or line, it shall be the applicant's responsibility to notify the city's utility department of the proposed connection and/or tap. The notification shall be in writing, and shall state therein the exact location of such connection and/or tap as well as its reasonably expected period of use. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-68. - Approval of connections; termination. 
(a)  No connection and/or tap into any fire hydrant plug, main or line shall be allowed unless the following enumerated conditions have been met, namely: 
(1)  The applicant receives a written approval by the city's utility department agent-in-charge as to such proposal and its particulars; and 
(2)  A fee is paid by the applicant in the amount then applicable, payable at the city's utilities department and prior to the installation of a water meter or reclaimed water meter. 
(b)  Upon approval, as provided in this section, the connection and/or tap shall be effectuated by a utility department work crew. The fee, as provided for in this section, shall also be applicable whenever the established connection and/or tap is subsequently relocated for use by the applicant elsewhere. As is the case in the initial installment, any subsequent relocation shall be effectuated by a utility department work crew. 
(c)  Upon the termination of any connection and/or tap, it shall be the applicant's responsibility to notify the city's utility department in writing immediately after such termination. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-69. - Penalty for violation of division. 
Any person, corporate or otherwise, or any business enterprise, for profit or otherwise, who fails to comply with any provision of this division, or any of its particulars, shall be held liable for a fine as provided in section 1-14. This fine shall be exclusive of any additional charges, fines and fees which may become established for such matters as labor and replacement costs, and other pertinent charges. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-70. - Damage to fire hydrant, utility line, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to negligently or intentionally damage or otherwise alter an existing "header" device, fire hydrant, main, reclaimed water main, water service utility line or reclaimed water line or any other water service utility line or similar property or device (collectively, referred to as "facility") belonging to the city in such a manner as to make such facility's future utilization impossible or unfeasible for proper usage. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence excavation work in, on or adjacent to any city road or road right-of-way or any other location where city facilities lines are reasonably anticipated to be located without contacting the engineering department of the city requesting a facility's location marking for such area of excavation. Any person who shall damage or otherwise alter any city facility as provided for in this section shall be liable in monetary damages for its replacement and repair. In any claim or cause of action by the city against any such person for monetary damages as provided for in this section, the failure by any such person to request a facility location marking from the city engineer's office shall constitute a prima facie case of negligence by such person in the damage of such city facility. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-71. - Costs assessed for repair of damaged facilities. 
(a)  Whenever any person causes a break or damage to any existing facility as provided for in section 106-70, there is hereby imposed, and such person shall be liable to the city for payment for loss of water or reclaimed water resulting in such break and/or damage of such facility and the cost of repairs as follows: 
(1)  Damage to a six-inch water line, six-inch reclaimed water line or smaller (water or reclaimed water loss), plus actual time and materials for repair .....$65.00 
(2)  Each additional inch of pipe size above six inches, per inch .....10.00 
(b)  Any person damaging or otherwise altering any city water or reclaimed water utility facility as provided for in section 106-70, shall immediately contact the city utility department at city hall if such break occurs during normal business hours, Monday through Friday, and the public utility department if such break occurs after normal business hours or on weekends, and such departments are listed in the local telephone directory. Such notification shall include the location of the damaged or broken city water or reclaimed water utility facility and any other information as required by the responding city personnel. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to give such notification as required in this subsection. 
(c)  The city finance department shall cause a bill to be prepared for any reasonable cost to repair any damages as provided for in subsection (a) of this section and shall submit the bill to the person responsible therefor, who shall remit payment therefor within ten days of the receipt of such billing or shall contact the utility manager or his authorized representative stating the reasons and lack of justification for payment of such bill. Should any such person fail to pay such bill when due, then such person shall not be eligible to receive any further city service relating to any construction site or any other similar type business of such person relating to the type of construction or excavation work for which the original damage or break to the city water or reclaimed water utility facility was caused as provided for in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Secs. 106-72—106-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 106-81. - Rate schedules established. 
There are hereby established four schedules of rates to be charged for the consumption of water supplied through the city water system, as follows: 
(1)  Standard water rate schedule within the city for City of McAllen customers under the city's certificate of convenience and necessity. 
(2)  Standard water rate schedule for areas previously covered by Sharyland Water Supply Corporation Certificate of Convenience and Necessity relating to any buyout phases whereby the city has entered into agreements with Sharyland Water Supply Corporation for buyout of their certified area. 
(3)  Standard water rate schedule outside the city. 
(4)  Reclaimed water rate schedule 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-82. - Standard water rate schedule within the city. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) hereof, the rate to be charged for water furnished and consumed by single-family residence, multifamily, commercial and industrial customers is as follows: 
(1)  Minimum monthly base fee charges shall be made, and bills rendered at $9.95 per month, regardless of meter size. 
(2)  Commodity charges: 
Residential: $1.45 per 1,000 gallons for the first 7,999 gallons; $1.75 for the next 8,000 to 12,999 gallons; $1.95 for 13,000 to 17,999 gallons, and $2.05 per 1,000 gallons thereafter. 
Multifamily: $1.45 per 1,000 gallons for all usage under last fiscal year's average monthly usage, and $1.95 per 1,000 gallons for all usage above last fiscal year's average monthly usage. 
Commercial: $1.45 per 1,000 gallons for all usage under last fiscal year's average monthly usage, and $1.95 per 1,000 gallons for all usage above last fiscal year's average monthly usage. 
Industrial: $1.45 per 1,000 gallons for all usage under last fiscal year's average monthly usage, and $1.95 per 1,000 gallons for all usage above last fiscal year's average monthly usage. 
Irrigation/pool services: $1.95 per 1,000 gallons. 
(3)  Traveling meters: 
Minimum monthly base fee charges shall be made, and bills rendered at $50.00 per month, regardless of meter size. Commodity charges shall be made as indicated in item (2) above. The traveling meter shall be retrieved by city after three months of zero consumption usage. 
(b)  Provide that until the buyout cost is recovered and 30 days after approved by the utility board, the monthly charges shall be made, and bills rendered accordingly on all accounts located or to be located on or after May 1, 1995, in the areas covered by Sharyland Water Supply Corporation's Certificate of Convenience and Necessity buyout Phase #2, #3, #4, #5A, and #6 as shown in the agreements between the McAllen Public Utility Board and Sharyland Water Supply Corporation covering the same, as follows: 
(1)  Residential connection ( 5/8 ? or ¾? meter): 
0 to 3,000 gallons .....$9.00 
(2)  Commercial connection ( 5/8 ? or ¾? meter): 
0 to 3,000 gallons .....15.00 
(3)  Meters larger than 5/8 ? or ¾?: 
1? meter, 0 to 3,000 gallons .....16.00 
2? meter, 0 to 3,000 gallons .....24.00 
3? meter, 0 to 3,000 gallons .....29.00 
4? meter, 0 to 3,000 gallons .....34.00 
6? meter, 0 to 3,000 gallons .....39.00 
(4)  Charge per 1,000 gallons, after the first 3,000 gallons of usage, for both residential and commercial connections: 
Per Thousand Gallons 
3,000 to 20,000 gallons .....$1.50 
20,001 to 100,000 gallons .....1.60 
100,001 to 150,000 gallons .....1.75 
All over 150,000 gallons .....2.00 
(c)  The penalties and/or remedies provided in division 2 of this article apply to any violation of the provisions of this section. Such penalties or remedies are not exclusive and it is expressly provided that any remedies available by law to the city to enforce the provisions of this section are also applicable to violations of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17; Ord. No. 2017-51, § I, 9-25-17; Ord. No. 2019-57, § I, 9-23-19)  
Sec. 106-83. - Standard water rate schedule outside the city. 
All customers connected to and using water from the public utility system outside the city limits shall be charged on the schedule of rates set forth in section 106-82 plus an additional charge of 50 percent of the total water bill. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-84. - Reclaimed water rates. 
(a)  Reclaimed water shall mean domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for a beneficial use. 
(b)  All customers connected to and using reclaimed water from the public utility system shall be charged the same fees and costs, such as meter and deposit charges as customers using potable water except the rates for the reclaimed water shall be reduced by 20 percent of the rates applied to the most current domestic base potable water rate or the commodity rate is set at 80 percent of the lowest tiered potable water rate. 
(c)  Commercial and industrial large volume users of reclaimed water contracts and city properties such as public parks and golf courses are not subject to the rates applied in subsection (a) and will be set by the McAllen Public Utility Board on a case by case basis. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17; Ord. No. 2018-65, § I, 9-24-18)  
Sec. 106-85. - Deposit required. 
(a)  A security deposit shall be required for all water and reclaimed water customers in the amounts as approved by minute order, from time to time, by the board of commissioners and as recommended by the McAllen Public Utility Board. This deposit shall be required for all new accounts as provided for in this section, save and except for any existing customer of the water system who shall transfer an account from one location to another or who shall request additional account(s) to be established under such person's name; provided that such customer has not been in default for payment of the utility bills for the prior two years immediately preceding the transfer of or establishment of any new account. Any such customer paying any deposit as provided for in this section and who shall under the same account maintain such account without delinquency for a continuous two-year period from the date of deposit shall be entitled to a refund of such deposit. 
(b)  The security deposit should not only cover the water and reclaimed water account billing of such customers, but shall also be prorated among the sewer amounts due and outstanding and the garbage collection service amounts due and outstanding for any account relating to such security deposit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-86. - Meter testing. 
Any customer of the water system or the reclaimed water system may have the meter serving such customer tested by the public utility department once per year without charge to the customer. Except as provided for in this section, any request for testing of meters at a shorter interval than one year shall be paid for by the customer requesting such test and the fee therefor shall be $25.00 per test. If any test required to be paid for by the customer results in a finding that such meter is defective to an extent that it creates a substantial disadvantage to the consumer, then the fee to be paid by the consumer shall be waived. The term "substantial disadvantage" as used in this section shall mean that the water charge or reclaimed water charge calculated based on the original meter reading resulted in a 25 percent or greater overcharge to the customer. The one-year period for determining the duration for free meter reading shall commence for all existing customers on the effective date of the ordinance adopting this section and for all future customers commencing on the date of installation of the meter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-87. - Tapping charges. 
The following charges shall be made by the public utilities as tapping fees for making connections for the use of any water or reclaimed water user: 
	Existing tap 	New tap 
For 5/8 × ¾-inch tap 	$375.00 	$750.00 
For 1-inch tap 	 450.00 	1,050.00 
For 1½-inch tap 	 800.00 	1,600.00 
For 2-inch tap 	1,000.00 	1,800.00 
For 3-inch tap 	3,850.00 	4,400.00 
For 4-inch tap 	5,100.00 	5,650.00 
For 6-inch tap 	7,700.00 	8,250.00 
Traveling meter per connection 	50.00 	
 
For all other size taps, the tapping charge shall be based upon the current cost of the meter, required materials, and labor therefor. 
For all other size taps, the tapping charge shall be based upon the current cost of the meter, required materials, and labor therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-88. - Reserve for depreciation. 
(a)  There is hereby created a reserve for depreciation as a separate fund called the Reserve for Depreciation - Water, to be collected out of the amounts collected monthly as a result of the application of the water rates set out in this division, in an amount equal to one-twelfth of 35 percent of the amount contained in the City of McAllen Public Utilities, Water Fund annual budget for each succeeding fiscal year, as a reserve for depreciation, and such amount shall be set aside in Reserve for Depreciation - Water Fund. Such fund is an account (line item) in the budget for the city water system. All expenditures from the reserve for depreciation shall be for replacement items only and either be budgeted or approved by the Board of Trustees of the McAllen Public Utilities. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the city commission may, upon recommendation by the public utility board, from time to time, authorize, by ordinance, expenditures from the Depreciation Fund for other than replacement items. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17; Ord. No. 2018-65, § I, 9-24-18)  
Secs. 106-89—106-101. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - WELLS 
 
Sec. 106-102. - Temporary permit to drill or develop; bond. 
No water well shall be drilled or developed within the city unless the driller or developer first secures a temporary permit from the city secretary for such purpose. All applications for such permit shall be accompanied by a bond in the amount of $1,000.00, payable to the city, executed by the applicant and a corporate surety authorized to do business in the state and conditioned that the applicant will comply with all provisions of this division. The application to drill shall describe the lot or land upon which the well is proposed to be drilled and such permit shall not be valid beyond 30 days after its issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-103. - Test hole required; information to be given city. 
The driller or developer of a water well shall be required to drill a test hole and completely log each stratum and soil formation encountered in the process of drilling such test hole, and furnish a copy of an electric log and soil formation of the proposed well to the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-104. - Permit for completion; right of city to designate formations to be developed; inspection fee. 
(a)  If the electric log and soil formation indicate favorable conditions for completion of a water well, based upon geological analysis of such soil formation and electric log, the city will issue a final permit for well completion. The city reserves the right to designate which formations are to be developed and which formations are to be sealed off and not developed, a condition to be determined before final issuance of the permit. 
(b)  An inspection fee of $25.00 shall be charged for each final permit granted under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-105. - Backfilling abandoned test hole. 
In the event of abandonment of a test hole for a water well, the driller or developer shall completely backfill such test hole with clay materials free of sand or gravel. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Secs. 106-106—106-116. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN 
 
Sec. 106-117. - Introduction. 
McAllen Public Utility (MPU) provides the public with its water, reclaimed water and sewer services within the city limits. The water and wastewater system is owned and operated by the City of McAllen in Hidalgo County, Texas, and is governed by the McAllen Public Utility Board of Trustees. The amount of water the city water system can store, treat divert, and distribute to customers is limited. MPU wants to avoid waste or unreasonable use of water, which could lead to possible drought and emergency conservation strategies. With an expected population increase over the next 50 years that well exceeds the national average; it is imperative that we maximize efficient water use practices and minimize both direct and indirect water waste. While short-term water shortages and water supply emergencies are often unpreventable, response measures can be determined and implemented in advance to avoid, minimize, or mitigate the risks and impacts of drought-related water shortages and other emergencies. 
The purpose of this plan is to establish a water conservation and drought contingency plan for the city in accordance with Texas Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter 288. The basic goal of the water conservation and drought contingency plan is to ensure an uninterrupted supply of water in an amount sufficient to satisfy essential human needs. The water conservation plan develops a conservation strategy for reducing the volume of water withdrawn from a water supply source, for reducing the loss or waste of water, for increasing the recycling and reclaimed of water, and for preventing the pollution of water. The drought contingency plan is a strategy for temporary supply management and demand management responses to temporary and potentially recurring water supply shortages and other water supply emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-118. - Utility profile. 
(a)  Demographics. MPU provides water supply and wastewater services within the city limits. The service area is 48.7 square miles. The 2010 U.S. Census data for the population of the city of McAllen is 129,877. The current estimated dynamic population in the winter, when long-term visitor counts are higher, is 138,398; and in the summer, the estimate is 132,338. This figure includes people who live in the city permanently, as well as winter visitors and people who commute here from Mexico. The McAllen city limits population has grown 2.16 percent annually over the past decade and is projected to continue to grow another three percent annually through 2016. 
(b)  Water supply. 
(1)  Raw water supply. The Rio Grande River is the sole source of water for citizens of the city, and MPU has water delivery contracts with four districts, as follows: 
Hidalgo County Irrigation 
District Number 2 	8,111 acre ft/year 
Hidalgo County Water Improvement District Number 3 	13,980 acre ft/year 
United Irrigation District 	11,250 acre ft/year 
Brownsville Irrigation District 	2,000 acre ft/year 
 
(2)  Water treatment system. The city has two water treatment plants: 
Southwest Water Treatment Plant: (rerated in 2010) 47.25 MGD 
Northwest Water Treatment Plant: (rerated in 2011) 11.25 MGD 
Total System Treatment Capacity: 58.5 MGD 
(3)  Water pumpage and storage. Current annual pumpage for 2011 was 109 billion gallons of water. MPU has various pumps located at the Southwest Water Treatment Plant to pump raw water from the raw water reservoir into the plant facilities for treatment. The plant also has high service pumps to pump water from the ground storage tanks into the distribution system. MPU relies on elevated storage and high service pumps for pressure maintenance. 
MPU has seven water towers with a total of 6.75 million gallons of elevated storage, and 11.9 million gallons of ground storage. All ground storage and elevated towers are monitored by a SCADA system. The system allows MPU to monitor flow data and record historical trends in the treatment and distribution system. 
MPU has a total of 713.6 miles of water lines, of which approximately 16 percent are 12 inches in diameter or larger. The MPU system has 7,375 water valves and 4,050 active fire hydrants. 
(4)  Water master plan. An updated water master plan was completed by Freese and Nichols, Inc. in July 2009, to evaluate the integrity of the existing water systems and to recommend a phased capital improvements plan to serve growth through 2025. The recommended improvements will serve as a basis for the design, construction and financing of facilities required to meet MPU's water service needs as a result of projected population growth. 
(c)  Water use characteristics. MPU supplies water for residential, commercial, industrial, and public use. The total per capita use for the city in 2011 is estimated at 172 gallons per capita per day (gpcd) 2. This is an average taken by dividing the total water treated by the population served. The residential gallons per capita per day are estimated at 108 gpcd. Residential gpcd is made by dividing total single-family and multi-family residential water sales by the population served. 
The city's industrial users accounted for 16 percent of total water use. The largest volume industrial user for 2011 was Magic Valley Fresh Frozen, which purchased approximately 84.4 MG of water, or 1.11 percent of total water usage. 
Large sized meters, or those 1.5 inches and larger in size, make up only 4.8 percent of the meters used but use 33.3 percent of the water. Conversely, small sized meters, or those one-inch and below, make up 95.1 percent of all meters, but account for less than 66.7 percent of metered sales. 
(d)  Unaccounted-for water. The city's unaccounted-for water is due to breaks, leaks, meter under- registration, processing, flushing mains, system loss, and un-metered fire hydrants. The amount of unaccounted-for water is determined by the difference between production and sales of water. The average amount of unaccounted-for water loss for the past three years was ten percent. The unaccounted-for loss of water for 2011 was ten percent. 
(e)  MPU operates two wastewater treatment plants. Both treatment plants are based upon extended aeration activated sludge system, with secondary effluent limitations. Treated effluent is discharged into floodways and eventually into the Arroyo Colorado and Laguna Madre Estuary. The average annual treated wastewater volume for 2009—2011 was 5100.8 million gallons. The average monthly amount of treated wastewater for that same period was 425.0 million gallons per month, or 14.2 MGD. The sanitary sewer infrastructure consists of 500 miles of sanitary sewer line, with 44 lift stations within the City of McAllen and ten lift stations within the City of Alton. 
The South Wastewater Treatment Plant is a 10 MGD design flow with 16.2 MGD peak flow capabilities. It is currently 61 percent hydraulically loaded with effluent limitations of 10 mg/l of carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand; 15 mg/l of total suspended solids; 2 mg/l of ammonia nitrogen and E. coli, CFU or MPN/100 ml 126. 
The North Wastewater Treatment Plant is an 11.25 MGD design flow with 28.125 MGD peak flow capability. The permit limitations include 10 mg/l of biochemical oxygen demand, and 15 mg/l of total suspended solids, 3 mg/l of ammonia nitrogen and 35 mg/l Enterococci bacteria. 
(f)  Wastewater master plan. An updated wastewater master plan was completed by Freese and Nichols, Inc. in July 2009 to evaluate the integrity of the existing wastewater systems and to recommend a phased capital improvements plan to serve growth through 2025. The recommended improvements will serve as a basis for the design, construction and financing of facilities required to meet MPU's wastewater service needs as a result of projected population growth. 
The following is a description of the public utility system. 
WATER SUPPLY AND USE DATA 
2011 Data 
Population: 129,877 
Water Sources: 
Hidalgo County Irrigation 
District Number 2 	8,111 acre ft/year 
Hidalgo County Water Improvement District Number 3 	13,980 acre ft/year 
United Irrigation District 	11,250 acre ft/year 
Brownsville Irrigation District 	2,000 acre ft/year 
 
Water Production: 
Average annual pumpage (3-year average 2009—2011): 771.701 MG/year 
Maximum daily treatment capacity: 58.5 MGD 
Average daily pumpage (3-year average): 25.37 MGD 
Wastewater Production: 
Average annual amount treated (4-year average 2008—2011): 2,159.01 MG/yr 
Maximum daily treatment capacity: 44.325 MGD 
Average daily treated: 5.92MGD 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-119. - Water conservation goals. 
Based on the data found in the utility profile and on careful evaluation of the city's water consumption and practices, MPU has set the following goals to be achieved through the adoption of this water conservation plan: 
(1)  To reduce daily municipal per capita water use to 168 gpcd by the year 2015 and to maintain the unaccounted-for water loss at ten to 12 percent by 2017. Also, to reduce daily municipal per capita water use to 160 gpcd by the year 2020 and to maintain the unaccounted-for water loss at eight to ten percent by 2022. At present, the gpcd ten-year average is 187 and the unaccounted-for water loss is at ten percent. 
(2)  To implement long term cost-effective recovery measures for major causes of unaccounted-for water related to metering. We have implemented a meter change out policy that requires all meters to be changed out after 12 years or 1.5 MG of total flow and an aggressive meter testing program to identify and deal with problem meters. A 2011 audit reflected that our program is working. 
(3)  To increase both public and employee awareness regarding water conservation and water related issues. This will especially be encouraged during summer months when water consumption increases significantly. 
(4)  To investigate the potential for wastewater effluent reclaimed, and to use reclaimed water when practical. 
(5)  To promote xeriscape landscape use like low-water using shrubs and plants, patios, rocks, decks, and walkways in order to reduce the amount of high water consuming landscape area. Businesses as well as residential users will be encouraged to participate. 
(6)  To promote more efficient irrigation techniques for agriculture, industry, and private use through rebates, retrofit, and education. 
(7)  A full time water education specialist is on staff. This specialist will be developing conservation programs and educational offerings to both public and school children audiences to enhance understanding of water utility systems as well as promote water conservation and prevention of pollution of water resources. 
(8)  Wholesale customers will be required to implement and adhere to a water conservation and drought contingency plan. Currently, no wholesale contracts exist. 
(9)  MPU will strive to attain a two percent reduction goal during water conservation stages. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-120. - Water conservation strategies. 
(a)  Public education. Water conservation is promoted in the city through the following: 
(1)  Public service announcements have been and will continue to be made regarding water conservation inside and outside the home, as well as in the workplace. For example, tips on efficient lawn watering, repairing leaks in the home, and installing low-flow showerheads and faucet aerators have been publicized on local radio stations, in newspapers, and on television stations. Educational videos and service announcements are and will continue to be shown periodically on the McAllen Cable Network. 
(2)  New customers are given information such as brochures about water conservation when they open a new account with the city. Informative brochures as well as flyers are also on display at City Hall where many customers come in to pay their water bill or take care of business with the utility department and at other city offices. 
(3)  Employee education will also be furthered in the utility by periodic presentations regarding water use and conservation. Posters and additional brochures will also be distributed in City Hall for employee use. City employees who do not work at City Hall will also be sent materials such as pamphlets and brochures to be displayed and read at their facilities. 
Customer Service Week is celebrated within all city departments every October. During this time, the utility has a booth at City Hall to inform citizens on water conservation efforts and to improve public perception and awareness of the utility's conservation efforts. 
MPU's water education specialist will make every effort to work with other city departments, McAllen-area schools, the International Museum of Art and Science (IMAS), and other community groups to promote water conservation education by participating in special public events, educational offerings, and other activities. Examples include co-sponsoring a poster contest, having a booth at festivals or fairs, or hosting community groups for water plant tours. 
(b)  Recycling and reclaimed. MPU currently has a recycle or reclaimed program for water via irrigation of treated wastewater effluent on the city's golf course. Additionally, MPU has contracts to sell Calpine and Duke Energy 5 MGD and 4.8 MGD, respectively, of treated wastewater effluent for reclaimed. MPU began constructing a reclaimed line in 2011 that will eventually supply the Convention Center District and the city's nearby Westside Park with treated wastewater effluent for irrigation and landscape feature use such as decorative water fountains and other water features. After recent developments have requested to purchase reclaimed water from the City for irrigation, the MPU has amended its ordinance to allow for reclaimed water to be used for residential and institutional irrigation purposes. 
(c)  Metering devices and universal metering. 
(1)  Metering devices. New meters, two inches and smaller in size, are bought according to the latest revision of "AWWA New Meter Standard for Cold-Water Meters" in order to specify all materials, design, manufacture, and testing of all meters. The manufacturer will guarantee that all new meters will test at 98.1 to 101 percent accurate at the maximum rate and 95 to 101 percent at the "low flow" rate as designed by AWWA Standards Manual M-6 on a meter size for size basis. This ensures accurate and precise measurement of water diverted. 
Older meters that may be registering too high or low will be replaced as time permits in order to accurately account for water and lower any unaccounted-for water loss. 
(2)  Metering. MPU currently meters all water usage except that of fire hydrants and water loss due to leaks, breaks, processing, flushing of mains, and system loss. MPU, however, does keep track of water used by fire hydrants through the city fire department. 
MPU uses computers to maintain billing, to keep accurate records of water consumption, and to identify high and low water users. MPU will test all meters that appear to show unusually high or low water usage based on fluctuating meter data. Water distribution tests meters based on an "as needed" basis when customers complain or a problem arises. 
The MPU water distribution department is responsible for maintaining all 53,200 connections. Meter readers use a portable meter tester and/or a read-a-flow recorder to test meters in the field. When meters cannot be read in the field, they are taken into a meter shop to be assessed. Priority is always given to water leaks with all other tasks including service calls, maintenance calls, and other water distribution projects. 
Meter management study. In September 2011, JBS Associates, Inc. prepared a report of meter management study for the utility. The study included an analysis of production and metered sales from January 2009 to June 2011, and of individually metered water consumption accounts from February 2008 to January 2011. The report made recommendations that are currently being utilized, such as the recommendation to implement quarterly testing of meter accuracy in the case of zero-consumption or low-use accounts. 
(d)  Water distribution audit and leak survey. In November 1997, JBS Associates, Inc. completed a water distribution audit and leak survey. The audit was conducted to determine causes for unaccounted-for water and develop recommendations for unaccounted-for water recovery in a cost-effective manner. This audit and leak survey is conducted every five years at a minimum. 
A continuous leak detection and repair program is carried out by MPU. Meter readers also check for leaks while reading meters and performing regular maintenance. For the year 2006-2007, a full-scale leak detection project was implemented. 
(e)  Plumbing codes and retrofit program. The city does have plumbing codes pursuant to the 2006 standard plumbing code issued from the International Code Council. Additionally, the 72 nd Texas Legislature passed legislation which requires plumbing fixtures sold in the state after January 1, 1992 to meet strict standards that incorporate efficient water use and conservation in new structures. This law subsequently effects plumbing fixtures sold in the city and will help to eliminate inefficient plumbing fixtures. 
MPU does encourage businesses and homeowners to replace older water fixtures like low-flow showerheads, faucet aerators, and toilet dams, purchased before January 1, 1992, with the newer water efficient replacements. MPU will also advocate the use of low demand water appliances instead of older, high use ones in homes and businesses. 
(f)  Water conservation landscaping. When practical, MPU will advocate the use of drip irrigation for the watering of landscapes for commercial establishments. Also, the use of ornamental fountains will be discouraged except when they recycle and use minimal quantities of water. 
MPU will continue to work with the city parks and recreation department in order to eliminate any wasteful water use. The watering of parks for example will be evaluated and done according to efficient water conserving methods. Municipal pools will also be evaluated for efficient water use. 
Local landscape architects and local nurseries will be asked and encouraged to utilize efficient irrigation systems and native low water using plants and grasses. Xeriscape gardening and landscaping techniques will also be asked to be promoted. 
Licensed irrigation contractors will be asked to use drip irrigation systems, where possible, and to use water conserving irrigation systems like sprinklers which produce large drips instead of a fine mist and a sprinkler layout which accommodates prevailing wind patterns. 
(g)  Conservation oriented water rate structure. The city has established three schedules of rates to be charged for the consumption of water supplied through the city water system, as follows: 
(1)  Standard water rate schedule within the city for city customers under the city's certificate of convenience and necessity. 
(2)  Standard water rate schedule for areas previously covered by Sharyland Water Supply Corporation certificate of convenience and necessity relating to any buyout phases whereby the city has entered into agreements with Sharyland Water Supply Corporation for buyout of their certified area. 
(3)  Standard water rate schedule outside the city. The standard rate to be charged for water furnished and consumed by single-family residence, multi-family, commercial, and industrial customers within the city is as follows: 
a.  Base meter charge: $4.00 per meter 
b.  Commodity charge: Approved September 23, 2008. 
Residential: $1.30 per 1,000 gallons for the first 12,999 gallons and $1.60 for 13,000 to 17,999 and $1.80 per 1,000 gallons thereafter. 
Multi-family: $1.30 per 1,000 gallons for all usage under last fiscal year's average monthly usage, and $1.80 per 1,000 gallons for all usage above last fiscal year's average monthly usage. 
Commercial: $1.30 per 1,000 gallons for all usage under last fiscal year's average monthly usage, and $1.80 per 1,000 gallons for all usage above last fiscal year's average monthly usage. 
Industrial: $1.30 per 1,000 gallons for all usage under last fiscal year's average monthly usage, and $1.80 per 1,000 gallons for all usage above last fiscal year's average monthly usage. 
Irrigation/pool services: $1.80 per 1,000 gallons. 
Water and sewer rates are periodically evaluated and updated as needed, so the above information is subject to future change. 
(h)  [Records mangement program.] A monitoring and records management program is in place for tracking annual budget allocation for Hidalgo County Irrigation District No. 2, Hidalgo County Irrigation District No. 3, United Irrigation District and Brownsville Irrigation District to determine water deliveries, sales and losses. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-121. - Drought contingency plan. 
In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the City of McAllen/McAllen Public Utility hereby adopts the following regulation and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water. 
Water uses regulated or prohibited under this drought contingency plan (drought plan) are considered to be non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply conditions are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in this section. 
(1)  Public involvement. Opportunity for the public to provide input into the preparation of the drought plan was provided by the MPU by scheduling and providing notice of public meetings considering adoption of the water conservation and drought contingency plan. 
(2)  Public education. MPU will periodically provide the public with information about the drought plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage of the drought plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of periodic publications in the local newspaper and utility bill inserts or mail-outs. 
(3)  Coordination with regional water planning groups. The service area of the MPU is located within the Lower Rio Grande Valley and MPU has provided a copy of this water conservation and drought contingency plan to the Lower Rio Grande Valley Development Council. 
(4)  Implementation and enforcement. The general manager or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this drought plan upon the determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The general manager, or his designee, shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply emergency response measure as described in this plan. In the case of an emergency situation, such as a canal breakdown, pump failures, line ruptures, etc., the general manager is authorized to take immediate actions deemed necessary to minimize or mitigate the risks and impacts of the water supply emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-122. - Triggering criteria for drought response stages. 
The general manager or his or her designee shall monitor water supply and demand conditions on a monthly basis and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the plan. Notification will be made through major media outlets. The designated city representative will notify water users when water use restrictions have been eased due to lessening of drought conditions. 
The triggering criteria described below are based on the level of the United States share of water in the Falcon-Amistad Reservoirs as reported by the TNRCC watermaster, and demand on the municipal system capacity. The stages of the drought plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased for a period of three consecutive days. Any one of the triggers listed below may cause the utility to initiate water restrictions. 
Current as of 2012 WTP capacities: 
Southwest Water Treatment Plant: rerated in 2010, 47.25 MGD 
Northwest Water Treatment Plant: rerated in 2011, 11.25 MGD 
Total System Treatment Capacity: 58.5 MGD 
Demand Triggers 	Trigger 	Action 
	Water demand reaches or exceeds 85 percent of delivery capacity for three consecutive days (currently 49.73 MGD) 	Public Utility Board may enact Stage Two water restrictions 
	Water demand reaches or exceeds 90 percent of delivery capacity for three consecutive days (currently 52.65 MGD) 	Public Utility Board may enact Stage Three water restrictions 
	Water demand reaches or exceeds 95 percent of delivery capacity for three consecutive days (currently 55.58 MGD) 	Public Utility Board may enact Stage Four water restrictions 
	Water demand reaches or exceeds 100 percent of delivery capacity at any time (currently 58.5 MGD) 	Public Utility Board may enact Stage Five water restrictions 
 
Supply Triggers 	Stage One Water Restrictions 

at all time unless: 
	Reservoir levels of Amistad/Falcon reach 40 percent of capacity 	Public Utility Board may enact Stage Two water restrictions 
	Reservoir levels of Amistad/Falcon reach 25 percent of capacity 	Public Utility Board may enact Stage Three water restrictions 
	Reservoir levels of Amistad/Falcon reach 20 percent of capacity 	Public Utility Board may enact Stage Four water restrictions 
	Reservoir levels of Amistad/Falcon reach 15 percent of capacity 	Public Utility Board may enact Stage Five water restrictions 
Emergency 
Triggers 	As determined by utility general manager, including but not limited to system outage, equipment failure, or supply source contamination 	Reduce water use to levels deemed necessary 
 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-123. - Drought response stages. 
The city/city public utility has an emergency conservation plan that outlines five stages for possible water shortage and/or emergency conditions. A brief description is summarized below. 
(1)  Stage One: Voluntary conservation. Voluntary conservation is the first stage of the conservation program. It is always in force unless a higher stage is required and enacted. Customers of the city utility during Stage One are requested to voluntarily limit the amount of water used to that amount absolutely necessary for health, business, and irrigation. Notice of such request shall be given by the general manager through appropriate circulars, television, radio, and newspaper media at his or her discretion. 
(2)  Stage Two: Mandatory compliance-water alerts. During Stage Two, MPU will aim to reduce per capita consumption by two percent. The following restrictions shall apply to all persons: 
a.  Irrigation of outdoor vegetation shall be limited except for during the days and times as provided in this section and in such zones as designated herein. Irrigation by drip method or hand-held buckets is permitted at any time in any zone. 
Zone 1: Northern city limits on the north, 10th Street on the east, Nolana Avenue on the south and western city limits on the west—Sunday and Wednesday during the time periods as provided for below. 
Zone 2: Northern city limits on the north, eastern city limits on the east, Nolana on the south and 10th Street on the west—Monday and Thursday during the time periods as provided for below. 
Zone 3: Nolana on the north, 10th Street on the east, Business 83 on the south and western city limits on the west—Tuesday and Friday during the time periods as provided for below. 
Zone 4: Nolana on the north, eastern city limits on the east, Business 83 on the south, 10th Street on the west—Wednesday and Saturday. 
Zone 5: Business 83 on the north, 10th Street on the east, southern city limits on the south and western city limits on the west—Thursday and Monday during the times as provided for below. 
Zone 6: Business 83 on the north, eastern city limits on the east, southern city limits on the south, and 10th Street on the west—Friday and Tuesday during the time period as provided below. 
Table 4. Map of City Irrigation Zones
 
Irrigation may only be conducted during the hours of midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to midnight on the authorized days. 
b.  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment is prohibited except on designated irrigation days between the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 a.m. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a handheld bucket or a handheld hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. 
Exception: Washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial carwash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted from this provision if the health, safety and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning, such as garbage trucks and vehicles to transport food and perishables. 
c.  The washing or sprinkling of foundations is prohibited except on designated irrigation days between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
d.  The refilling or adding of water to residential swimming and/or wading pools is prohibited except on designated irrigation days between the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
e.  The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making similar use of water is prohibited except for those fountains or structures with a recycling system. 
f.  The use of water for irrigation for golf greens and tees is prohibited except on designated irrigation days between the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
The irrigation of golf course fairways is absolutely prohibited. Provided, however, any golf course utilizing wastewater effluent or raw water is exempted from the provision of this division. 
g.  Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting and related activities, and/or other governmental use activities necessary to maintain the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
h.  The following uses of water are defined as waste of water and are absolutely prohibited: 
1.  Allowing irrigation water to run off into a gutter, ditch or drain; 
2.  Failure to repair a controllable leak; 
3.  Washing sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts or other paved areas, except to alleviate immediate fire hazards. 
i.  No bulk water sales shall be made from city or other sources for any purpose when such water will be transported by any tanker truck or similar type vehicle. 
(3)  Stage Three: Mandatory compliance-water warning. During Stage Three, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons. All elements of Stage Two, including the goal of two percent reduction of water use per capita, shall remain in effect in Stage Three except that: 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to irrigate any outdoor vegetation other than in zones and on the days as designated in Stage Two and only during the hours of midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to midnight on such designated days. Irrigation by drip or handheld buckets is permitted at any time in any zone. 
b.  The watering of golf fairways areas is prohibited unless done with treated wastewater, reclaimed water, or well water. 
A water surcharge shall be levied against all customers in the following amounts: 
1.  Residential/domestic metered customers (5/8-inch, ¾-inch, and one-inch meters) shall pay a 50 percent surcharge for any water used over an amount of 15,000 gallons per month. 
2.  Those irrigation-metered customers shall pay a 50 percent surcharge for any water used over 10,000 gallons per month. 
3.  Those commercial and industrial metered customers shall pay a ten percent surcharge for any water used over an amount equal to 80 percent of the maximum monthly consumption over any one billing cycle out of the last 12 months preceding the month in which the Stage Three designation was implemented. 
(4)  Stage Four: Mandatory compliance-water shortages. During Stage Four, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons. All elements of Stage Three, including the goal of two percent reduction of water use per capita, shall remain in effect in Stage Four except that it shall be unlawful for any person to irrigate any vegetation outdoors except on the following designated days in the zones established herein: 
1. Zone 1 - Sunday 
2. Zone 2 - Monday 
3. Zone 3 - Tuesday 
4. Zone 4 - Wednesday 
5. Zone 5 - Thursday 
6. Zone 6 - Friday 
And only during the times established under Stage Three of this section. 
a.  All outdoor irrigation of vegetation shall be allowed only between the hours of midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. to midnight on designated days. 
b.  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and other types of mobile equipment not occurring upon the immediate premises of commercial carwashes and commercial service stations and not in the immediate interest of the public health, safety and welfare shall be prohibited except on designated irrigation days and only on the owners of such vehicles, etc., premises. 
c.  Carwashes and commercial service stations in the immediate interest of the public health, safety and welfare shall be limited to 50 percent of their monthly average usage based on the last 12 billing periods for each of such customer. After such usage, the general manager shall enforce this subsection by terminating water service. 
d.  Commercial nurseries, commercial sod farmers, and similarly situated establishments shall water only on designated days between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. and shall use only handheld hoses, drip irrigation systems, or handheld buckets. 
e.  The filling, refilling or adding of water, except to maintain the structure integrity of the pool, to swimming and/or wading pools is prohibited. 
f.  The operation of any ornamental fountain or similar structure is prohibited. 
g.  A water surcharge shall be levied against all customers during Stage Four in the following amounts: 
1.  Residential/domestic metered customers (5/8 -inch, ¾-inch, and one-inch meters) shall pay a 75 percent surcharge for any water used over an amount 10,000 gallons per month. 
2.  Those irrigation-metered customers shall pay a 75 percent surcharge for any water used. 
3.  Those commercial and industrial metered customers shall pay a ten percent surcharge for any water used over an amount equal to 60 percent of the maximum monthly consumption over any one billing cycle out of the last 12 months preceding the month in which the Stage Four designation was implemented. 
(e)  Stage Five: Mandatory compliance-water shortage emergency. During Stage Five, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons. All elements of Stage Four, including the goal of 2 percent reduction of water use per capita, shall remain in effect in Stage Five except that: 
(1)  No applications for new, additional, further expanded, or increased-in-size water service connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains, or other water service facilities of any kind shall be allowed, approved or installed except as approved by the public utility board. 
(2)  All allocations of water use to non-essential industrial and commercial customers shall be reduced to amounts as established by the public utility board. 
(3)  The maximum monthly water use allocation for residential customers may be established with revised rate schedules and penalties by the board of commissioners on recommendation by the public utility board. 
(4)  Irrigation is permitted only by: 
a.  Continuously handheld hoses; 
b.  Handheld or faucet filled bucket; 
c.  Drip irrigation during the hours from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m., once every ten days, by a schedule established by the general manager. 
(5)  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers boats, airplanes, and other types of mobile equipment not occurring upon the immediate premises of commercial carwashes and commercial service stations and not in the immediate interest of the public health, safety and welfare shall be prohibited. 
(6)  A water surcharge shall be levied against all customers during Stage Five in the following amounts: 
a.  Residential/domestic metered customers shall pay a 100 percent surcharge for any water used over an amount of 8,000 gallons per month. 
b.  Those irrigation-metered customers shall pay a 100 percent surcharge for any water used. 
c.  Those commercial and industrial metered customers shall pay a ten percent surcharge for any water used over an amount equal to 20 percent of the maximum monthly consumption over any one billing cycle out of the last 12 months preceding the month in which the Stage Five designation was implemented. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-124. - Variances. 
The general manager, or his designee, may grant temporary variance from the provisions of the drought plan if the person requesting the variance can satisfactorily demonstrate that failure to grant such variance would adversely affect the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such variance, and if one or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect. 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-125. - Penalty of violation. 
Any person violating any provision of the water conservation plan after order and notice as specified in this division shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction, shall be punished as prescribed in this Code, section 1-14, provided, however, a first offense shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed $200.00, exclusive of court costs. In the event of a second subsequent conviction of said person for violating any provision of this division during an emergency conservation period, the minimum fine shall be not less than $300.00 exclusive of court costs. A third conviction during the emergency conservation period by the same person shall be punished by a fine of not less than $400.00 exclusive of court costs. The violation of each provision of this division, and each separate violation thereof, shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be punished accordingly. Provided, however, compliance may be further sought through injunctive relief in the district court. 
For purposes of this division, in any case where water has been used in any manner contrary to any provision of this section, it shall be presumed that the person, individual corporation, or partnership in whose name a water meter connected is registered with the utility department as the customer on the water account for the property where the violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator. 
It shall be presumed that the utility customer has intentionally and knowingly, recklessly, or negligently made, caused, used, or permitted to be used, the water in such a contrary manner. 
In any prosecution charging a violation of this section: Proof that the violations occurred in this property serviced by the utility connection the name of the account holder thereof shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered customer of such account was the person responsible at the place and time during which such violation occurred. 
Any police officer or authorized utility department personnel may: 
Issue citations for violations of this division to the person he reasonably believes to be in violation of this article. The citation shall be prepared in duplicate and shall contain the name and address of the violator, if known, the offense charged and shall direct such person to appear at the city municipal court no later than ten days from the date of service of the citation. 
The alleged violator shall be requested to sign the citation and shall be served a copy of the citation. Service of the citation shall be complete upon the attempt to give it to the alleged violator, to an agent or employee of the violator or to a person over 14 years of age who is a member of the violator's family or a resident at the violator's residence. In the event no person is available to sign the complaint, a copy of the complaint shall be left at the address of the violator, which shall constitute notice of violation. 
Corporations will be served in accordance with the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
Police department citations issued for violations of this section shall be of the same force and effect as a citation issued under section 61-2 of this Code. The utility department personnel citations issued for violations of this division will provide that if a person fails to answer such citation, that a municipal court complaint will be sworn to upon a failure to respond to the citation. 
Upon continuous violations of any mandated stage, the general manager may provide for a notice of disconnections of water services for deferred periods. Anyone receiving such notice may appeal the same to the utility board by giving written notice therefore, within 72 hours of receipt of notice of disconnection. Prior to the reconnection of service, the standard reconnection fee shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Sec. 106-126. - Administrative penalties. 
(a)  In lieu of the charge for violation of the division as set out in section [106-125], the general manager may provide that any person violating, shall be subject to an administrative charge being added to their monthly utility bill, which such charge shall be payable as part of the monthly water utility bill. Such payment shall be subject to the disconnecting procedures as set out in section 106-221 of this chapter, including the right to appeal such disconnect notice to the general manager's authorized representative, as set out in such section. 
(b)  Police officers or utility department personnel may issue notice of violation and notice of administrative charge to be imposed when such officer or personnel reasonably believes that a violation of the article has occurred. The administrative charge shall be established by minute order of the public utility board from time to time, and shall compensate the public utility system for activities such as issuing citations, inspecting properties, administering its conservation program including public education. Such charge may be tiered based on the number of frequency of violations and the public health concerns relating to various stages of conservation measures. 
(c)  A notice of administrative charge shall be left, when possible, at the structure at the location of the violation of the city's conservation ordinance. 
(d)  The person receiving such administrative notice or the person responsible for the account under which the administrative charge will be assessed, may appeal the imposition of the administrative assessment prior to the issuance of the utility bill by contacting the general manager or his authorized representative if such party believes there has been an error in such charge or there is some other reason there is no justification for the charge being issued. The general manager or his authorized representative is hereby authorized to make determinations concerning the assessment of administrative charges, upon the appeal of any such parties. 
Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 5-8-17)  
Secs. 106-127—106-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing code adopted, § 22-136 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 106-141. - Authority of public utility board. 
The public utility board shall have the power to operate, maintain and control the city sanitary sewer system and shall have the power to collect for the city the revenues thereof and to make application thereof for the expenses of maintenance, repairs and operation of the sewer system and the necessary extensions thereof, including the improvement and extension thereof, from the bond funds. 
(Code 1966, § 30-51)  
Sec. 106-142. - Bond for system. 
The public utility board shall obtain and keep continually in force an employees fidelity and indemnity bond of the blanket type, written by a solvent and recognized indemnity company, covering losses to the city in an amount of not less than $10,000.00. 
(Code 1966, § 30-52)  
Sec. 106-143. - Connection required. 
(a)  All owners or occupants of buildings, or agents therefor, situated in any section of the city where sanitary sewers exist, and where the property line of the land on which any such building is situated approaches or extends to within 100 feet of any such sewer, are hereby required to construct or cause to be constructed suitable water closets on their property, and connect such water closets with the city sewer, under the supervision of the city engineer, within 30 days after notice by the city health director or by the city engineer. 
(b)  Water service shall be discontinued to all properties which are required by this section to be connected to the sewer system and which have not been connected. 
(Code 1966, § 30-53)  
Sec. 106-144. - Deposit of certain wastes in sewer required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, or for any person to allow any person under his control, to throw or deposit on the surface of the ground or in any hole or vault in or under the surface of the ground, in any lot within 100 feet of any city sanitary sewer, except in the proper and neces-sary manuring of the soil, any water which has been used for domestic purposes, or any liquid or solid filth, feces or urine. 
(Code 1966, § 30-54)  
Sec. 106-145. - Prohibited deposits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, or for any person to cause or permit anyone under his control, to throw or deposit in any city sewer or in any vessel or receptacles connected with any city sewer, any garbage, hair, fruits, vegetable peelings, refuse, rags, cotton, or any other matter whatsoever, except feces, urine, necessary closet paper and liquid slops. Any waste which may be disposed by means of an efficient residential kitchen disposal unit shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 30-55)  
Sec. 106-146. - Deposit of wastes in streets prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to connect all wash stands or slop stands in his house or yard with the city sewer, or to allow any slops, wash or wastewater of any kind to flow over the pavement or into any open gutter or into the street. 
(Code 1966, § 30-56) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94.  
Sec. 106-147. - Car washing. 
(a)  All owners or operators of used car lots where cars are washed on such lots or premises are herewith required and ordered to install washracks for the washing of such cars in accordance with the requirements of city codes, and to be attached to the sewerage disposal system with proper appurtenances. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a used car lot as that term is commonly understood to wash cars on such lot and/or allow water from washing such cars to come to rest on the public streets or to become stagnant on the property where such washing occurs. 
(c)  This section shall also apply to owners and operators of all automobile dealerships and owners and operators of filling stations and carwash businesses. 
(d)  Anyone who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 30-56.1)  
Sec. 106-148. - Privies restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or use any privy vault within any area in the city where sewer connections are required. 
(Code 1966, § 30-57)  
Sec. 106-149. - Public utility department to pay street rental. 
(a)  The public utility department shall be charged as a rental for the use of the streets, alleys, highways, easements and public places within the city a sum equal to two percent of the gross receipts of such department received from business conducted within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The street rental charge levied under this section shall be computed and paid annually on March 15 of each and every year for the preceding year, and such sum shall be paid to the city finance director. 
(Code 1966, § 30-62)  
Secs. 106-150—106-165. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE CHARGES 
 
Sec. 106-166. - Necessity of levy; rate schedules. 
It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary for the city to levy and collect charges from all persons using the sanitary sewer system and lines of the city, including storm sewer lines if such lines are used for the purpose of disposing of wastes, cooling water, etc. The schedules of such charges shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential, multifamily, commercial, industrial uses. $12.00 per account for administrative charges and other fixed costs as a minimum monthly bill plus: 
Commodity charges: 
Residential: $1.70 per 1,000 gallons or part thereof of metered water according to the monthly water billing up to 19,999 gallons; $2.20 per 1,000 gallons thereafter. 
Commercial: $1.70 per 1,000 gallons for all usage under last fiscal year's average monthly usage, and $2.20 per 1,000 gallons for all usage above last fiscal year's average monthly usage. 
Multifamily: $1.70 per 1,000 gallons for all usage under last fiscal year's average monthly usage, and $2.20 per 1,000 gallons for all usage above last fiscal year's average monthly usage. 
Industrial: $1.70 per 1,000 gallons for all usage under last fiscal year's average monthly usage, and $2.20 per 1,000 gallons for all usage above last fiscal year's average monthly usage. 
(2)  Metered accounts. Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent the installation of a meter to actually meter the effluent being discharged into the sewer system, if such meter is approved by utility manager and its installation is also approved by the city engineer. The bill for a metered sewer account shall be computed as follows: $9.00 per account for administrative charge and other fixed cost plus $0.91 per 1,000 gallons of metered sewage. 
(3)  Septic tank waste disposal fees. 
a.  Inside city limits: 
1.  0—1,000 gallons .....$40.00 
2.  Each subsequent 1,000 gallons or part thereof .....$30.00 
b.  Outside city limits: 
1.  0—1,000 gallons .....$65.00 
2.  Each subsequent 1,000 gallons or part thereof .....$30.00 
All disposal of septic waste generated from sources outside the city limits shall be subject to a 50 percent surcharge of the applicable rate. 
(Code 1966, § 30-68; Ord. No. 1994-86, § II, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 1995-8, § I, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 1996-40, § I, 6-12-96; Ord. No. 1997-93, § III, 9-29-97; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 1, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 1999-43, § 2, 4-26-99; Ord. No. 2003-70, § 2, 10-13-03; Ord. No. 2004-82, § 1, 10-11-04; Ord. No. 2005-34, § 1, 4-25-05; Ord. No. 2006-98, § 2, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2013-72, § II, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 2014-44, § III, 9-22-14; Ord. No. 2015-80, § II, 9-28-15; Ord. No. 2016-26, § I, 5-9-16; Ord. No. 2017-51, § II, 9-25-17; Ord. No. 2019-57, § I, 9-23-19)  
Sec. 106-167. - Reserve for depreciation. 
Out of the amounts collected monthly as a result of the application of the rates set out in section 106-166, an amount equal to $25,000.00 per month for the remainder of fiscal year 1981—82 and an amount equal to 1/12 of 40 percent of the amount contained in the city public utilities, sewer fund annual budget for each succeeding fiscal year, as a reserve for depreciation, shall be set aside in a separate fund called the reserve for depreciation—sewer. Such fund shall be an account (line item) in the budget for the city sewer system. All expenditures from the reserve for depreciation shall be for replacement items only and either be budgeted or approved by the public utility board. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the city commission may, upon recommendation by the city public utility board, from time to time, authorize, by ordinance, expenditures from the depreciation fund for other than replacement items. 
(Code 1966, § 30-69; Ord. No. 1995-7, § I, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 2018-65, § I, 9-24-18)  
Sec. 106-168. - Disposition of funds. 
All monies collected for sewer service by the public utility department shall be placed in a separate fund to be known as the city sewer system revenue fund, except those amounts designated by section 106-167 to be placed in the reserve fund for fixed assets—sewer, which amounts shall be placed in such fund. 
(Code 1966, § 30-73)  
Sec. 106-169. - Application of charges for industrial wastes. 
The charges for industrial wastes levied by division 3 of this article are in addition to the charges levied in this division, and all discharges of effluent into the city sewer system are specifically made subject to the provisions of division 3 of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 30-70)  
Sec. 106-170. - Rate outside city limits. 
All persons connected to and using the sanitary sewer system of the city outside of the city limits shall be charged according to the schedule of rates set out in section 106-166, plus an additional charge of 50 percent of the total sewage bill. 
(Code 1966, § 30-71)  
Sec. 106-171. - Against whom assessed. 
The charges provided for in this division shall be assessed against the person in whose name the water meter is assigned. 
(Code 1966, § 30-72)  
Secs. 106-172—106-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PRETREATMENT AND SEWER USE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, adopted May 24, 2010, deleted the former Div. 3, §§ 106-181—106-187, and enacted a new Div. 3 as set out herein. The former Div. 3 pertained to sewer use and derived from the Code of 1966, §§ 30-77—30-93; Ord. No. 1992-75, § II(30-77—30-93), 9-14-92; Ord. No. 1994-21, § I, 3-28-94; Ord. No. 1994-33, §§ I, II, 5-23-94; Ord. No. 1995-47, § I, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 2001-08, § 1, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 2006-31, § 1, 3-14-06. 
 
Sec. 106-181. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and policy. This division sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the City of McAllen and enables the McAllen Public Utility (MPU) to comply with all applicable State and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW will interfere with its operation or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; 
(3)  To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of wastewater and sludge from the POTW; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW; and 
(6)  To enable MPU to comply with its Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject. 
This division shall apply to all users of the POTW. The division authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
All categorical pretreatment standards, lists of pollutants, industrial categories and other standards and categories which have been or which will be promulgated by the EPA shall be incorporated as part of this division, as will EPA regulations regarding sewage pretreatment established pursuant to the clean water act. The amendment of this division to incorporate such changes shall not be necessary. MPU will use its best efforts to notify all affected users within 90 days as promulgated changes are incorporated; provided however, all affected users shall keep themselves informed of all changing laws and regulations relating to this division. 
(b)  Administration and required use of sanitary sewer system. Unless exception is otherwise granted by the control authority, the public sanitary sewer system (POTW) shall be used by all persons discharging wastewater, industrial wastes or polluted liquids in the city. Unless authorized by the state water commission, no person may deposit or discharge any wastewater, industrial waste or polluted liquids on public or private property into or adjacent to any natural outlet, watercourse or stormwater system or other area within the jurisdiction of the city. The general manager shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this division. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the general manager by this division may be delegated to other city personnel. The general manager shall verify prior to discharge that waste authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations and ordinances, rules and other orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(c)  Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this division, shall have the designated meanings: 
(1)  BMP Best Management Practice 
(2)  BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
(3)  CFR Code of Federal Regulations 
(4)  COD Chemical Oxygen Demand 
(5)  EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(6)  gpd gallons per day 
(7)  mg/l milligrams per liter 
(8)  TCEQ Texas Commission on Environmental Quality 
(9)  TPDES Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
(10)  POTW Publicly owned treatment works 
(11)  RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
(12)  SIC Standard industrial classification 
(13)  SIU Significant industrial user 
(14)  TSS Total suspended solids 
(15)  TTO Total toxic organics 
(16)  U.S.C. United States Code 
(17)  µg/l micrograms per liter 
(d)  Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this division, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
(1)  Act or the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
(2)  Approval authority. The director in an NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program and the appropriate regional administrator in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program. 
(3)  Authorized or duly authorized representative of the user. 
a.  If the user is a corporation: by a responsible corporate officer, which means: 
1.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
2.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
b.  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
c.  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
d.  The individuals described in paragraphs a through c, above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the control authority. 
(4)  Best management practices or BMPs. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in section 106-182(a). BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
(5)  Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
(6)  Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called house lateral and house connection). 
(7)  Bypass. The intentional diversion of the waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
(8)  Categorical industrial user (CIU). Any industrial user of the city's POTW which is subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard. 
(9)  Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
(10)  City. The City of McAllen or any authorized person acting on its behalf. 
(11)  Chemical oxygen demand or COD. A measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus, not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
(12)  Composite sample. A sample formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples. If discrete sampling is employed, at least 12 aliquots should be composited. The sample may be composited either as a time composite sample: composed of discrete sample aliquots collected at constant time intervals providing a sample irrespective of stream flow; or as a flow proportional composite sample: collected either as a constant sample volume at time intervals proportional to flow, or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while maintaining a constant time interval between the aliquots. For wastewater discharges consisting of a single batch discharge in a 24-hour period, a grab sample of the batch discharge may be used to represent the 24-hour composite quality of the wastewater, as long as the batch is mixed prior to sample collection. For wastewater discharges consisting of two or more batch discharges in a 24-hour period, the 24-hour composite quality of the wastewater may be determined via compositing of one grab sample collected from the discharge of each batch, as long as each batch is mixed prior to sample collection. 
(13)  Control authority. McAllen Public Utility (MPU) to enable the city to comply with the TPDES permit. 
(14)  Control manhole. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with the other discharges in the public sewer. 
(15)  Daily average limit. The average allowable daily discharge. 
(16)  Daily discharge. The discharge of a pollutant measured during any 24-hour period. 
(17)  Daily maximum limit. The highest allowable daily discharge. 
(18)  Dilution. An increase in the use of process waters or other waters as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the standards for wastewater discharge. 
(19)  Discharge. The introduction of waste by depositing, conducting, draining, emitting, throwing, running or allowing to seep into the city's POTW from any non-domestic source. 
(20)  Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
(21)  Existing source. Any source of discharge that is not a "new source," which is found in 40 CFR § 403.3(m). 
(22)  Garbage. Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
(23)  General manager. The person designated by McAllen Public Utility (MPU) who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this division, or a duly authorized representative. 
(24)  Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
(25)  Indirect discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Sections 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
(26)  Industrial user. An industry that discharges wastewater into the wastewater system. 
(27)  Industrial waste. Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of such waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal domestic wastewater. By definition, industrial waste also includes restaurant operations and other food processing operations. 
(28)  Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
(29)  Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both a) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and b) therefore, is a cause of a violation of the control authority TPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); 40 CFR 503 sludge regulations; any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act and 30 TAC 312; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
(30)  Maximum daily discharge limitation. The highest allowable daily discharge. 
(31)  Milligrams per liter (mg/l). Same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligrams per liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
(32)  Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
(33)  Monthly average limit. The highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
(34)  National categorical pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the federal environmental protection agency (EPA) in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
(35)  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit or NPDES permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 USC 1347). 
(36)  National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive standard. Any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the act and 40 CFR 3.5. 
(37)  Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
(38)  New source. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that the construction meets the definition of 40 CFR 403.3 (m). 
(39)  Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
(40)  Normal operations of the industry. Hours per week that an industry operates its facility. 
(41)  Normal domestic wastewater. Wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewer and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids and five-day BOD does not exceed 200 mg/l each. 
(42)  Overload. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
(43)  Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the control authority's TPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
(44)  Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
(45)  pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
(46)  Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
(47)  Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
(48)  Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
(49)  Pretreatment standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
(50)  Process water. Any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product. 
(51)  Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in subsection 106-182(a) of this division. 
(52)  Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A "treatment works," as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the city and/or the control authority. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
(53)  Public sewer. Pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted discharge in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city. 
(54)  Sanitary sewer. A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes, or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
(55)  Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
(56)  Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
(57)  Shall is mandatory; May is permissive. 
(58)  Significant industrial user. 
a.  A user subject to national categorical pretreatment standards by the United States EPA; or 
b.  A user that: 
1.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
2.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or 
3.  Is designated as such by the control authority on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
c.  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection [(d)(57)b.] has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
(59)  Significant non-compliance. 
a.  Chronic violations in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in section 106-182; 
b.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violation in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits as defined in Section 106-182 multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutant except pH). 
c.  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by section 106-182 (daily maximum or longer-term average, instantaneous limit or narrative standard) that the general manager determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
d.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or the environment or has resulted in the general manager's exercise of the emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
e.  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
f.  Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
g.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
h.  Any other violation or group of violations which may include a violation of best management practices, which the general manager determines will adversely affect the operations or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(60)  Slug load or slug. Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. 
(61)  Standard Industrial Classification Code (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
(62)  Storm sewer. A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
(63)  Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
(64)  Substantial change in wastewater discharge. A 20 percent or greater increase or decrease in the volume of wastewater discharged or in the quality and character of pollutants discharged as a result of changes in the industrial processes which generate the wastewater. 
(65)  Total suspended solids or TSS. A measure of the suspended solids in wastewater, effluent, or water bodies, determined by tests for "total suspended non-filterable solids. 
(66)  Total toxic organics or TTO. The sum of the masses or concentration of specific toxic organic compounds found in industrial user's discharge at a concentration greater than 0.01 mg/L. For non-categorical and categorical SIU's the TTO list is 40 CFR 122 appendix D, table 2, unless specifically designated in a particular categorical classification. 
(67)  Trap. A device designed to skim, settle or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
(68)  Unpolluted. Water which does not contain free or emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalis; phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension; colloidal state or solution; noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of total suspended solids and BOD, as determined by the state water commission; or color exceeding 50 units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as specified in standard methods. 
(69)  User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge. 
(70)  Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, together with any ground, surface, and stormwater that may be present, which are contributed to the POTW. 
(71)  Wastewater facilities. Includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
(72)  Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(73)  Watercourse. A natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, 5-24-10; Ord. No. 2020-04, § I, 1-27-20)  
Sec. 106-182. - General sewer use requirements. 
(a)  Prohibited discharge standards. 
(1)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
a.  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
b.  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 11.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
c.  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, blockage, or damage to the POTW; 
d.  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
e.  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C); 
f.  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
g.  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
h.  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the control authority in accordance with subsection 106-183(d) of this division; 
i.  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
j.  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the applicable TPDES permit; 
k.  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
l.  Unpolluted storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, subsurface drainage, unpolluted cooling water, unpolluted industrial process waters or any other unpolluted drainage. In compliance with the state water quality act and other statutes, the control authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage as described in this subsection may be discharged; 
m.  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
n.  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the control authority in a wastewater discharge permit; 
o.  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the POTW's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
p.  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
q.  Free or emulsified fats, wastes, greases or oils in excess of 100 mg/L, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and 65°C). An oil and grease concentration of 500 mg/L is allowable for non-significant industrial and commercial users, such as restaurants, and for industrial user outfalls that are dedicated solely to cafeteria usage, provided the control authority determines that the waste: 
1.  Derives from animal or vegetable materials; 
2.  Biodegrades readily in the treatment plant; 
3.  Does not obstruct or limit sewer flow; and 
4.  Is pretreated by an approved trap or other pretreatment device. Where any operation necessitates such discharges, traps shall be provided. Any person responsible for any discharge requiring a trap shall, at his own expense and as required by the control authority: 
i.  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the control authority. 
ii.  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection. 
iii.  Maintain the trap in an effective operating condition. 
iv.  Pay the city for any cost incurred by the city as a result of damage to the POTW because of neglect or malfunction of the trap facility. 
5.  Complies with the MPU grease policy, the city ordinance, any other applicable state and federal regulation. 
r.  Discharges into the sanitary sewer which cause blockage, overflow, or interference, or which exceed discharge limitations; 
s.  Fungicides, insecticides or herbicides; 
t.  Polychlorinated biphenyls; 
u.  Hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide in excess of ten parts per million; 
v.  Garbage that is not properly shredded to such an extent that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in wastewater mains, with no particle having greater than one-half-inch cross-sectional dimension; 
w.  Wastewater or industrial waste generated or produced outside the city, unless approval in writing from the control authority has been given to the person discharging the waste; 
x.  Without the approval of the control authority, a substance or pollutant other than industrial waste, normal domestic wastewater, septic tank waste or chemical toilet waste that is of a toxic or hazardous nature, regardless of whether or not it is amenable to treatment, including, but not limited to, bulk or packaged chemical products; 
y.  Vandalism. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the POTW; 
z.  Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(b)  National categorical pretreatment standards. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the general manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the general manager shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e), unless the industrial user establishes a dedicated upstream monitoring point, where assessment of the categorical discharge can be made directly. 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Local limits. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge or cause or permit to be discharged, wastewater containing in excess of the following discharge limits. 
(1)  Metals in the form of compounds or elements with total concentrations exceeding the following: 
Pollutant 	Discharge Limit (mg/L) 
Arsenic 	0.19 
Cadmium 	0.14 
Chromium 	3.69 
Copper 	3.56 
Cyanide 	0.52 
Lead 	1.23 
Mercury 	0.00 1 
Nickel 	1.76 
Selenium 	0.10 
Silver 	0.80 
Zinc 	9.29 
 
1 Compliance for mercury will be determined at the minimum analytical level (MAL) of 0.2 µg/L 
(2)  These limits represent a maximum daily discharge for constituents in the form of compounds or elements, in solution or suspension. These limits are based upon a method of allocating pollutant loadings which has been approved by the EPA and incorporated into the city's approved pretreatment program. No discharge into the city's sewer system may contain concentrations greater than these limits. These limits apply at a point where the industrial user's waste enters the city sewer. Unless otherwise specified by the control authority, compliance with these limits will be assessed by the collection and analysis of a 24-hour composite sample of the wastewater discharge. 
(3)  Permit compliance/non-compliance determinations will be based on the minimum analytical level (MAL) for toxic organic and inorganic parameters. Where permit limits are > MAL, compliance is assessed at the permit limit. Where permit limits are < MAL, effluent concentrations measured as less than the MAL are deemed to be compliant with the permit limitations. When an analysis of an effluent sample results in a measurement of less than the MAL, that parameter shall be reported as "<(MAL value)" and this shall be interpreted as a value of zero for compliance purposes. For reference: 
Selenium MAL = 0.010 mg/L (10 ppb). 
Mercury MAL = 0.0002 mg/L (0.2 ppb). 
The Mercury MAL shown will apply irrespective of the mercury method used. 
(4)  All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The general manager may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above. 
(5)  The concentration limits as contained in this subsection may be changed upon approval of the control authority and with the notification to all applicable users. Notification may be accomplished by publication if so required by state, federal or other applicable agency rules, regulation and orders, including, but not limited to, the Texas Water Commission Board Rule No. 70-0828-5 regulating the discharge of hazardous metals into or adjacent to state waters. Notwithstanding the provision of requirement of notification by the control authority, it is the user's responsibility to monitor all state and federal regulatory authorities having jurisdiction over the discharge of wastewaters by any user of the POTW. 
(e)  City's right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(f)  Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The control authority may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, 5-24-10; Ord. No. 2020-04, § I, 1-27-20)  
Sec. 106-183. - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
(a)  Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in subsection 106-182(a) of this division within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the control authority, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the general manager for review, and shall be acceptable to the general manager before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the POTW under the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  Whenever deemed necessary, the general manager may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods and require any other such conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(2)  The general manager may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow, if such condition is necessary to protect the POTW. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(3)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the general manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the general manager and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
(4)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter, or other control device as deemed necessary by the general manager. 
(5)  Interference with grease traps, grit trap, or sanitary sewer. A person commits an offense if the person causes or permits the plugging or blocking of, or otherwise interferes with or permits the interference of a grease trap, grit trap, or the sanitary sewer. 
(6)  Bioremediation of grease traps. Use of grease trap treatment products, including bacteria, designed to digest the grease, is prohibited without written consent of the control authority. Guidance regarding requirements for use of such agents is provided in the McAllen Public Utility Pretreatment/Grease Trap Facilities Policy. 
(c)  Slug control plans. At least once every two years, the general manager shall evaluate whether each permitted significant industrial user needs a slug control plan as required by 40 CFR 403.8(2)(vi). The general manger shall evaluate within of year of being designated as a significant industrial user (SIU), whether each such SIU needs a plan or other action to control slug discharges. The general manager may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. A slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the general manager of any slug discharge, as required by subsection 106-186(g) of this division; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any slug discharge. Such procedures may include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(d)  Hauled wastewater. 
(1)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the general manager, and at such times as are established by the general manager. Such waste shall not violate section 106-182 of this division or any other requirements established by the control authority. The general manager may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(2)  The general manager will require haulers of industrial waste to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits. The general manager will require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits. The general manager also will prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(3)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the general manager. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the general manager. The general manager may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The general manager may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(4)  Septic tank waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of generator, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(e)  Grease traps, holding tanks, grit traps, and septic tanks. A person commits an offense if the person causes or permits the plugging or blocking of, or otherwise interferes with or permits the interference of a grease trap, grit trap, or the sanitary sewer. Maintenance, record keeping, spill reporting, and related requirements for Grease Traps and Interceptors are defined in the City of McAllen "McAllen Public Utility Pretreatment/Grease Trap Facilities Policy." Users are to follow the requirements of that document, unless otherwise authorized by the general manager. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  Previously issued permits. All permits issued by the general manager to septic tank waste haulers pursuant to the predecessor of this article shall remain valid until their expiration or until their revocation pursuant to the ordinance under which they were issued. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, 5-24-10; Ord. No. 2020-04, § I, 1-27-20)  
Sec. 106-184. - Wastewater discharge permit application. 
(a)  Wastewater analysis. When requested by the general manager, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The control authority has promulgated a permit application form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(1)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the general manager, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to subsection (c) of this section may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(2)  The general manager may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. If any user discharges or proposes to discharge to the POTW any waste which would be in violation of this division, or should any pretreatment be required of any categorical users under the provisions of the act or by regulations of the EPA, then any such person shall be required to obtain a waste discharge permit. The control authority may grant to such user a permit wherein such permit and the requirements therein is an acceptable condition for discharge of any waste into the POTW. Unless the control authority shall approve any discharge according to a waste discharge permit, any waste which does not meet the criteria of this division shall be rejected by the control authority for discharge into the POTW and such discharge shall constitute a violation of this division. 
(3)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this division and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 106-190 through 106-191 of this division. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(4)  The general manager may require industrial users to hire an environmental consultant/engineer to assist with filling the permit application form and the elements listed in section 106-184(e). 
(c)  Wastewater discharge permitting; existing connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this division and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 90 days after said date, apply to the general manager for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 90 days of the effective date of this division except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the general manager. If, in the general manager's judgment, the passing of the ordinance does not significantly affect the industrial user's current permit, then the existing permit will continue through to the expiration date. If the user has filed a timely and complete application, and the general manager has not issued a renewed permit or notified the user of its decision to deny the application, then the user's permit shall continue in effect after expiration, until a permit decision is rendered by the general manager. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge permitting; new connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(e)  Wastewater discharge permit application contents. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The general manager may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by subsection 106-186(b)(2) of this division; 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, all points of discharge, and all sampling locations for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; 
(8)  The design and installation of equipment and processes which conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws included in the plans and specifications for the pretreatment facilities as required by the control authority; 
(9)  Reserved; 
(10)  Any and all further information and/or requirements as promulgated by the general manager relating thereto. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(f)  Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(g)  Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The general manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the general manager will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. If the user has filed a timely and complete application, and the general manager has not issued a renewed permit or notified the user of its decision to deny the application, then the user's permit shall continue in effect after expiration, until a permit decision is rendered by the general manager. The general manager may deny or condition an application for new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the general manager may appeal such decision within 15 business days of the notice by the general manager of any action taken. A hearing on the appeal shall be conducted by the general manager and notice shall be issued by the general manager to the aggrieved party with the time and place for such hearing, which shall not be scheduled earlier than two days from the date of such notice. After the hearing, the general manager shall issue an opinion relating to the action taken by the general manager and appeal there from, which decision shall be made in writing and delivered to the aggrieved party and the general manager within ten days after the date of the hearing. Such decision of the general manager shall be final. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the general manager to the district court of the county within 15 days from the date of receipt of the decision of the general manager. Any such appeal to the district court shall be determined by the substantial evidence rule. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, 5-24-10; Ord. No. 2020-04, § I, 1-27-20)  
Sec. 106-185. - Wastewater discharge permit issuance process. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the general manager. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the general manager to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit issuance date, effective date and the duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the control authority in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards include best management practices (BMPs); 
d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements including BMPs. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
f.  Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the general manager to be necessary. The general manager shall evaluate within one year of being designated as a significant industrial user (SIU), whether each such SIU needs a plan or other action to control slug discharge. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of BMPs pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges. The review of such plans and operating procedures and the issuance of the waste discharge permit will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the control authority under the provisions of this division; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; 
h.  Compliance schedules; 
i.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the general manager to ensure compliance with this division, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations; 
j.  An agreement by the user that such user shall be responsible for maintenance of the facilities in operating condition at the user's sole expense; that the user shall pay all charges and surcharges applicable to pretreatment or the treatment of waste by the city; and that the user will comply with all the reporting requirements of the city; 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge permit modification. The general manager may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to POTW, POTW personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. The existing permit holder shall be informed of any proposed changes in the permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the requirement of any such change. 
(e)  Wastewater discharge permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days' advance notice to the general manager and the general manager approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the general manager must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(f)  Wastewater discharge permit revocation. The general manager may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the general manager of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the general manager of changed conditions pursuant to subsection 106-186(f) of this division; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.8 (f)(1)(vi)(B); 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the control authority's timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this division. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(g)  Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with subsection 106-184(e) of this division, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(h)  Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(1)  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, [the] general manager shall enter into an inter-municipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(2)  Prior to entering into an agreement, the general manager shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
a.  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
b.  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
c.  Such other information as the general manager may deem necessary. 
(3)  An inter-municipal agreement, as required by subsection (h)(1), above, shall contain the following conditions: 
a.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this division and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in subsection 106-182(d) of this division. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits; 
b.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
c.  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the general manager; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the general manager; 
d.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the general manager with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
e.  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
g.  A provision ensuring the general manager access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the general manager; and 
h.  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the inter-municipal agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, 5-24-10; Ord. No. 2020-04, § I, 1-27-20)  
Sec. 106-186. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Preliminary reporting requirements. 
(1)  Any industrial user, categorical user or significant industrial user of the POTW shall be required within 30 days of request from the control authority to answer and reply to a sewer quality questionnaire form (Form 15: Preliminary Investigation Report for Potential Industrial Users) as promulgated by the general manager. The purposes of the requirement for the form shall be to determine the quality of the sewer effluent being discharged from any such user into the POTW for determination of compliance with the provisions of this division or for a determination of whether pretreatment approval should be requested from the control authority. 
(2)  Should any user fail to reply in a satisfactory fashion to the questionnaire, such failure to respond shall be considered a violation of the provisions of this division and subject any such person to the enforcement provisions of this division. The request to answer such questionnaire shall be evidenced by the deposit of such questionnaire to the user at its billing address as shown on the records of the public utility. 
(3)  In addition to the enforcement provisions as provided for in this division, the control authority, upon failure of any user to satisfactorily answer the questionnaire as provided in this section, may cause the waste being discharged from such user to be tested and the costs therefore shall then be payable by the user to the city. Should such user fail to pay such costs upon 30-days' notice from the city, this shall be considered as a failure to pay a city utility bill and utility service may be cut off by the city upon the failure to make such payment. 
(b)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the general manager a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b)(2), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that will become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the general manager a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b)(2), below. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured or estimated average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams. If combined wastestream formula applies, provide sufficient information to allow combined wastestream formula to be determined set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). New sources must estimate flows. 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing sources. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the general manager or the applicable standard to determine compliance with the standard. 
2.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the general manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (k) of this section. The frequency of monitoring for the reports of this section shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. New sources must estimate concentrations. 
3.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph. 
4.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. 
Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the general manager. 
5.  The general manager may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures. 
6.  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
7.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsections (k) (analytical requirements) and (l) (sample collection) of this section. 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O and M must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection (c) of this section. 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 106-184(f) of this division. 
(c)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (b)(2)g. of this section: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment including BMPs required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the general manager no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the general manager. 
(d)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards established in 40 CFR Part 403.6(b), or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the general manager a report containing the concentration and flow information described in subsection [(b)(2)d, e.] of this section. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the general manager or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 106-184(f) of this division. 
(e)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards, and other non-categorical significant industrial users as identified by the general manager shall during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently by the general manager, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of any regulated pollutants at the appropriate sampling location in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the general manager or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows and data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the reporting period. At the discretion of the general manager and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the general manager may agree to alter the months during which reports under this subsection are to be submitted. 
At the general manager's discretion, sampling and analysis may be performed by the control authority in lieu of industrial monitoring. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 106-184(f) of this division. 
(2)  The general manager may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution, if otherwise allowable, to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (e)(1) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by national categorical pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the general manager, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards. 
(3)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(4)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the general manager, using the procedures prescribed in subsections 106-186(k) (analytical requirements) and 106-186(l) (sample collection) of this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(f)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the control authority or the general manager of any planned substantial change in the volume or character of pollution in their discharges at least 30 days before the change. 
(1)  The general manager may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under subsection 106-184(e) of this division. 
(2)  The general manager will determine whether a new permit, a revision of an existing permit, or no permit change is required in response to the changed condition. 
(g)  Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the control authority of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. Significant industrial users are required to notify the general manager immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the general manager, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this division. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge as described in subsection (g)(1), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(h)  Reports from unpermitted users. 
(1)  Any industrial user of the POTW shall be required within 30 days of request from the general manager to answer and reply to a sewer quality questionnaire form (Form 15: Preliminary Investigation Report for Potential Industrial Users) as promulgated by the control authority. The purposes of the requirement for the form shall be to determine the quality of the sewer effluent being discharged from any such user into the POTW for determination of compliance with the provisions of this division or for a determination of whether pretreatment approval should be requested from the general manager. 
(2)  Should any user fail to reply in a satisfactory fashion to the questionnaire, such failure to respond shall be considered a violation of the provisions of this division and subject any such person to the enforcement provisions of this division. The request to answer such questionnaire from the general manager shall be evidenced by the deposit of such questionnaire to the user at its billing address as shown on the records of the public utility. 
(3)  In addition to the enforcement provisions as provided for in this division, the general manager, upon failure of any user to satisfactorily answer the questionnaire as provided in this section, may cause the waste being discharged from such user to be tested and the costs therefore shall then be payable by the user to the city. Should such user fail to pay such costs upon 30-days' notice from the city, this shall be considered as a failure to pay a city utility bill and utility service may be cut off by the city upon the failure to make such payment. 
(i)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. Pursuant to 40 CFR, Part 403.12 (g)(2), if sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control authority within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, unless the control authority informs the user otherwise. The user is not required to resample if the control authority monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the control authority samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(1)  Where the control authority has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the control authority must perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat analysis. Re-sampling is not required if: 
a.  The control authority performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month; or 
b.  The control authority performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the control authority receives the results of this sampling. 
(j)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). The notification must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge and in accordance with other requirements in 40 CFR 403.12 (p). 
(2)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this division, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(k)  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the general manager or other parties approved by EPA. The laboratories used by the industrial users must be accredited according to 30 TAC Part 1 Chapter 25 Subchapter A. 
(l)  Sample collection. Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsection (l), (2) and (3) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the general manager. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the control authority, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the control authority, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(3)  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in subsections (b) and (d) of this section [40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the general manager may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by subsection (e) of this section (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(4)  Industrial users can split the samples collected by the control authority for their own analysis. Industrial users shall follow approved sampling and analysis procedures as listed in 40 CFR Part 136. However the results of the sample analyzed by the control authority will supersede as long as appropriate QA/QC procedures were followed. 
(5)  Sampling must be taken within 24-hour period, however, the sample should only be collected during the portion of the 24-hour period that the user is discharging form the regulated process and/or pretreatment unit (as long as regulated process wastewater is flowing through the pretreatment unit). During parts of the day when there is no discharge of process wastewater, standing water shall not be disproportionately sampled and analyzed as it would not be representative of the discharge. The control authority will require documentation of the site-specific circumstances to allow any alternate sampling techniques that are representative of the discharge. 
(m)  Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(n)  Record keeping. Industrial users subject to the reporting requirements of this section (106-186) shall retain these reports and the information resulting from any required monitoring activities for a minimum of three years. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available to the control authority for a period of at least three years, for inspection and copying. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the control authority. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, 5-24-10; Ord. No. 2020-04, § I, 1-27-20)  
Sec. 106-187. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Monitoring facilities. 
(1)  The control authority shall require monitoring facilities, to be provided and operated at the industrial user's own expense, to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the control authority may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(2)  There shall be ample room in or near a sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility and sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(3)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities required by this section shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the control authority. 
(b)  Right of entry; inspection and sampling. The control authority, TCEQ, or USEPA or their designated representative shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this division and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow inspecting or sampling person ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city, TCEQ or USEPA will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The control authority shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The control authority may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated annually, at a minimum, to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the control authority and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the inspecting or sampling person's access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this division. 
(6)  In accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v), the control authority shall inspect and monitor each permitted significant industrial user a minimum of once per year. If the control authority elects to perform compliance monitoring for the industry, then the control authority will monitor the industry a minimum of once every six months. 
(c)  Search warrants. If the control authority has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this division or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the control authority may seek issuance of a search warrant from the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, 5-24-10)  
Sec. 106-188. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the control authority, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable laws. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the TPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this paragraph, all information described herein shall be handled in accordance with applicable law, including but not limited to the Texas Public Information Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, 5-24-10)  
Sec. 106-189. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The general manager shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements as required by 40 CFR Part 403.8(2)(vii). The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in section 106-182 of this division; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by section 106-182 of this division multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by section 106-182 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the general manager believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the general manager's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which may include a violation of BMPs which the general manager determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, 5-24-10; Ord. No. 2020-04, § I, 1-27-20)  
Sec. 106-190. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. When the general manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the general manager may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Such notice and order shall state: 
(1)  The nature of the violation and the provisions of this division which have been violated; 
(2)  The corrective action which must be taken and the amount of time allowed to correct the violation. 
Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the general manager. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the general manager to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent order. The general manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (d) of this section and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The general manager may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the general manager and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user and violations committed by the industrial user from the time the notice is issued to the show cause hearing, will be enforced as separate violations. 
(d)  Administrative orders. 
(1)  Compliance orders. When the general manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the general manager may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(2)  Cease and desist orders. When the general manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the general manager may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
a.  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
b.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Emergency suspensions. The general manager may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The general manager may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the general manager may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The general manager may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the general manager that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in subsection (g) of this section are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the general manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsections (c) or (g) of this section. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(g)  Termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions in subsection 106-185(f) of this division, the city may immediately terminate wastewater service when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, or to the POTW, or when a user violates permit conditions. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection (c) of this section why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the general manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, 5-24-10; Ord. No. 2020-04, § I, 1-27-20)  
Sec. 106-191. - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. Upon alleged violation of the provisions of this division and by order of the public utility board or the board of commissioners, as applicable, provided however, that should an emergency exist and there not be sufficient time in which to hold an emergency meeting for which a quorum may be present by such boards, then upon order by the general manager, the city attorney is hereby directed to institute appropriate action, including request for injunctive relief and civil penalties in the appropriate district court of the county, to prohibit the continued violation of this division, and, if appropriate, to further seek civil or criminal contempt sanctions against any person who has been so enjoined by any such court. It is further provided that the violation of any provisions of this division relating to waste discharges shall be and is declared a public nuisance for which the city has sufficient legal authority to seek injunction and the remedies set out in this division. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of $2,000.00 per violation. Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(2)  The control authority may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  A user who violates any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment as decided by an appropriate court, or both. 
(2)  A user who introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to the same penalties described in subsection (a) of this section. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  A user who makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this division, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division shall, upon conviction, be subject to the same penalties described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(4)  Criminal responsibility. A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this division if the person negligently, knowingly, or willfully commits or assists in the commission of a violation, or causes or permits another person to commit a violation. 
(d)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this division are not exclusive. The control authority may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city enforcement response plan. However, the control authority may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the control authority is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(e)  Applicability of more stringent regulations. 
(1)  If national pretreatment standards, categorical or otherwise, more stringent than the discharge limits prescribed in this article are promulgated by the EPA for certain industries, the more stringent national pretreatment standards will apply to the affected industrial user. A violation of the more stringent national pretreatment standards will also be considered a violation of this division. 
(2)  If more stringent pretreatment standards, Texas surface water quality standards, or TPDES permit conditions are promulgated, the city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(3)  Variances in compliance dates. The general manager may grant a variance in compliance dates to an industry when, in the general manager's opinion, such action is necessary to achieve pretreatment or corrective measures. In no case shall the general manager grant a variance in compliance dates to an industry affected by national categorical pretreatment standards beyond the compliance dates established by the EPA. 
(4)  Authority to regulate. The general manager may establish regulations, not in conflict with this division or other laws, to control the disposal and discharge of industrial waste into the wastewater system and to insure compliance with the city's pretreatment enforcement program with all applicable pretreatment regulations promulgated by the EPA. The regulations established shall, where applicable, be made part of any discharge permit issued to an industrial user by the general manager. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, 5-24-10)  
Sec. 106-192. - Reserved.  
Sec. 106-193. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Act of God defense. 
(1)  Act of God defense. The act of God defense constitutes a statutory affirmative defense [V.T.C.A., Water Code § 7.251] in an action brought in municipal or state court. If a person can establish that an event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under the ordinance, was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation of the ordinance or permit. 
(2)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the Act of God affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through relevant evidence that: 
a.  An event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit issued under the ordinance occurred, and the sole cause of the event was an act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe; and 
b.  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the POTW and the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or permit issued under the ordinance (if information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
1.  A description of the event, and the nature and cause of the event; 
2.  The time period of the event, including exact dates and times or, if still continuing, the anticipated time the event is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the event. 
(3)  Burden of proof. In an enforcement, the industrial user seeking to establish the Act of God affirmative defense shall have the burden of providing by a preponderance of the evidence that an event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under the ordinance, was cause solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe. 
(b)  Bypass. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section: "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsection (b)(3) and (4) of this section. 
(3)  Notification. 
a.  Planned bypass. If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the general manager, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
b.  Unanticipated bypass: A user shall submit oral notice to the general manager of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The general manager may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(4)  Bypass is prohibited, and the general manager may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(5)  The general manager may approve a bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the general manager determines it meets the conditions listed in subsection (b)(4) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, 5-24-10)  
Sec. 106-194. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Pretreatment charges and fees. 
(1)  Service fees. 
a.  McAllen Public Utility (MPU) may charge fees to industrial/commercial users for services rendered in administering the programs in this division. The fees shall be established by minute order of the public utility board, from time to time, and shall compensate MPU for activities such as issuing permits, inspecting facilities, sampling and analyzing wastewater, and conducting enforcement actions. Fees required under this section shall be billed to the user by the public utility and shall be payable as indicated on the bill. 
b.  If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by MPU requires that the POTW be improved, expanded or enlarged in order to treat the waste, then, prior to approval, MPU and the user shall enter into an agreement which provides that the user pay in full all added costs MPU may incur due to acceptance of the waste. The agreement shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  Amortization of all capital outlay for collecting and treating the waste, including new capital outlay and the proportionate part of the value of the existing system used in handling and treating the waste; and 
2.  Operation and maintenance costs, including salaries and wages, power costs, costs of chemicals and supplies, proper allowances for maintenance, depreciation, overhead, and office expense. 
(2)  BOD and TSS surcharges. 
a.  Water or wastes having: 
1.  A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 200 mg/L; or 
2.  Containing more than 200 mg/L of total suspended solids shall be subject to the review and approval of the general manager. 
Where the general manager has approved the admission of a.1. or a.2. above into the POTW, that discharge may be subject to a surcharge as determined by the control authority. In no case shall a discharge be accepted that will prevent the POTW from meeting its limits. 
b.  The surcharge will be assessed according to the following formula each month using the most current pollutant concentration data and the current months' wastewater flow at the matching outfall: 
(BOD results mg/L - 200 mg/L) × $ (A) × Discharge (MG) × 8.34 = (x) BOD Subtotal 
(TSS results mg/L - 200 mg/L) × $ (B) × Discharge (MG) × 8.34 = (y) TSS Subtotal 
Total Sewer Surcharge = (x) + (y) 
Where: 
8.34 = Weight in pounds of one gallon of water 
(A) = Unit cost of treatment per pound of BOD 
(B) = Unit cost of treatment per pound of TSS 
(x) = Amount ($) of total sewer surcharge due to BOD content 
(y) = Amount ($) of total sewer surcharge due to TSS content 
Discharge = Million gallons (MG) of flow 
A surcharge is an additional charge by the POTW for the increased cost of handling discharge of unusual strength and character and shall not serve as a variance to the requirements of this division. Exercise of this provision shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(b)  Severability. If any provision of this division is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be effected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(c)  Transportation and disposal of hauled wastewater. 
(1)  No person shall vacuum, flush or service tanks or traps which contain liquid wastes or portable chemical toilet wastes for the purpose of transporting such waste to a site of disposal unless approval has been granted by the control authority. Prior to any operation in the city, all persons desiring to commercially transport such wastes shall obtain a permit from the control authority. The application for a permit shall require such information as the general manager deems reasonably necessary. MPU may charge a fee as set by its board from time to time for the purposes of permit applications. The permit shall be valid for a period of one year and shall be renewed by the applicant at least 30 days prior to the date of expiration. Any permit issued under this section shall be nontransferable and shall be issued to the person or entity originally applying therefore. The permit may contain limitations as to routes, equipment, inspection and insurance requirements, and other health-related matters. 
(2)  In addition to the application for a permit to transport liquid wastes within the city limits of McAllen, Alton and where sewer service is provided to in the city of Mission, the person requesting such permit shall submit for inspection each vehicle the applicant proposes to use to transport liquid wastes. Each vehicle shall be constructed, equipped and identified in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  The business name of the operator must be in letters of three inches or higher and permanently displayed on both sides of the vehicle; 
b.  Each vehicle shall have the necessary tanks, pumps, valves, cylinders, diaphragms and other appurtenances which shall be of a design and type suitable and maintained in a condition to safely operate without spillage, spray or leakage. 
(3)  Transporters of liquid wastes shall use a disposal site approved by the state water commission and by MPU. The issuance of a permit does not specifically allow a transporter of liquid wastes to utilize the POTW unless express written permission is obtained by MPU. All deliveries to the POTW of any liquid wastes by transfer shall be by permit or written authorization issued by MPU therefore. Hauled liquid wastes for delivery to the MPU POTW shall not contain hazardous waste in any or listed hazardous in combination with other waste. 
(4)  The control authority may charge a fee to transporters for discharging liquid wastes at locations designated by MPU. 
(5)  Transporters of liquid/sludge waste shall also comply with all the requirements in 30 TAC Chapter 312 Subchapter G, Sections 312.141 through 312.147. 
(d)  Hazardous wastes. 
(1)  Users that generate hazardous wastes shall comply with all regulations of the EPA, the state water commission and the state department of health. 
(2)  Users generating hazardous wastes shall maintain records of the types and quantities of wastes generated, name of the transporter and site of disposal. These records shall be made available for inspection by the control authority at any reasonable time. 
(3)  Transporters transporting hazardous wastes must have the applicable state department of health or state water commission permit and use the appropriate manifest system. The control authority shall be allowed to inspect vehicles for proper operation, registration and manifest. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, 5-24-10; Ord. No. 2020-04, § I, 1-27-20)  
Sec. 106-195. - Effective date. 
This division shall be in full force and effective immediately following the passage, and approval of McAllen Public Utility's (MPU) Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, 5-24-10)  
Secs. 106-196—106-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BILLING PROCEDURE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-271 et seq. 
 
Sec. 106-221. - Payment of bills. 
(a)  All bills for water services under the schedules as set out in this chapter shall be due and payable and shall become delinquent on the 12th day from the mailing of such bill. Whenever a water bill shall become delinquent, and remain so for ten days, the utility manager or his authorized representative is hereby authorized to disconnect water utility service relating to such delinquent account. Prior to disconnecting water utility service, the utility manager or his authorized representative shall cause a utility disconnect notice to be issued to the applicable party. 
(b)  Bills not paid on or before the 20th day from the billing date will be assessed a late fee equal to five percent of the past due balance. The late fee will be charged monthly to each delinquent account. 
(c)  Such notice shall contain: 
(1)  The reason for disconnection; 
(2)  State that all services shall be disconnected unless all amounts due are paid within the next ten calendar days from the date of mailing of such notice; and 
(3)  A statement that the aggrieved party may contact the utility manager or his authorized representative if such party believes that there has been an error in the billing or that the bill has already been paid, or for some other reason there is not justification for discontinuance of service. 
(d)  The utility manager or his authorized representative is hereby authorized to make determinations concerning the discontinuation of water utility service upon the appeal of any aggrieved party as provided and set out above. 
(e)  When water is disconnected under the above procedures, a reconnection fee of $25.00 shall be charged for reconnection services per meter. All utility service and reconnection fees must be paid in full prior to any reconnection of water service. New connection fees shall also be $25.00 per meter. In addition, a security deposit shall be made, replenished or increased in the corresponding amount for the type of account prior to the reconnection. 
(f)  Whenever a utility bill is paid for by check or ACH draft and such check or draft is returned to the city because of nonsufficient funds, there shall be added to such charge for the processing of such returned payment an additional $25.00 returned payment fee. 
(g)  A customer of the utility service may request that the utility manager grant an extension for payments on an installment basis or an extension of payment in order to process such installment basis there shall be a fee of $20.00 per extension of payment request, and such fee shall be payable as part of the extension payments. 
(h)  Whenever water is disconnected under any procedure by the utility manager, and there is evidence of an unauthorized reconnect based on a broken lock on the meter, then prior to the reconnecting of such meter, there will be an additional service fee of $100.00 for such account. This fee is a reconnect fee and is in addition to any other fine which may be applicable relating to the enforcement hereof under the Code of Ordinances of the City of McAllen in Municipal Court of any other criminal proceeding under the Penal Code of the State of Texas. 
(Code 1966, §§ 30-25, 30-73; Ord. No. 1994-46, § I, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 1995-12, § I, 3-13-95; Ord. No. 1997-95, §§ V, VI, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 2014-44, § IV, 9-22-14)  
Sec. 106-222. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1995-12, § II, adopted Mar. 13, 1995, set out provisions repealing § 106-222, which pertained to notice of disconnection; appeal; reconnection fees, and derived from Code 1966, § 30-25, and Ord. No. 1994-46, § II, adopted July 11, 1994.  
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 106-223. - Municipal drainage utility system established. 
The Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 552, subch. C, as amended (the "Act"), is hereby adopted and shall be fully implemented as provided by the Act and by the board of commissioners; and the drainage of the city is hereby found to be a public utility within the meaning of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 1-8-18)  
Sec. 106-224. - Drainage service provided. 
The service area shall include all real property within the corporate city limits. The city will provide stormwater drainage for all real property within the service area upon payment of the determined drainage fees, as defined in the Act, and excluding property exempt under the Act and certain exempted real property by the city, and that the fees and assessments, will be based on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms. The drainage fees established herein shall be for all nonexempt benefitted property as defined in the Act within the service area. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 1-8-18)  
Sec. 106-225. - Billing for drainage service. 
The city is hereby authorized to bill the drainage fees incurred as a result of the adoption of the Act and through the establishment of the municipal drainage utility system. The drainage fee shall be separately identified from other public utility billings. Drainage fees may only be expended for the costs of service as defined by the Act.  
Sec. 106-226. - Authority to levy drainage fees. 
The city may levy a schedule of drainage fees upon satisfaction of the procedural requirements provided in the Act and this article. Prior to the levy of any drainage fees, the board of commissioners shall conduct a public hearing on the drainage fees pursuant to the Act. Prior to adoption of this article the board of commissioners found and determined that: The city will establish a schedule of drainage fees against all real property within the service area based on each parcel's contribution to stormwater runoff in accordance with the fees under the Act; the city will provide drainage for all real property in the service area upon payment of the drainage fees, except real property exempt under the Act; and the city will offer drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and equitable terms. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 1-8-18)  
Sec. 106-227. - Exemptions authorized. 
The city is authorized to exempt certain property, entities or persons from all ordinances, resolutions, and rules which the city may adopt from time to time in connection with the adoption of the Act and the establishment of its municipal drainage utility system. Any exemptions to the drainage fees established herein other than the exemptions required by the Act shall be set forth in the drainage fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 1-8-18)  
Sec. 106-228. - Fees. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall, following the adoption of this article, establish a drainage fee schedule, by resolution of the board of commissioners, from time to time, for fees which shall be collected through the city's bill for public utilities pursuant to the Act and other applicable law. There shall be a drainage fee on each monthly public utility statement for the city drainage service as set forth in the drainage fee schedule. The city manager, or designee, is authorized to collect such fees in a manner consistent with the city Charter, the Act and this article. The drainage fees shall be a separate line item on the public utility statement, and shall be clearly identified as a separate charge. Except, as otherwise provided herein, the billing, fees and collection procedures shall be consistent with city collection procedures for the water, sewer and solid waste collection. 
(b)  The drainage fees established pursuant to this article will apply to the accounts maintained by the city for public utility services. 
(c)  The income from the drainage utility system shall be segregated and completely identifiable in the city's accounts. The income shall only be used for cost of service, a reserve for future construction, repair or maintenance of the system, future system improvements, including replacement, new construction, or extension, or any other purpose allowed by the Act, provided however, at no time shall the income from the drainage utility system be transferred to the general fund. 
(d)  All billings, exemptions and other procedures relating to drainage fees established pursuant to this article shall be subject to the provisions of the Act and other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 1-8-18)  
Sec. 106-229. - Appeals. 
(a)  Billing and payment disputes for administrative issues relating to the drainage fees shall be subject to appeals procedures used by the city for other public utility billing disputes. A person or entity that owns or occupies a benefitted property may appeal the drainage fees established herein pursuant to this procedure set forth in this section. 
(b)  Appeals for the following reasons shall be directed to the director of engineering for evaluation and determination. An appeal shall be in writing and submitted to the director of engineering within 30 days after the public utility billing statement containing the matter to be disputed. During all periods of appeal the person or entity who owns or occupies the benefitted property and/or the account holder shall be responsible for payment of the fees in full: 
(1)  Exempt property has been assessed a drainage charge; 
(2)  Drainage charge for an individual property is assessed on more than one public utility account; or 
(3)  Drainage charge is assessed to individual property outside the city's jurisdictional area. 
(c)  The director of engineering shall render a written decision on such appeals within 30 days after receiving a timely written notice of appeal from the person or entity who owns or occupies the benefitted property and/or the account holder. The director of engineering shall deliver a copy of the appeal decision to the person or entity who owns or occupies the benefitted property and/or the account holder by U.S. mail to the address of the landowner/account holder according to the most recent records in the possession of the city. 
(d)  Appeals for claims that the drainage fee for an individual property is based on an incorrect determination of the property's contribution to the drainage system, as established in the city drainage fee schedule shall be directed to the director of engineering for evaluation and determination. An appeal pursuant to this subsection shall be in writing and submitted to the director of engineering within 30 days after the public utility billing statement containing the matter to be disputed. Documentation submitted in support of said appeal shall include information on all impervious areas and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property. Information may consist of, but is not limited to, improvement surveys prepared by a professional land surveyor licensed to actively practice in the State of Texas, record drawings, exhibits illustrating actual field measurements and photos. Initiation of the formal appeal process shall also authorize the city's designated officers and employees to enter upon and inspect private and public property owned by entities other than the city, upon notice to the owner thereof. During all periods of appeal the person or entity who owns or occupies the benefitted property and/or the account holder shall be responsible for payment of the fees in full. 
(e)  Any person or entity who owns or occupies the benefitted property and/or the account holder who disagrees with the decision of the director of engineering, as the case may be, may appeal such decision to the city manager in writing within ten days after receipt of the decision of the director of engineering, as the case may be. The city manager shall render a written decision within 30 days after receipt of a timely appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 1-8-18)  
Sec. 106-230. - Penalties; enforcement. 
Failure to pay the drainage fees promptly when due shall subject such user to discontinuance of any public utility services provided by the city, in accordance with the procedures adopted by the city for discontinuance of any city public utility service including water and/or sewer service and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 1-8-18)  
Sec. 106-231. - No effect on landowner obligations; no waiver of immunity. 
(a)  The establishment of a drainage utility by the city does not relieve private land owners, developers, other individuals and entities from responsibility for providing drainage improvements in connection with land development pursuant to the other ordinances of the city or laws of the State of Texas that relate to stormwater runoff, drainage management, or drainage improvements. 
(b)  The establishment of a drainage utility system by the city does not imply or warrant that a benefitted property will be free from flooding, stormwater pollution, or stream erosion. The city makes no representation that all drainage problems will be remedied. This article does not create additional duties on the part of the city or create new liability or remedies for any flooding, stream erosion, deterioration of water quality or other damages. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to waive the city's immunity under law or reduce the need or necessity for flood insurance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 1-8-18)  
Sec. 106-232. - Annual review. 
The municipal drainage utility system shall be reviewed, at a minimum, on an annual basis by the director of engineering, city manager, and board of commissioners to evaluate its continued necessity. If the commission finds during such review that the system is no longer necessary, it shall be discontinued in accordance with the Act. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the commission's authority to review and make changes to the system, including discontinuation thereof, at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 1-8-18)  
Secs. 106-233—106-250. - Reserved.  
Chapter 110 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 110-1—110-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LANDSCAPING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; environment, ch. 46; supplementary district regulations, § 138-346 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 110-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessway means a paved area intended to provide ingress and egress of vehicular traffic from a public right-of-way to an offstreet parking area or loading area. 
Buffer means a screen constructed of wood, concrete block, masonry, a combination of wood and masonry, or landscape material with a chain link fence in such a manner that adjacent property is visually screened, and so that noise, solid waste or other objectionable influences will be avoided. Such buffer shall be perpendicular to the ground, a minimum of six feet in height, continuous and uninterrupted, and 100 percent opaque except where extraordinary circumstances exist where additional height will more adequately accomplish the desired end. 
Caliper means the diameter of a tree measured 12 inches above the ground for trees up to and including eight inches in diameter and four and one-half feet above the ground for trees having a diameter of more the eight inches. The diameter of a multi-stem tree shall be measured at the point below branching or the sum of the two largest stems measured at four and one-half feet above the ground which ever is greater. 
Contiguous means adjacent property whose property lines are shared, or are separated by only a street, alley, easement or right-of-way. 
Developed property means that portion of a lot or parcel upon which a building, structure, pavement, or other improvements have been or are proposed to be placed. 
Diameter-at-breast-height (DBH) means the tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height of four and one-half feet (54 inches) above natural grade or the DBH measurement according to the latest edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal as published by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, when the tree trunk branches out at a point lower than four and one-half feet. 
Frontage means lineal distance measured along abutting street rights-of-way. 
Ground cover means low growing plants planted in such a manner as to form a continuous cover over the ground, typical horizontal growth form with a maximum height of 24 inches, such as liriope, low growing varieties of honeysuckle, confederate jasmine, English ivy or others. 
Landscape material means trees, shrubs, ground cover, vines or grass installed in planting areas, including but not limited to those installed for the purpose of fulfilling the requirements of this article. 
Landscape strip area means a planting area within the property lines of specified width and parallel to a public street, excluding driveways for ingress and egress. 
Mulch means nonliving organic and inorganic materials customarily used in landscape design to retard erosion and retain moisture. 
Native plant means landscape materials identified as indigenous or naturalized (adapted) to the Lower Rio Grande Valley area independent of outside influences such as transplantation or hybridization. 
Palm tree means any group of plants in the palm family that will eventually reach ten feet in clear trunk height measured from top of root ball to live fronds. Suggested palms include: Texas Sabal, Florida Sabal, Mexican Fan Palm, California Fan Palm, and Chinese Fan Palm. 
Paved ground surface area (also referred to in this article as paved area or paved ground area) means any paved ground surface area (excepting public rights-of-way) used for the purpose of driving, parking, storing or displaying of vehicles, boats, trailers and mobile homes, including new and used car lots and other open lot uses. Parking structures, covered drive-in parking areas to the drip line of the covering or garages shall not be considered as paved ground surface areas. 
Planting area means an area intended or used for landscaping that has a minimum of 40 square feet of actual plantable area and an inside dimension on any side of at least 36 inches. 
Reconstruction means rehabilitation or replacement of structures on nonresidential or multifamily property to an extent exceeding 50 percent of the assessed valuation of such structures as shown on the most recent tax roll of the city. 
Shrub means any woody plant of relatively low height, having several stems arising from the base and lacking a single trunk. 
Stormwater detention facility means an impoundment on a lot or parcel reserved for detaining and controlling the release of stormwater runoff as required by City of McAllen Drainage Policy. 
Street line means that line separating the right-of-way from any adjacent property. 
Tree means any self-supporting woody plant of a species which normally grows to an overall mature height of a minimum of 15 feet in the lower Rio Grande Valley of the state. 
Tree removal means the destruction or killing of a tree; or the physical removal of a tree from its location, including but not exclusively for replanting; or any act or failure to act as a result of which it is reasonably anticipated that the tree will die, including but not exclusively by the uprooting or severing of its main trunk, or any other act which inflicts or causes damage to the root system, whether by machinery, storage of materials, soil compaction, substantial change in the natural grade above the root system or around the trunk, excessive pruning, or paving with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious materials. 
Vine means any of a group of woody or herbaceous plants which may climb by twining, by means of aerial rootlets or tendrils, or which may simply sprawl over the ground or other plants. 
Xeriscape means landscape methods which conserve water through the use of drought-tolerant plants and planting techniques. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -4; Ord. No. 1993-88, § I, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06; Ord. No. 2007-28, § 1, 3-26-07; Ord. No. 2019-82, § I, 12-9-19) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Secs. 110-27—110-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, adopted November 13, 2006, repealed §§ 110-27—110-29, which pertained to authority; purpose; and objective and findings. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 110-30. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
Whenever the standards and specifications in this article conflict with those contained in another ordinance, the most stringent or restrictive provision shall govern. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -13)  
Sec. 110-31. - Authority of the director of planning. 
The director of planning is hereby authorized to promulgate, or to have promulgated, and to file for public record and use, rules, regulations, standards and specifications for the construction, installation, design, location and arrangement of landscaped elements, but all such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be subject to the approval of the board of commissioners. No such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall conflict with this article or any other ordinances of the city. All improvements in the city shall be constructed, installed, designed, located and arranged by the developer in accordance with such rules, regulations, standards and specifications. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -15; Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06)  
Sec. 110-32. - Exemptions from article. 
The provisions of this article regarding landscaping shall not apply to properties other than single-family and multi-family residential properties located within the downtown area shown in Exhibit "A" on the map which is on file in the city secretary's office, and more specifically described as the following: 
Lots 5—8, Block 3; Lots 1—6, Blocks 9, 24, 25, 40, 41, and 56; Lots 7—12, Blocks 14, 19, 30, 35, 46, and 51; all of Blocks 4—6, 10—13, 20—23, 26—29, 36—39, 42—45, and 52—55 of McAllen Addition Subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2001-75, § 1, 11-12-01) 
Editor's note— Exhibit "A" referenced in § 110-32 is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city.  
Sec. 110-33. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any provision of this article within the corporate limits of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined an amount as prescribed in section 1-14. Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction under this section shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief for violations of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -16)  
Secs. 110-34—110-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 110-46. - Landscape and buffer plan approval. 
(a)  Before a building permit is issued appropriate plans showing proposed landscape material and placement, including figures to show compliance with this article, shall be submitted to the city. A plot plan drawn to scale not more than one inch equals 50 feet shall include dimensions and distances, and clearly delineate both the existing and proposed landscape material. Such plot plan shall also include detailed drawings of the entire offstreet parking area and the location of proposed buildings. 
(b)  The plan required by this section must be signed by the owner and authorized city staff as approved prior to issuance of a building permit and is attached and made a part of the conditions for the building permit. 
(c)  Prior to construction of buffers, complete plans showing type of material, depth of beam, and structural support shall be submitted to the building permit office for analysis to determine whether or not: 
(1)  The screen will withstand the pressures of time and nature. 
(2)  The screen adequately accomplishes the purpose for which it was intended. 
(Code 1966, §§ 17 3/8 -4(2), 17 3/8 -8; Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06)  
Sec. 110-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, adopted November 13, 2006, repealed § 110-47, which pertained to purpose and objectives. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 110-48. - Required landscape area. 
A minimum of ten percent of the area of any lot or parcel shall be devoted to landscape material and comply with the intent and purpose of this article and 50 percent of such landscaped area for nonresidential lots shall be visible from the street fronting the developed property. Landscape areas located within the street and alley rights-of-way shall not be credited towards meeting the minimum landscape area requirement. However, right-of-way areas shall be landscaped. Landscape areas associated with drainage detention facilities located on the lot or parcel may be credited towards the landscape area requirement. A minimum of 50 percent of the area within the required front yard of any residential parcel shall be devoted to landscape material. The portion of the front yard for any residential parcel located between the property line and the extension of the sideyard setback line shall be devoted to landscape material. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -5(b)(1); Ord. No. 1993-88, § II, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 1999-101, § 1, 11-22-99; Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06)  
Sec. 110-49. - Landscape buffers. 
(a)  A buffer shall be provided where a nonresidential use has a side or rear area property line in common with any residential use or zone. A masonry screen eight feet in height shall be required where a commercial, industrial or multifamily use has a side or rear property line in common with a single family use or zone. Where such use has 200 feet or less in common with any residential use or zone, the buffer shall be eight feet in height but may be cedar planks with masonry columns at every ten feet. 
(b)  A buffer shall be provided where a multifamily use of four or more dwelling units per structure has a side or rear area property line in common with any single-family residential use. 
(c)  A buffer shall be no closer to the street than the property line or landscape strip area, whichever is greater. Section 94-86 et seq. concerning sight obstructions at intersections shall be applicable to the screen where it is intersected by a street or alley. 
(d)  A landscape strip area with a minimum width of ten feet shall be provided along and within the property lines of all nonresidential and multifamily uses contiguous to a public street, excluding driveway entrances and exits. For properties having a lot depth of less than 200 feet, the landscaped strip may be reduced to a minimum width of five feet with a landscape hedge not exceeding three feet in height. 
(e)  A wood or masonry or combination of wood and masonry buffer shall be provided along rear property lines of residential uses contiguous to a public street. Rear access to a residential use from a public street is prohibited where such residential use has access to a public street along the front property line. The buffer shall be constructed prior to final acceptance of the subdivision development improvements or prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for properties with an approved subdivision plat prior to the effective date of this ordinance. The buffer is required to be maintained by property owners of the subdivision or by the subdivision homeowners association. 
(f)  A buffer shall be provided to screen refuse areas (including refuse dumpsters, compactors and contained compactors), outdoor storage areas and loading docks from public streets. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -5(b)(2); Ord. No. 1993-88, § II, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06)  
Sec. 110-50. - Location of landscape areas. 
(a)  Landscape areas with trees shall be located within 50 feet of any parking space. 
(b)  Landscape areas within public and private rights-of-way, stormwater detention facilities, medians and islands shall comply with the specifications of the department of engineering. Landscape areas within rights-of-way shall be maintained in perpetuity by the property owners as common area. Trees located in landscape areas within street right-of-ways shall not be planted closer than six feet from the back of the curb, or three feet from the edge of an existing or future sidewalk. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -5(b)(3); Ord. No. 1993-88, § II, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06)  
Sec. 110-51. - Credit for trees. 
For all non-single-family residential development, a minimum of one tree of at least two and one-half-inch caliper in size and ten feet in height shall be included and replaced as necessary as per the following ratios: 
(1)  When the required area being landscaped is from one to 2,000 square feet a minimum of one tree for every 200 square feet of landscape area shall be required. 
(2)  When the required area being landscaped is from 2,001 to 10,000 square feet a minimum of ten trees for the first 2,000 square feet and one tree for every 500 square feet over 2,000 square feet of landscape area shall be required. 
(3)  When the required area being landscaped is from 10,001 or greater square feet a minimum of 26 trees for the first 10,000 square feet and one tree for every 800 square feet over 10,000 square feet of landscape area shall be required. 
(4)  Two palm trees with a minimum of six feet of clear trunk is the equivalent of one two and one-half-inch caliper tree. The number of palms trees shall not exceed 80 percent of the total number of trees required. 
(5)  Credit for trees: 
Trees excluding palm trees: 
Caliper* 	Number of trees 
Greater than or equal to eight-inch caliper 	6 trees credit 
Greater than or equal to six-inch caliper 	4 trees credit 
Greater than or equal to four-inch caliper 	2 trees credit 
 
(6)  In order to encourage the preservation of existing trees, credit shall be given to existing trees according to the following schedule: 
Existing trees excluding palm trees: 
Credit for trees: 
Caliper* 	Number of trees 
Greater than or equal to 20-inch caliper 	12 trees credit 
Greater than or equal to 16-inch caliper 	10 trees credit 
Greater than or equal to 12-inch caliper 	8 trees credit 
Greater than or equal to eight-inch caliper 	6 trees credit 
Greater than or equal to four-inch caliper 	4 trees credit 
 
(7)  The minimum planting area shall be one-half the radius of the crown spread for an existing tree measured from the trunk center, or not less than a radius of two and one-half feet, measured from the center of the tree trunk to the near edge of the planting area whichever is greater. The ground surface within the planting areas shall be maintained in a porous or vegetative cover. Plastic underliners shall not be permitted. 
(8)  Single-family residential development shall provide a minimum of one non-palm tree for the first 50 feet of lot frontage and one additional non-palm tree for each additional 25 feet of lot frontage. Trees required for single-family residential development shall be located within the front yard. 
(9)  A native, non-palm tree, as listed in section 110-56(j) with a minimum caliper of two inches and a minimum height of six feet shall be the equivalent of one and one-half required trees. Native tree credit is in addition to credit for large caliper and existing tree credit. Of the vegetation required by this chapter, the use of ten percent native plant material is encouraged. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -5(c); Ord. No. 1993-88, § III, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 1999-101, § 2, 11-22-99; Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06)  
Sec. 110-52. - Applicability to developments or redevelopment. 
(a)  The requirements and standards for the installation and maintenance of landscape material and site improvements as set forth in this division shall apply to all lots or parcels with developed property within the city. All new development, construction or reconstruction shall be in full compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If the zoning ordinances of the city would otherwise permit developed property to exceed 90 percent of the lot or parcel's total land coverage, the provisions of this article shall supersede and prevail over such other requirements. In no event, except as expressly permitted in this article, shall more than 90 percent of a lot or parcel's area be covered by developed property. 
(c)  If a principal nonresidential use and some or all of the parking area (required or otherwise provided) serving the principal nonresidential use are located on separate lots or parcels, the landscape installation required in this article shall apply. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -6(a); Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06)  
Sec. 110-53. - Applicability to existing development areas; nonconformance; when compliance required. 
(a)  All property with existing development on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived which is not in compliance with the provisions of this article shall be considered nonconforming, and allowed to continue until such time as a building permit is granted to enlarge, or reconstruct a structure on the property. Whenever a nonresidential or multifamily building or use existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance is enlarged to the extent of ten percent or more in floor area, the same percentage of existing paved areas shall be brought into compliance with this article and all new paved areas shall be brought into compliance with this article. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance is enlarged to the extent of 50 percent or more in floor area, the existing as well as the new paved areas shall be brought into compliance with this article. A plan showing existing and new development and the proposed landscaping shall be submitted in accordance with section 110-46. 
(b)  No structure existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be required to be altered or moved in order to comply with the provisions of this article except in the event of reconstruction. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -6(b); Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06)  
Sec. 110-54. - Installation of materials. 
All landscape materials shall be installed properly in a sound workmanlike manner and according to commonly accepted horticultural practices. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -7(a); Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06)  
Sec. 110-55. - Maintenance requirements; when tree removal is prohibited. 
(a)  The owner of the lot or parcel or the manager or agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscape areas, which shall be maintained so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at all times and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. All landscaped areas shall be irrigated and shall be watered regularly to ensure continuous healthy growth and development. Maintenance shall include the replacement of all dead plant material. 
(b)  No trees over 20 inches in DBH (diameter at breast height) shall be removed without, in the case of any existing or proposed commercial development, submitting to the director of planning for review a survey of the property in question which includes all trees with a DBH of over 20 inches. 
(c)  The director of planning shall expeditiously review the submitted survey and work with the landowner/developer in pre-development conference to preserve as many existing trees over 20 inches DBH which said preserved trees shall serve as a credit to the landowner/developer's total aggregate number of caliper inches that they are required to plant as per the city's existing landscaping ordinance. 
(d)  In the case of an existing commercial development, no trees may be removed from the development's existing landscape plan without first submitting a replacement landscaping plan for review, consideration and approval by the city; or, in the case of an issue involving three trees or less, the submission of a one page application to remove any tree that has become a hazard to the existing development with a plan to immediately replace it with another tree or trees of an equivalent caliper inch. Applications to remove and replace three trees or less shall be deemed automatically approved unless the city objects in writing within five business days of filing. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall require any application from or permit to any public utility provider prior to removing a tree whenever it has determined the tree poses a hazard, or interferes with restoration or continuation of utility services. 
(f)  Violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per occurrence. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -7(b); Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06; Ord. No. 2007-28, § 1, 3-26-07; Ord. No. 2007-73, § 1, 9-10-07)  
Sec. 110-56. - Planting criteria. 
(a)  Trees. Trees planted for credit under section 110-51 should be a minimum of ten feet in height from ground level to top of crown when measured immediately after planting. In the case of palms, the required measurement should be six feet from ground level to base of live palm fronds. Trees should be of a species having an average mature crown spread of greater than 15 feet in the lower Rio Grande Valley (excepting palms) and having trunks which can be maintained in a clean condition for over six feet of clear wood measured from the ground. Trees having an average mature crown spread less than 15 feet may be substituted by grouping such trees so as to create the equivalent of a 15-foot crown spread. 
(b)  Shrubs. Shrubs should be a minimum of one foot in height when measured immediately after planting. 
(c)  Vines. Vines should be a minimum of 30 inches in height one year after planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens or walls to meet buffer requirements and specifications. 
(d)  Ground covers. Ground covers other than grass should be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within one year after planting. 
(e)  Lawn grass. Grass areas should be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in the city. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. 
(f)  Synthetic lawns or plants. Synthetic or artificial lawns or plants shall not be used in lieu of plant requirements in this section. 
(g)  Architectural planters. The use of architectural planters may be permitted in fulfillment of landscape requirements. 
(h)  A list of trees, shrubs, vines, and ground covers native to the Lower Rio Grande Valley shall be prepared by the Department of Parks and Recreation and provided by the Planning Department. 
(i)  Landscape irrigation requirements for nonresidential and multifamily uses: 
(1)  The owner shall be responsible for the irrigation of all landscape areas and plant materials, utilizing one or a combination of the following methods: 
a.  An automatic underground irrigation system (conventional spray, bubbler, and the like); 
b.  An automatic water-saving irrigation system (drip, porous pipe, leaky pipe, and the like); or 
(2)  The irrigation method used shall: 
a.  Provide a moisture level in an amount and frequency adequate to sustain growth of the plant materials on a permanent basis; 
b.  Be in place and operational at the time of the landscape inspection for certificate of occupancy unless an alternative method is approved; and 
c.  Be maintained and kept operational at all times to provide for efficient water distribution. 
(3)  Landscape areas utilizing xeriscape plants and installation plants and installation techniques, including areas planted with native grasses and wildflowers, may use a temporary and aboveground system and shall be required to provide irrigation for the first two growing seasons and thereafter must maintain viability of plant material. 
(4)  Landscape plants shall indicate, by a detail, a drawing, or by specification in a note on the site plan, the nature and location of irrigation which will be used; these should be specific enough to show that adequate irrigation will be provided to all required landscape areas and plant material. 
(5)  No irrigation shall be required for undisturbed natural areas or undisturbed existing trees. 
(j)  Xeriscape areas shall provide a minimum of 50 percent of the landscaped areas with ground cover or grasses. Xeriscape areas not covered by grasses or ground cover shall be mulched. A list of indigenous plant species for xeriscape areas shall be prepared by the department of parks and recreation and provided by the department of planning. 
(k)  When landscaped areas are used for stormwater detention, tree and shrub plantings shall not adversely affect volumetric and/or conveyance characteristics. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -7(c); Ord. No. 1993-88, § IV, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06)  
Secs. 110-57—110-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 110-66. - Grant of exception from article. 
(a)  The planning director shall have the power to grant exceptions to this article in special cases where the paved area is less than 10,000 square feet and where there are unusual and practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships created in meeting the requirements of this article. The guidelines to be used in determining whether an exception should be granted are as follows: 
(1)  That meeting the requirements of this article would prohibit an owner of property from using land for a use that the zoning ordinance expressly permits. 
(2)  That the hardships or difficulties of meeting the requirements of this article are peculiar to that property, and not general in character. 
(3)  That the lack of landscaping will not be detrimental to adjoining property or to the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(4)  That the hardships and difficulties of the landscaping are greater than the benefits derived by the general public. 
(b)  Financial hardship due to meeting the requirements of this article is not sufficient to show unnecessary hardship, unless the financial difficulties amount to confiscation of property. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -9)  
Sec. 110-67. - Compliance responsibility. 
(a)  The planning director or the director's designee shall be the enforcing official for this article. The planning director, by and through the code enforcement offices of the city, is charged with the duty of administering the provisions of this article and securing compliance therewith. In furtherance of this responsibility, the planning director shall: 
(1)  Make such inspections as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes and intent of this article and to initiate appropriate action to bring about compliance with this article if such inspections disclose any instance of noncompliance. 
(2)  Investigate thoroughly any complaints of alleged violations of this article, and indicate clearly in writing as a public record the disposition made of such complaints. 
(3)  Issue in writing a notice of violation as set out in this section the remedy of all conditions or all violations of the article found to exist in or on any premises. The notice of violation shall be served in person or by certified and regular mail to the owner and occupant, if applicable, of the premise using the appraisal district records for ownership and the city utility department for occupancy information. The planning director is hereby authorized to implement violation enforcement procedures. 
(4)  Request the assistance of the city attorney in taking appropriate legal action upon the failure of the responsible party to timely comply with such notice of violation order. 
(b)  The planning director or a designated agent is authorized and directed to lawfully enter in and upon all premises at reasonable times to determine their condition insofar as the provisions of this article are applicable. 
(c)  Whenever the planning director determines that a violation of this article exists, he shall take action as follows: 
(1)  Give written notice of the violation to the management agent or the owner shown on the most recent tax roll of the city. A copy of such written notice shall be transmitted to the city manager. 
(2)  The notice shall include: 
a.  A description of the location of the property involved, either by address or by legal description. 
b.  A statement indicating the nature of the violation and reason or reasons why the notice of the violation is being issued. 
c.  A specification of the section or sections of this article upon which the notice of violation is based. 
d.  A general description of the things that are required to be done in order that the premises comply with the provisions of this article. 
e.  A statement showing the time within which the work must be accomplished in order to comply with the provisions of this article, which requirement as to time may not be less than ten days nor more than 90 days from the date of such written notice. 
f.  The names of the persons upon whom the notice of violation is served. 
g.  A statement advising that upon the failure to comply with the requirements of the notice, the city shall take such enforcement procedures as may be required under this article in order to secure compliance. 
h.  A statement advising of the procedures available for review of the action of the planning director as set out in this article. 
(d)  Notice: 
(1)  Service of the written notice required by this article shall be deemed complete if personally delivered to the person or persons required under the provisions of this article to be served with such notice, and if such notice cannot be personally delivered within the city, then service shall be deemed complete upon sending such notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such person or persons and by posting a copy of such notice in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(2)  The planning director shall endorse on the copy of the written notice forwarded to the city manager the manner of service of the notice or notices as are required by this section. 
(3)  When any written notice of violation shall become an order, either because no petition for review of the decision of the planning director has been taken or because such petition for review has been taken and the decision of the planning director has not been reversed, then such order shall be executed by the planning director. 
(4)  If such order is not complied with within the time specified in the order, then the planning director shall use all available means of enforcement in order to secure compliance with the provisions of this article as well as to secure punishment for its violation. 
(5)  When any notice has been issued and such notice becomes an order within the terms of this article, the planning director shall cause to be placed in a conspicuous place on the premises a notice which shall read substantially as follows: 
These premises are in violation of the requirements of the city's Landscape Ordinance No. 1974-61. This notice is to remain as placed here until the requirements of such ordinance have been complied with. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such requirements have been so complied with. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -10; Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06)  
Sec. 110-68. - Board of adjustment to act as landscape appeals board. 
(a)  There is hereby established a landscape appeals board. The board of adjustment as created in section 138-41 shall serve and perform the duties of such landscape appeals board under the procedures established for that board contained in this division. Appeals to the board shall be in accordance with the procedure of the board of adjustments as set out in section 138-41 et seq. 
(b)  In granting or denying the request, the landscape appeals board shall, in each instance, state its reasons therefore and state the length of time, if it is extended, during which the acts required to be done shall be completed, which time, in no instance, may be greater than 90 days after the time period stated in the original notice of violation or action required by the city. 
(c)  An appeal or request for extension of time properly filed within the time and in the manner as provided in this section shall stay all action or enforcement appealed from or sought to be extended until final disposition thereof by the board of adjustment. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -11; Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Cross reference— Board of adjustment, § 138-41 et seq.  
Sec. 110-69. - Order; review of appeal; hearing; judicial review. 
Any aggrieved party dissatisfied with the ruling by the landscape appeals board shall have the right to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with law and shall file notice of appeal with the landscape appeals board within ten days after receipt of notice of its ruling. Upon the filing of such suit in a court of competent jurisdiction, the board shall, after notice thereof, forthwith transmit to such court all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Any order or action thereon appealed from shall be stayed pending the outcome of the trial of the cause in such court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1966, § 17 3/8 -12; Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06)  
Sec. 110-70. - Penalty for violation of division. 
Any person as the owner or occupant of any property or premise found to be in violation of any provision of this article after notice as specified relating to any violation hereof shall be subject to complaint in the municipal court of the city and upon conviction shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-14, provided, however, a first offense of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed $200.00 exclusive of courts costs. In the event of a second subsequent conviction of said person, for violating any provision of this article relating to the same premises, the minimum fine shall not be less than $300.00, exclusive of court costs. 
For the purposes of this article, in any case where the required vegetation has not been maintained or replaced, it shall be presumed that the person, persons, corporation, partnership in whose name the premise is owned as shown on the Hidalgo County Appraisal District records or the occupant in whose name the utility bill is listed for the premise is the owner or occupant for the property or premise where the violation of this article occurs or originates and shall be presumed to be the violator. It shall be presumed that such owner or occupant has intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or negligently made, caused, or permitted the violation of this article. 
The violation of any provision of this article, and each separate violation thereof, shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be punished accordingly, provided other remedies available to the city may be utilized to enforce compliance including but not limited to: 
(a)  Failure to approve the subdivision plat, building permit or other similar permit under which compliance with this article is necessary as a condition of the issuance of such plat or permit. 
(b)  Seeking injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Imposition of administrative fines to be collected under the city's utility billing system under the provision of this article. 
(d)  Revocation of a permit (such as a condition use permit) under which compliance with this article is a condition or stipulation. 
(e)  Discontinuation of any incentive program relating to compliance with this article or under which compliance with this article is a condition or stipulation. 
(f)  Recapture of any grant or incentive for a particular activity required under this article for which a violation of this article is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06)  
Sec. 110-71. - Administrative fines. 
(a)  In lieu of municipal court prosecution for violation of this article, the director may provide that any person violating this article as set out in section 110-70, shall be subject to an administrative fine being added to the monthly utility bill for the premises on which the violation has occurred or is otherwise related to the occupancy of such premises. Such administrative fine shall be payable as part of the monthly utility bill. 
(b)  Code enforcement personnel may, when such personnel reasonably believes that a violation of this article has occurred, issue notice of violation and notice of administrative fine under the notice provisions set out in section 110-70. 
(c)  The persons receiving such notice or the person responsible for the utility account, may appeal the imposition of the administrative fine prior to the issuance of the utility bill due date as set out in the notice by contacting the director of planning or such director's designee, setting forth the reasons why the administrative fine should not be carried out. The director of planning or such director's designee is hereby authorized and directed to make determinations concerning the assessment of any administrative fines upon appeal of any affected party. The notice of violation of this article shall also specify the appeal process. 
(d)  The administrative fine shall be established by minute order of the board of commissioners from time to time. The administrative fine shall compensate the city for activities such as issuing citations, inspecting properties, administrating its landscaping and vegetation program and other related costs in administrating this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06)  
Sec. 110-72. - Administrative charges. 
(a)  In lieu of municipal court prosecution or administrative fines for any violation of this article, the planning director may impose an administrative charge to cover the costs to the city, including any administrative expense, in accomplishing compliance with the provisions of this article. The director upon reasonable belief that a violation of this article has occurred and where it is feasible for the city to accomplish compliance with this article on a premise on which the violation is present by the hiring of third party contractors or supplying city personal or materials or equipment to rectify such violation and prevent continuing violations may give notice to the owner and occupant of such premise that the violation has occurred and that the city intends to provide for the rectification of such violation and impose an administrative charge to the utility bill for such premise to cover the cost thereof. Such notice shall include a reasonable time limit under which such owner or occupant or person responsible for the payment of the utility bill may appeal such determination and the process for such appeal. 
(b)  The person receiving such administrative charge notice or the person responsible for the payment of the utility bill may appeal the imposition of the administrative charge prior to the date set out in the notice for the deadline for appeal by setting forth the reasons why the administrative charge should not be carried out or by showing compliance with the provisions of this article. The director or the director's designee is hereby authorized to make determinations concerning the carrying out and assessment of administrative charges upon the appeal of such parties. 
(c)  Upon the completion of the work required for achieving compliance with this article for the premises for which notice was issued, the director shall add the costs therefore as an administrative charge to the next utility bill for service to such premise and the same shall be payable and subject to the disconnecting procedures as set out in section 106-221 of this Code. 
(d)  All lot owners shall in a subdivision that abuts a public street and that has unimproved areas between the lot or fence line of such subdivisions and the improved street shall be responsible for the compliance of this article as it relates to such unimproved areas. Should there be a violation of this article as it relates to such unimproved areas, then each lot owner shall be give notification of such violation by the director of planning or the director's designee and any such notification shall be sufficient for subsequent uninterrupted violations. Should the violation not be corrected within the time limit specified in such notice then in such event, the city may provide for the remediation of such violation and the costs relating to such remediation shall be prorated against all lot owners in such subdivision and such cost shall thereafter be collected by adding such amount as an administrative surcharge against all of the utility billing accounts in such subdivision. 
Any lot owner may appeal the assessment of such administrative charge by following the appeal process as set out in this section and the same notice and appeal process and rights as otherwise set out herein shall be applicable to this subdivision administrative charge. 
(e)  All single-family residential subdivisions of four lots or more shall be required as part of the subdivision approval process to create by document filed in the official records of Hidalgo County a home owners association and provide in such document that such association shall be responsible for meeting the conditions of this article as it relates to common areas or areas not included in specific lots but those areas adjacent to the subdivision and that are unimproved and lie between the subdivision and adjacent paved public streets. 
(Ord. No. 2006-118, § 1, 11-13-06)  
Chapter 114 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, adopted February 10, 2020, repealed ch. 114, §§ 114-1—114-5, 114-20—114-29, 114-50—114-57, 114-80—114-85, 114-100—114-118, 114-140—114-143, 114-160—114-165, 114-180—114-181, 114-226—114-241 and enacted a new ch. 114 a set out herein. Former ch. 114 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1995-57, § 1, adopted November 27, 1995; Ord. No. 2001-09, § 2, adopted January 22, 2001; Ord. No. 2002-02, §§ 1—7, adopted January 14, 2002; Ord. No. 2004-78, § 1, adopted September 27, 2004; Ord. No. 2007-54, § 1, adopted July 9, 2007; Ord. No. 2010-34, § 1, adopted May 24, 2010 and Ord. No. 2011-67, adopted November 28, 2011. 
Cross reference— Ambulances, § 42-76 et seq.; smoking on buses and taxicabs, § 54-122(a)(6). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 114-1. - Short title. 
This chapter may be cited and referred to as "The McAllen Vehicle for Hire Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them: 
Airport means the McAllen-International Airport. 
Bus terminal means the McAllen Central Station. 
Certificate of approval means that document issued by the transit department certifying that a commercial passenger vehicle has passed the requisite inspections for mechanical, safety and fitness for public occupancy conditions. 
Commercial passenger vehicle means all vehicles which carry passengers for hire within the city and which is regulated by any portion of this chapter, including, but not limited to, taxicabs, limousines, pedicabs and transit vehicles. A vehicle is not considered to be a commercial passenger vehicle for the purposes of this chapter if the vehicle is owned and operated by a business and used to transport employees or customers of the business when such transportation is a part of the services provided and not provided separately and apart from such other services. 
Cruise or cruising means the movement of any commercial passenger vehicle over the public streets of the city in search of prospective paying passengers for compensation, or, in the case of a commercial passenger vehicle for which an approved route or routes have been designated pursuant to this chapter, the movements of such vehicle over the public streets of the city in search of prospective passengers for compensation outside of such designated routes or between designated stops. 
Domelight means a device to be placed on the front and exterior portion of the roof of every taxicab, which shall be electrically connected with the taximeter in such manner as to illuminate and give an indication as to when the taxicab is being operated for hire and when the taxicab is vacant or available for hire by a passenger. 
Immediate family means the parents, spouse, children, brother or sister of a licensee. 
License means a written certificate or document issued by the transit director, or his designee, granting a person authority to operate a commercial passenger vehicles for hire within the city. 
Licensee means the holder of any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
Limousine means a chauffeured motor vehicle, offered for transportation of passengers for compensation on an hourly or set-fee basis over the public streets of the city, whether or not the service extends beyond the limits of the city. 
Operator means the driver of a commercial passenger vehicle. "Operator" permit means that document issued by the office of the transit director authorizing an individual to drive a commercial passenger vehicle for hire within the city. 
Owner means that person holding title to a commercial passenger vehicle. 
Pedicab means a bicycle or tricycle, whether human propelled or powered by electricity or gas, that transports, is capable of transporting, or is held out to the public as available to transport passengers for hire, including such a vehicle that pushes or pulls, or to which is attached, a trailer, sidecar, or similar device where passengers may be seated. 
Permittee means the holder of any vehicle permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
Rated passenger capacity means the designated number of passengers set by the vehicle manufacturer. 
Taxicab means a chauffeured motor vehicle, offered for transportation of passengers for compensation on the basis of distance traveled, whether or not the service extends beyond the limits of the city. 
Taximeter means a machine that automatically calculates fares, at a predetermined rate or rates, and digitally registers the charge for hire of a taxicab. 
Transit vehicle means a chauffeured motor transport vehicle, with a rated passenger capacity of a minimum of eight passengers and a maximum of 14, excluding the driver, each at a fixed and predetermined fare, traversing the public streets of the city following an established schedule over a fixed and predetermined route, loading and unloading passengers en route to a final destination within or outside of the city, excluding those vehicles that are operated under authority of the surface transportation board or the state railroad commission unless such carrier operates between the city and a foreign municipality or state municipality located within ten miles from the corporate limits of the city. Passenger vans with a rated seating capacity of 14, excluding the driver shall not be permitted as transit vehicles. 
Vehicle permit means the document issued by the transit director which authorizes a vehicle to be operated as a commercial passenger vehicle for hire within the city. 
Waiting time means such time which, at the special instance and request of a passenger, elapses between a taxicab's arrival at the originating point of a trip and before reaching the passenger's final destination; no lost time shall be made against a passenger for any time lost on account of any delay not caused by the special instance and request of such passenger. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-3. - Transit department established; enforcement; exclusions. 
(a)  The transit department is hereby established, headed by the transit director. In addition to any other duties and responsibilities assigned in this chapter, the transit director shall: 
(1)  Administer and supervise the issuance of parking violation citations by non-police officer personnel as authorized by this chapter and to administer the collection of fines thereof; and 
(2)  Manage and oversee the operations of the bus terminal, Central Station, and its public bus system, Metro McAllen, as it relates to operational policy and procedures, and lease rates and bus fare structures to be established by the city commission. 
(b)  The transit director, or his designee, shall enforce compliance with this chapter concerning the operation of commercial passenger vehicles and, from time to time, shall inspect all such operations and shall perform the duties prescribed by this chapter and such further duties as may be prescribed by the city commission and the city manager. 
(c)  The transit director or designee may by written order establish standard operating policies and procedures that are not inconsistent with this chapter. Such regulations shall be filed with the city secretary and copies shall be furnished to each licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-4. - Appeals from decisions of the transit director. 
(a)  In any instance where an appeal is permitted in this chapter to the city manager from a decision or determination of any matter by the transit director, such appeal must be perfected within ten calendar days from the date of such decision by written notice of appeal. The city manager, as soon as practicable after receiving such notice of appeal, shall grant the appellant a hearing and, after such hearing, shall modify, sustain or reverse the findings or decision of the transit director and shall forthwith certify his decision in writing to the transit director and the appellant. If no appeal is taken from the findings or decision made by the transit director within the time provided in this subsection, the decision of the transit director shall be final. 
(b)  The decision of the city manager under this section may be appealed, in writing, to the board of commissioners; provided that notice of appeal is perfected within ten calendar days of the city manager's decision. The appeal is perfected by providing written notice to the mayor's office, city commission liaison or city manager's office. If proper notice of appeal is timely delivered as outlined herein, the city secretary shall place the appeal on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners subject to the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-5. - Public liability insurance. 
(a)  Before a vehicle permit for any commercial passenger vehicle regulated by this chapter shall be issued or renewed, the owner shall file with the transit department a copy of, a policy of public liability insurance, against any loss or damage that may result from the operation of the commercial passenger vehicle. Such a policy shall thereafter be maintained in full force and effect. That said policy shall cover at least the minimum amount of recovery required under Texas law as amended for the type vehicle and usage insured. A certificate of insurance must be submitted to the transit department and approved by the city attorney's office. 
(b)  Every policy shall include a complete list of all vehicles and approved operators that are insured under the policy. The city must be included as certificate holder. 
(c)  Every policy required by this chapter shall include a 30-day notice of cancellation to be delivered to the transit director. 
(d)  Neither the city nor any officer or employee thereof shall be held liable for the pecuniary responsibility or solvency of any insurer issuing a policy required under the provisions of this section nor in any manner become liable on account of any claim, act or omission relating to the insured vehicle or the procuring of any policy of insurance in satisfaction of the requirements thereof, or for any misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in the carrying out of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Secs. 114-6—114-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COMMERCIAL PASSENGER VEHICLE LICENSES AND VEHICLE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 114-20. - Required licenses and permits. 
(a)  The owner of any commercial passenger vehicle which loads passengers within the city must apply for and receive a license duly issued by the transit department under the provisions of this article before any vehicle may be operated for hire within the city. A separate license must be obtained for each type of commercial passenger vehicle operated for hire. 
(b)  In addition to the commercial passenger vehicle license, the owner must apply for and receive a vehicle permit for each vehicle proposed to be operated. Commercial passenger vehicles must be registered in the state of Texas under the name of the license applicant and must have a valid registration throughout the duration of the license. Licensee must have a valid Texas driver's license. 
(c)  Applications for a commercial passenger vehicle licenses shall be filed with the office of the transit department on application forms provided for that purpose. The transit director shall promulgate separate license application forms for each type of commercial passenger vehicle regulated by this chapter. An application form for a pedicab, and/or a transit vehicle license shall contain, in addition to any other information required by the transit director, a description of all vehicles to be operated, and identification of all drivers, routes, fares, and stops proposed. 
(d)  A commercial passenger vehicle license or vehicle permit issued under the provisions of this article must be renewed annually on a calendar year basis. A renewal application must be submitted, on or before the first day of December of each year, and all fees due must be paid no later than the last day of December of that year. 
(e)  A commercial passenger vehicle license or vehicle permit issued under the provisions of this article shall not be transferable or assignable. Notwithstanding the foregoing prohibition, a commercial passenger vehicle operation permit for a taxicab shall be transferable or assignable to a member of the licensee's immediate family in the event of the incapacitation or death of licensee. Application to transfer licenses and vehicle permits must be made within 45 days of the incapacitation or death of licensee. 
(f)  A commercial passenger vehicle license or vehicle permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article may be issued only to a United States citizen, a registered resident alien or a corporation incorporated within the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-21. - Fees. 
(a)  An applicant for a commercial passenger vehicle license or vehicle permit shall pay, at the time of submission of each initial or renewal application, the following fees: 
(1)  Taxicab, pedicab, limousine, and similar vehicles: $100.00 for license plus $50.00 for each vehicle permit. 
(2)  Transit vehicles: $500.00 for license plus $100.00 for each vehicle permit. 
(3)  Replacement vehicle permit $10.00. 
(4)  Vehicle re-inspection fee $10.00. 
(b)  Fees for optional services: 
(1)  McAllen International Airport and Central Station Concessionaire Agreement. 
(2)  Transit vehicle lease agreement fee. 
(c)  In no event shall there be a refund of a fee paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Permits issued under this chapter shall expire on the last day of December of the calendar year it is issued. Permits not renewed on or before December 31 shall be subject to a $25.00 late fee. 
(e)  Transportation network companies shall pay a per trip fee, as set by the city, for each trip originating at the McAllen International Airport, to be paid on a monthly basis within 30 days after the close of each calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-22. - Duty to update. 
It shall be the duty of every licensee to notify, in writing, the office of the transit director of any change in the information provided upon the most recent application or renewal application for each license or vehicle permit affected by the change. Notice shall be provided within seven calendar days from the date of the change. Notice of the provisions of this section shall be conspicuously printed on each application for a license or vehicle permit controlled by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-23. - Posting of permit in vehicle. 
The vehicle permit issued for the operation of any commercial passenger vehicle issued under this chapter shall be posted in the vehicle for which it was issued and shall be positioned on the right side of the vehicle on or above the windshield or on the dashboard of the vehicle above the glove compartment or its equivalent. Pedicab vehicle permits shall be posted as directed by the transit director. No commercial passenger vehicle permitted under this chapter shall be operated for compensation within the city unless the vehicle permit is so posted. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-24. - Replacement of vehicle. 
(a)  In the event a commercial passenger vehicle for which a permit is issued under this chapter is sold, wrecked, destroyed, or otherwise taken out of service by its owner, the owner thereof shall have the right to replace such vehicle which meets all the requirements of this chapter. Upon written application to the transit director and surrender of the permit of the vehicle to be replaced, a permit for the replacement vehicle shall be issued for the remainder of the year 
(b)  No replacement commercial passenger vehicle for hire shall be issued a vehicle permit until all marks identifying the vehicle as a commercial passenger vehicle have been removed from vehicle being taken out of service. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-25. - Replacement license or vehicle permit. 
If a license or vehicle permit issued pursuant to this article shall be lost, stolen or damaged to the extent that it is unreadable, a replacement license or vehicle permit must be obtained from the office of the transit director before further operation of the vehicle. A replacement license or vehicle permit shall be issued by the office of the transit director upon written notice of such loss, theft or damage, and payment of a $10.00 replacement fee. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-26. - Penalties, enforcement, revocation and suspension. 
(a)  Any license, operator's permit or vehicle permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the transit director, after notice and hearing except when otherwise provided in this chapter, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation by any licensee or operator of, any provision of this chapter. 
(2)  Violation by any licensee or operator of, any other ordinance of this city, or any law of this state or the United States, concerning the regulation of motor vehicles of the type regulated by this chapter. 
(3)  Violation by any licensee or operator of, any applicable law governing the conduct of the owner's commercial passenger vehicle business, including zoning and land use regulations. 
(4)  Licensee fails to ensure that all operators employed by or operating under the license are listed and covered under the liability insurance policy. 
(5)  Licensee allows a driver who does not possess a valid operator's permit to operate a commercial passenger vehicle. 
(6)  Licensee allows a commercial passenger vehicle to be operated without proper insurance. 
(b)  The penalties provided in this chapter for violation or failure to comply with this chapter may be enforced not only against the person/entity committing the violation, but also: 
(1)  As to noncomplying commercial passenger vehicle, against the owner, licensee or operator of such noncomplying commercial passenger vehicle. 
(2)  As to a noncomplying operator, against the owner or licensee under whom such noncomplying operator operates. 
(c)  Suspensions of a license or permit shall not affect the expiration date of such license or permit. 
(d)  Upon revocation of a license or permit, the holder shall be ineligible for a new license and or permit for a period of two years. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-27. - Limitation on number. 
(a)  The number of taxicabs licensed to operate in the city shall be limited a number equal to one per 2,000 in population for the City. It is further provided that in no event shall a vehicle permit be issued where such permit will constitute greater than 40 percent of the outstanding permits to be held by any single person, spousal pair, or entity. 
(b)  The number of transit vehicle permits in the city shall be limited to a number equal to one per 5,000 in population for the city. 
(c)  The number of pedicab permits in the city shall be limited to a number equal to one per 10,000 in population for the city. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, the city population calculation shall be based on the most recently available census data, including estimates. 
(e)  All new commercial passenger vehicle permits will be made available based on a lottery to be conducted by the city or a request for proposal at the discretion of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-28. - Vehicle permits to be revoked if not used. 
The transit director may revoke the commercial passenger vehicle permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or any taxicab not used or operated as a taxicab for at least 45 days in any 90-day period for which records of such use are required to be kept pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-29. - Stands on streets and sidewalks prohibited. 
(a)  The use of any street, alley, sidewalk, public thoroughfare or public property, unless specifically designated for such use by the city commission, wherever situated within the city as a taxicab or pedicab stand or as a place of business for owners or operators of the vehicles to receive calls for service, or from which to dispatch the vehicles, or as a place to assemble or habitually park the vehicles when awaiting calls for service, is prohibited. 
(b)  The city manager or designee may establish taxicab or pedicab stands under such terms and conditions as it deems necessary for the public welfare and good. 
(c)  No pedicab shall stand or park on any public roadway, sidewalk, or walkway for longer than is necessary to load or unload passengers. All loading and unloading of passengers from a roadway must be from a curb lane. Queuing areas for pedicabs shall be designated by the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Secs. 114-30—114-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATOR PERMIT AND CONDUCT. 
 
Sec. 114-50. - Operator permit required. 
(a)  No commercial passenger vehicle regulated under this chapter shall be operated by any person other than a person holding a valid operator permit for the type of vehicle to be operated. Said permit shall be prominently and conspicuously displayed in the vehicle within view of the passenger. 
(b)  Application for a commercial passenger vehicle operator permit shall be filed with the office of the transit director and include the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, present address, date and place of birth, citizenship, state driver's license or state commercial vehicle operator's license, and if not a United States citizen, valid resident alien registration number. 
(2)  The applicant's place(s) of residence for the 12 months immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(3)  The nature and place of applicant's employment for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application, and the reason for leaving such employment, if applicable. 
(4)  A statement of whether the applicant has been convicted, ever, of any violation of a motor vehicle and/or traffic law within five years of the date of application, or of any non-traffic violation of any state or of the United States, without regard to time period, unless such records are sealed; and if so, as to each conviction, the applicant shall identify the nature, date, and place of the offense; the date, cause number, court, and final disposition of the conviction; and the sentence received. 
(5)  Two recent photographs depicting good likenesses of the applicant, one front view and one side view. 
(6)  A written authorization to receive or documentation pertaining to applicants driving, criminal, medical, judicial, and any other background information related to the applicant's fitness to operate a motor vehicle including fingerprint or database searches. 
(7)  The name, local address, and local telephone number of the licensee under which the applicant is to be employed (if other than the applicant). 
(8)  Provide a certificate, executed by a licensed and practicing physician in the State of Texas, showing that the applicant is not afflicted with any physical or mental disease or disability which would impair his or her ability to drive and to operate a vehicle for hire in a safe manner and such certificate shall state specifically the condition of the applicant's hearing and eyesight including, without limitation, color perception. Any false information submitted shall be the basis for denial or revocation of a permit. 
(9)  Evidence of payment of any outstanding traffic or parking fine with the city. 
(10)  Provide a motor vehicle report for applicant 
(c)  A commercial passenger vehicle operator's permit issued under the provisions of this article may be renewed annually on a calendar year basis. A new application, updating the information previously provided, and new photographs, must be submitted on or before the first day of December of each year, 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-51. - Testing of applicant by transit director. 
(a)  Each applicant must complete a written assessment of his knowledge and understanding of the ordinances of the city, including the provisions of this chapter, and of the streets and thoroughfares of the city necessary to operate a commercial passenger vehicle safely and with regard to the interests of the public welfare. Applicant must correctly answer 70% of questions to qualify for operator's permit. 
(b)  Operator permit holders must complete and pass the written assessment described hereinabove every three years. 
(c)  Failure to submit to testing or failing the test will result in immediate suspension or denial of the operator's permit until the operator passes the test. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-52. - No operator permit or license to be issued to certain persons. 
(a)  No commercial passenger vehicle operator permit or renewal thereof may be issued to: 
(1)  Any person who fails to provide all of the information required by subsections 114-20 and 114-50. 
(2)  Or who fails to update such information as required by subsection 114-24, or who provides false information in order to obtain a license or renewal thereof. 
(3)  Any person who has been convicted of three or more moving traffic violations or three or more convictions and or findings of liability under this chapter within the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of the application or renewal application. 
(4)  Any person who has been convicted, within the seven years immediately preceding the date of application or renewal application, of any felony or any a Class B misdemeanor or higher in which a motor vehicle was used, 
(5)  Any person that is unable to read and speak the English language. 
(6)  Any person registered in the National Sex Offender Registry database. 
(b)  The occurrence of any of the above-listed conditions after a permit has been issued or renewed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be grounds for revocation 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-53. - Fees. 
(a)  An applicant for an operator's permit shall pay, at the time of submission of each initial or renewal application, a fee of $25.00. 
(b)  If a current operator permit holder transfers employers, an updated permit shall be issued at a fee of $10.00. 
(c)  Replacement operator permit fee shall be $10.00. 
(d)  The fee for any operator's permit applied for on or after the first day of April of each year shall be prorated for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-54. - Conduct of operators of commercial passenger vehicles. 
(a)  Every operator of a commercial passenger vehicle to whom a license has been issued pursuant to the terms of this article shall, while operating any commercial passenger vehicle, keep himself or herself clean in person and dress. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any commercial passenger vehicle operator to consume any alcoholic beverage or to use non-prescribed controlled substances while in the performance of his or her duties or to be under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances that affect one's ability to drive, whether during the actual transportation of passengers or while waiting to transport passengers, during the period of the commencement of duties until the final termination of duties for any working day. 
(c)  An operator shall report all traffic accidents they are involved in while operating any motor vehicle and all citations issued to them while operating any motor vehicle to the transit director, in writing, no later than seven calendar days following the date of accident or issuance of citation. 
(d)  No operator of any commercial passenger vehicle for hire shall operate any vehicle for hire for more than 12 hours in a 24-hour period without an eight hour rest period. 
(e)  No operator or licensee of any commercial passenger vehicle for hire shall employ abusive language in conversation with customers or other drivers. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-55. - Operator list. 
Each licensee shall provide to the transit director or designee, at the time of an initial or renewal application, a list of all operators. Such list shall be kept current at all times by the licensee whom shall inform the transit director in writing of any new driver or any driver who no longer is employed by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-56. - Heating, cooling, ventilation system. 
It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the commercial passenger vehicle is operated for the comfort of the passengers and that the vehicle's heating, cooling and ventilation system is in operation at all times while passenger(s) are present in the vehicle and is functioning in accordance with the passenger(s) reasonable request. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-57. - Accepting credit card payments. 
Each taxicab license holder must accept cash, debit card or credit card payments. In no event shall a surcharge or a minimum fee be required when accepting credit card payments. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-58. - Property left in commercial passenger vehicles. 
Operator shall return to the property owner any luggage, merchandise, or other property left in a commercial passenger vehicle for hire. If the owner of such property is unknown, the driver shall immediately deliver to the licensee any property left in the vehicle with a complete written report as to when it was left in the vehicle and any other relevant circumstances. The licensee shall tag the property so delivered and attach to it a copy of the driver's written report and, if property owner is not located licensee shall turn the property over to the McAllen Police Department no later than 45 days after its discovery in the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-59. - Commercial passenger vehicle clean up fee. 
In the event that a passenger soils the interior of a commercial passenger vehicle, a clean-up fee not to exceed $150.00 may be added to the trip fare. Notice shall be conspicuously posted in a commercial passenger vehicle by the licensee of such applicable fees. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-60. - Refusal to convey passengers. 
While operating a commercial passenger vehicle, an operator shall not refuse to convey a person who requests the service unless: 
(1)  The person is disorderly; 
(2)  The operator has reason to believe the person is engaged in unlawful conduct; 
(3)  The operator is in fear of the operator's personal safety; or 
(4)  The person cannot present proof of ability to pay the fare; 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-61. - Smoking of tobacco products in vehicle, at taxicab stands, and transit stops. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator or passenger of any commercial passenger vehicle to smoke, including e-cigarettes, while inside a commercial passenger vehicle or for any person to smoke while at a taxicab stand or bus stop. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-62. - Leaving a commercial passenger vehicle unattended. 
No operator shall leave their commercial passenger vehicle unattended for any purpose except in emergencies, while waiting on public property, taxicab stands, transit stops, bus stops, or on any other public right-of-way. This section does not prohibit an operator from assisting passengers in loading and unloading. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-63. - Moving violations. 
A violation of any local, state or federal traffic law, including, but not limited to, rules of the road, moving violations, Chapter 102 of the McAllen Code of Ordinances and the Texas Transportation Code, is considered a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-64—114-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INSPECTION OF VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 114-80. - Mechanical and safety inspection required. 
(a)  Commercial passenger vehicles shall be inspected before being placed into service and semi-annually. The transit director may designate a date or dates semi-annually for the purpose of inspecting all commercial passenger vehicles. All taxicabs and pedicabs shall report at the designated time and place for the inspection of the vehicles or have the vehicle's permit suspended or revoked. The traffic safety coordinator shall promulgate rules as it relates to the inspection times, places and procedures, including rules as it relates to rotation of the taxicabs at the airport and City of McAllen E1 Centro Bus Terminal facilities. 
(b)  Certification of a successful inspection issued by a state-approved mechanic at a state-authorized inspection station shall be filed with the office of the traffic safety coordinator for each licensed vehicle in accordance with subsection (a) above. 
(c)  When any required inspection shall disclose a mechanical or safety condition which prevents the inspector from approving the vehicle, or when any commercial passenger vehicle is involved in an accident, the owner of such vehicle shall remove such vehicle from service until the condition is corrected and the vehicle is successfully reinspected and a certificate of inspection issued. The transit director may suspend the vehicle permit during any period of noncompliance in this section. 
(d)  In addition to any requirement established by the transit director or their designee, each pedicab operated pursuant to this chapter must be equipped with the following: 
(1)  A headlight; 
(2)  Two taillights; 
(3)  Turn signals; 
(4)  Rear and side reflective devices; 
(5)  A braking system; 
(6)  A horn; 
(7)  A rearview mirror; 
(8)  A safety flag; and 
(9)  A slow moving vehicle emblem; 
(10)  Floorboards with non-skid contact surfaces and without holes. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-81. - Maintenance of vehicles for occupancy by the public. 
(a)  In addition to the mechanical and safety inspection required for each permitted commercial passenger vehicle by a mechanic approved by the transit director or designee, the transit director or designee shall inspect each such vehicle, to ensure that the vehicle is maintained in a condition fit for occupancy by the public as determined by an inspection checklist promulgated by the transit director. 
(b)  No vehicle which fails this inspection may be operated as a commercial passenger vehicle in the city until all defective conditions identified in such inspection shall be corrected and the vehicle re-inspected and approved. If a vehicle fails inspection, there will be a $10.00 fee assessed for each subsequent inspection of the vehicle. The transit director may suspend the vehicle permit during any period of noncompliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-82. - Current city inspection certificate required. 
All commercial passenger vehicles shall affix a current city inspection certificate from to the windshield.  
Sec. 114-83. - Age limit of commercial passenger vehicles. 
(a)  No licensee or operator shall drive or cause to be driven upon the streets of the city any commercial passenger vehicle over ten years of age, calculated as January 30 of the tenth year following the manufacturer's model year of the vehicle. 
(b)  Commercial passenger vehicles reaching ten years of age shall be replaced within 90 days.  
Secs. 114-84—114-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OPERATION OF TAXICABS, PEDICABS 
 
Sec. 114-100. - Identification. 
(a)  Every taxicab shall have painted on or otherwise affixed to each front door and to the rear of the taxicab thereof the name of the owner or the trade name under which the owner operates, together with the taxicab number and the owner's telephone number. All lettering for the foregoing shall be not less than two and one-half inches in height, and not less than five-sixteenths inch stroke in width. 
(b)  Every taxicab must at all times be equipped with a functioning domelight which shall be electrically connected to a functioning taximeter to indicate whether the taxicab is hired or is available for hire. The domelight shall be situated on the front exterior portion of the roof of each taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-101. - Taxicabs to be operated by holder of valid license only; pedicab area and hours of operation. 
(a)  The commercial vehicle operator's license of the person operating the taxicab shall at all times be displayed on the dashboard of the taxicab so that the same may be seen by a passenger in the taxicab and in pedicabs as directed by the transit director. The specific location for the placement of the operator's license within the taxicab shall be approved by the transit director. 
(b)  There are hereby established two zones for pedicab service: the North Zone, from Business 83 to Hackberry Avenue, and the South Zone, from Business 83 to Fresno Avenue, both from 17th Street to 11th Street. 
(c)  Pedicabs may operate only within the North and South Zones, and only along such routes as the city manager or designee shall allow. A map of the most current approved pedicab routes shall be maintained by the city manager or designee. No pedicab shall be operated before 3:00 p.m. or after 3:00 a.m. When the city manager or designee deems that he conditions so warrant, the hours, areas, and routes of service may be modified, upon 30 calendar days' written notice. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-102. - Use of most direct route and transferring of passengers. 
Every taxicab operator hired to transport a passenger to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will transport the passenger safely and expeditiously to the appointed destination. Operator shall not transfer passengers to any other vehicle during the duration of the trip except in case of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-103. - Passenger's exclusive right; transporting additional passengers. 
When a taxicab is engaged, the passenger shall have the exclusive right to the full and free use of the passenger area, and the owner or operator of any taxicab shall not solicit or transport additional passengers, except with the consent and approval of the first passenger. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-104. - Excessive number of passengers. 
No taxicab or pedicab shall transport at any one time more than the maximum number of passengers recommended by the vehicle manufacturer. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-105. - Records and reports required. 
(a)  Each holder of a taxicab or pedicab operations permit shall maintain, at a single location, all records of its operations. The following information is required to be kept by all such permittees: 
(1)  License and vehicle identification numbers of each vehicle operated. 
(2)  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of all operators employed or authorized to operate vehicles. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of licensee's liability insurance carrier(s), and copies of all policies currently in effect. 
(4)  All repair records for each vehicle used in the permitted operation, and records of all vehicle inspections required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-106. - Operator's daily manifest. 
(a)  The holder of each taxicab operations permit shall provide its operators with forms, approved by the transit director, for maintaining a daily manifest. The forms must include appropriate spaces for recording the following information: 
(1)  Taxicab number, operator's name, date, hours of operation, taximeter number, total miles driven, paid miles, units, trips and extras. 
(2)  Time, place and destination of each trip. 
(3)  Number of passengers and amounts of fare and other charges. 
(4)  Other information required by the transit director to aid in the discharge of his duties as required by this chapter. 
(b)  Each operator shall complete a manifest on a separate form for each shift. The operator shall provide the information required by the form and shall record the information required at the end of each trip. The operator shall return completed forms to the holder of the taxicab operations permit under which his taxicab is operated at the end of each shift. 
(c)  Failure to maintain manifests and/or produce same when requested shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-107. - Duty to provide services within city limits. 
A taxicab operation shall respond to each call received for service inside McAllen city limits that is accessible by public streets as soon as practicable. If the service cannot be provided without a reasonable time, the licensee or operator shall inform the caller of the reason for, and estimated time of, delay. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-108. - Taximeters required. 
(a)  No taxicab regulated by this chapter shall be operated for hire unless it is equipped with a taximeter approved by the office of the transit director. Such taximeter shall properly and accurately compute and register on its face the charge for distance traveled by, and the waiting time of, the taxicab in which it is installed. The taximeter shall be maintained in the "on" position when transporting any passenger within the city. 
(b)  All taximeters shall be installed at on the middle front dashboard in such a manner that the face thereof and the numeral thereon may be easily seen and read by a passenger sitting in any part of the taxicab. Between the hours of sunset and sunrise, the face of the taximeter shall be well illuminated. 
(c)  All taximeters shall be subject to inspection and testing from time to time as the transit director may deem necessary. 
(d)  Each taximeter must be equipped with a tamperproof switch and system of electrical distribution, so that when the taximeter flag is in the vacant or nonearning position a domelight on the top of the taxi will be well illuminated, and when the meter flag is in the "on" or earning position, the fare indicator on the taximeter will be lighted. Each taximeter must be driven directly from the taxicab transmission to the taximeter head, using a flexible shaft and flexible housing so connected and sealed as to be tamperproof. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-109. - Rates established. 
The following rates, fares and charges for taxicab or pedicab service are hereby established for services within the city, except for fares governed and superseded by any contract between commercial passenger vehicle owners and the airport: 
(1)  The minimum fare or flag drop shall be $5.00 to apply to the one-fifth mile or fraction thereof. 
(2)  Fifty cents for each additional one-fifth mile or fraction thereof. 
(3)  No charge shall be made for children under two years of age 
(4)  Two passengers with the same origin and destination may travel for a single fare. Each additional passenger with the same origin and destination shall pay a fare of $1.00. Passengers with different origins or destinations shall pay the single passenger fare. 
(5)  Twenty-five dollars per hour for waiting time, which charge must be recorded on the taximeter. 
(6)  The minimum fare originating from McAllen-Miller International Airport having a destination in the city limits shall be $7.00. Fares originating at the airport or at the City of McAllen Central Station with a destination outside the city limits will be established as per written agreement between the airport manager and the bus terminal manager and the taxicab company as otherwise provided in this chapter and shall be posed in the airport and bus terminal in a prominent area of the taxicabs. 
(7)  Each passenger shall be entitled to carry one piece of luggage, or four grocery bags, at no charge. Any additional luggage may be charged at the rate of $2.00 each, and each additional grocery bag shall be charged at the rate of 25 cents each. 
(8)  The fare for taxicab service originating in the corporate city limits of the city and extending outside the city limits of the city shall be by the applicable meter rate as established under subsection (1) and subsection (2), except as otherwise provided under subsection (6). Each taxicab shall have a posted sign, in English and Spanish, located in clear view of the passenger, on the back of the front passenger seat. It shall read as follows: 
ALL FARES TO DESTINATIONS WITHIN AND OUTSIDE THE CITY OF McALLEN SHALL BE AT THE METERED FARE RATE WHICH IS AS FOLLOWS: 
MINIMUM FARE IS $5.00 APPLIED TO THE FIRST ONE-FIFTH MILE OR FRACTION THEREOF 
FIFTY CENTS FOR EACH ADDITIONAL ONE-FIFTH MILE OR FRACTION THEREOF. 
GROUPS OF OVER TWO PASSENGERS, $1.00 FOR EACH ADDITIONAL PASSENGER. 
$25.00 FOR WAITING TIME. 
$7.00 MINIMUM FARE FROM THE AIRPORT TO ANY DESTINATION. 
A CLEAN UP FEE OF UP TO $150.00 MAY BE CHARGED FOR SOILING 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-110. - Refusal to convey at specified rate; excessive fares. 
No operator shall refuse to convey a passenger at the rates specified by this article and displayed in the taxicab or demand or receive an amount in excess of such rates. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-111. - Receipt for payment. 
No operator of a taxicab or pedicab, upon receiving full payment of a fare, shall refuse to give a receipt for the date and amount of payment upon the request of the passenger making such payment. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Secs. 114-112—114-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OPERATION OF TRANSIT VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 114-130. - Transit vehicle specifications. 
Every commercial passenger vehicle operated as a transit vehicle pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall have a minimum rated passenger capacity of eight and maximum rated passenger capacity of 14, excluding the operator, with provisions for safe seating for adult passengers, and shall meet the following additional specifications: 
(1)  The vehicle shall comply with all United States Department of Transportation Motor Vehicle Safety Standards and comply with all federal and state motor vehicle pollution requirements if applicable. 
(2)  All seating will be facing the front of the vehicle unless the original equipment provided otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-131. - Identification. 
Every transit vehicle regulated by this chapter shall have painted on or otherwise affixed to both sides and the rear of the vehicle the name of the owner, or the trade name under which the owner operates, and the transit vehicle number. All lettering in satisfaction of the requirements of this section shall be not less than six inches in height and not less than one-half-inch stroke. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-132. - Designated stops and idling. 
(a)  No transit vehicle shall make stops except for those previously designated and approved by the transit director. 
(b)  No transit vehicle may idle or remain stopped for more than 15 consecutive minutes. Air conditioning or heating must be on during any idling period. 
(c)  All stops authorized by the issuance of a transit vehicle operations permit or an amendment thereto shall be marked by a posted sign indicating that a transit vehicle stops at the marked location. Such signs shall be designed and installed by the office of the transit director. The cost of such signs and installation thereof shall be reimbursed to the city by the transit vehicle operations licensee for which the stop is so marked. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-133. - Amendments to transit vehicle operations permit. 
Any change in the number of vehicles, routes, fares or stops by a transit vehicle operations permittee may be made only after approval of an amendment of such permit. Request for such amendment shall thereafter be placed on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the city commission meeting in compliance with the Texas Open Meeting Act. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-134. - Rates established. 
The following rates, fares and charges for transit vehicle service shall be as follows: 
(1)  Five dollar maximum fare per person to the McAllen-Hidalgo International Bridge. 
(2)  Four dollar maximum fare per person to Hidalgo, Texas. 
(3)  Each passenger shall be entitled to carry one piece of luggage, or four grocery bags, at no charge. Any additional luggage may be charged at the rate of $2.00 each, and each additional grocery bag shall be charged at the rate of 25 cents each. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20)  
Sec. 114-135. - Records and reports required. 
(a)  Each holder of a transit vehicle operations permit shall maintain all records of its operations at a single location. The following information is required to be kept by all such permittees: 
(1)  License and vehicle identification numbers of each vehicle operated. 
(2)  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of all operators employed or authorized to operate vehicles. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of permittee's liability insurance carrier(s) and copies of all policies currently in effect. 
(4)  All repair records for each vehicle used in the permitted operation, and records of all vehicle inspections required by this chapter. 
(5)  Any other records or reports which may be required by the transit director after approval by the city manager. 
(b)  Each transit vehicle operations permittee shall submit an annual report to the transit director of the receipts, expenses, and number of passengers carried during the year reported for each transit vehicle operated under the permit, as well as any other information the permittee deems necessary for a complete report of the condition of the permitted operation. Such report shall be submitted to the transit director no later than 30 days after the close of permittee's business year. 
(c)  All records and reports and such other data required to be maintained under the provisions of this chapter shall be preserved by the person required to keep such records for a period of two years from the date such record or report is required to be submitted, or is not required to be submitted, from the date the record was made. 
(Ord. No. 2020-07, § I, 2-10-20) 

Subpart B - LAND USE REGULATIONS AND RELATED ACTIVITIES 
Chapter 118 - FLOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 118-1-118-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 118-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the base flood. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X or D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zones V1-30, VE or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of elevated building, even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include longterm storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Habitable floor means any floor usable for the following purposes, which include working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used for storage purposes only is not a habitable floor. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
a.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or before the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community. 
    Start of construction, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure onsite, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any register of historic places or state inventory of historic places. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements, see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 1966, § 8-50; Ord. No. 2017-14, § I, 3-27-17) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 118-27. - Application of article; basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of McAllen," dated December 15, 1980, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 8-51) 
Sec. 118-28. - Compliance with article; abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(a)  No structure or land shall be located, altered or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(b)  This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1966, § 8-52(b), (c)) 
Sec. 118-29. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the board of commissioners; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1966, § 8-52(d)) 
Sec. 118-30. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur, and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1966, § 8-52(e)) 
Secs. 118-31-118-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 118-41. - Floodplain administrator-Designated. 
    The city engineer is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Code 1966, § 8-53) 
Sec. 118-42. - Same-Duties and responsibilities. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the state water development board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 118-27, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from federal, state or other sources, in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(Code 1966, § 8-54) 
Sec. 118-43. - Development permit-Required. 
    A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 8-52(a)) 
Sec. 118-44. - Same-Application. 
    Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by the administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures. 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed. 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 118-57(2). 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 118-42(1). 
(Code 1966, § 8-55(a)) 
Sec. 118-45. - Same-Approval or denial. 
    Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental service during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems. 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable. 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan of that area. 
(Code 1966, § 8-55(b)) 
Sec. 118-46. - Variance procedures; appeals. 
(a)  The building board of adjustments and appeals (the "appeal board"), as established by the board of commissioners, shall hear and render judgement on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgement on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided the relevant factors in sections 118-44 and 118-45 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon the showing of a good and sufficient cause; a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(j)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) of this section are met, and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Code 1966, § 8-56) 
Secs. 118-47-118-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 118-56. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1966, § 8-57) 
Sec. 118-57. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in section 118-27, 118-42(8) or 118-58(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section 118-44(3), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  All manufactured homes placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles - Recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of section 118-44, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Code 1966, § 8-58; Ord. No. 2017-14, § II, 3-27-17) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, ch. 122. 
Sec. 118-58. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with this article. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet the development permit requirements of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 118-27 or 118-42(8). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Code 1966, § 8-59) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 134. 
Sec. 118-59. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 118-27 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 118-44(1), are satisfied. 
(4)  Require, within zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Code 1966, § 8-60) 
Sec. 118-60. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    The penalty upon conviction for a violation of this article shall be as prescribed in section 1-14. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city commission from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § III, 3-27-17) 
Subpart B - LAND USE REGULATIONS AND RELATED ACTIVITIES 
Chapter 120 - WATERSHED 
ARTICLE I. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - INTRODUCTION 

Sec. 120-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this local chapter is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to the environment and promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in the City of McAllen. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a stormwater management permit. 
    Authorized enforcement agency means employees or designees of the director of the municipal agency designated to enforce this article. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area. 
    Clean Water Act means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Clearing means any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover. 
    Construction activity means activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Developer means a person who undertakes land disturbance activities. 
    Drainage easement means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes. 
    Drainage way means any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site. 
    Erosion control means measures that prevent erosion. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan means a set of plans prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used controlling sediment and erosion on a development site before, during, and after construction. A plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities. 
    Grading means excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
    Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illegal discharge means any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm drainage system, except as exempted in section 120-66 of article II. 
    Illicit connections means an illicit connection defined as either of the following: any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drainage system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drainage system and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency, or any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drainage system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
    Land disturbance activity means any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse. 
    Land disturbance permit means a permit issued by the municipality for the construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff, and grading. 
    Landowner means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
    Maintenance agreement means a legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
    Municipal separate storm system (MS4) means a city owned infrastructure that includes ditches, pipes, curb and gutter, and inlets that collect and transport stormwater runoff into Waters of the State. 
    NPDES stormwater discharge permit, (National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System) means a permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Nonpoint source pollution means pollutants from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
    Perimeter control means a barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site either by filtering sediment-laden runoff, or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin. 
    Person means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    Phasing means clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next. 
    Pollutants means anything which causes or contributed to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Qualified person means a person with knowledge of the principles and practice of erosion and sediment control and pollution prevention with the ability to assess conditions at a construction site that could impact stormwater runoff quality and capacity to assess the effectiveness of storm water controls chosen and implemented and recognize how the meet permit requirements. 
    Redevelopment means any construction, alteration, or improvement that changes the amount of impervious cover that may result in an increase in stormwater runoff rates and volumes. 
    Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing, into the municipal separate storm sewer system or watercourse. 
    Sediment control means measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
    Site means a parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
    Stabilization means the use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
    Standard design guide means the City of McAllen Standard Design Guide for Public Infrastructure Improvements, current edition. 
    Start of construction means the first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading and filing; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; such as garages. 
    Stop work order means an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
    Storm drainage system means public-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater management means the use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, peak flow discharge rates and detrimental changes in stream temperature that affect water quality and habitat. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify source of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. The stormwater pollution prevention plan is a site specific, written document that identifies potential sources of stormwater pollution at the construction site, describes practices to reduce pollutants in stormwater discharge from the construction site, and identifies procedures that the operator will implement to comply with the terms and conditions of a construction general permit. 
    Stormwater runoff means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
    Watercourse means any body of water, including, but not limited to drain ditches, channels, waterways, and bodies of water which are delineated by the City of McAllen. A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water. 
    Waterway means a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse, or to the public storm drain. 
    Yard waste means any leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that results from landscaping, maintenance, and land clearing operations. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Secs. 120-3-120-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LAND DISTURBANCE 

Sec. 120-111. - Land disturbance permit application requirements. 
(a)  A permit application is required for any land disturbance activity except for: 
(1)  Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural resources. 
(2)  Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use. 
(3)  And as modified by the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) General Permit No. TXR040000. 
(b)  Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee. 
(c)  Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan, and that a qualified person shall be on site on all days where construction or grading activity takes place. 
(d)  For any land-disturbing activity less than an one acre, 43,560 square feet, operator of site must implement best management practices to mitigate potential stormwater pollution. 
(e)  Any land-disturbing activity greater than one acre which would require the uncovering of 43,560 or more square feet (one acre), the application shall include a stormwater pollution prevention plan to be reviewed and approved by the engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-112. - Review and approval. 
(a)  The City of McAllen Engineering Department will review each application to determine its conformance with the provisions of this local chapter. The engineering department shall, in writing: 
(1)  Approve the permit application; 
(2)  Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or 
(3)  Disapprove the permit application. 
(b)  Major amendments to the SWPPP after permit has been issued shall be submitted to the engineering department and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as the original plans. 
(c)  Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the engineering department by written authorization to the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Secs. 120-113-120-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN 

Sec. 120-121. - Plan requirements. 
    The SWPPP shall be done in accordance to requirements as specified in the design criteria set forth in the most recent version of the City of McAllen Standard Design Guide for Public Infrastructure Improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Secs. 120-122-120-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTION PROCEDURE 

Sec. 120-131. - Inspections. 
    The City of McAllen designated department(s) or designated agent shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permitee wherein the work fails to comply with the SWPPP as approved. In order to obtain inspections, the permitee shall contact the City of McAllen Engineering Department at least two working days before the following: 
(1)  Start of construction. 
(2)  Installation/stabilization of erosion and sediment control measures. 
(3)  Completion of final grading. 
(4)  Close of the construction/start of stabilization seeding. 
(5)  Final landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-132. - Inspection documentation. 
    The permitee or his/her agent shall make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection requirements in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-133. - Inspection review. 
    The City of McAllen Engineering Department or its designated agent shall have a right to enter the property of the applicant to make regular inspections to ensure permit compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Secs. 120-134-120-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 120-141. - Stop work order; revocation of permit. 
    In the event that any person holding a land disturbance permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit, or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site, so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the engineering department may suspend or revoke the site development permit. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-142. - Violation and penalties. 
    No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 for each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Secs. 120-143-120-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION 

Sec. 120-161. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of McAllen, through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law through the Clean Water Act. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit process. The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user; 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-162. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-163. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The engineering department shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the Director of the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-164. - Prohibition of illegal discharges. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. Such discharges may include litter, yard waste, animal waste, construction debris, grease, oil, paints, hazardous materials, and discharges from mobile car washing and commercial and industrial parking facilities. 
    The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drainage system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter: waterline flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, fire-fighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants, such discharges shall not violate Texas Surface Water Quailty Standards. 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test. 
(4)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES or TPDES Stormwater Discharge Permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-165. - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(a)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited. 
(b)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(c)  A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-166. - Prohibition of illicit discharges 
(a)  The engineering department may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person discharges in violation or reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the City of McAllen. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-167. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-168. - Applicability. 
    This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-169. - Access to facilities. 
(a)  The City of McAllen shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(b)  Facility operators shall allow city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES stormwater discharge permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(c)  The City of McAllen shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm water discharge. 
(d)  The city has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(e)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(f)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES stormwater discharge permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the city reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter. 
(g)  If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, it may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-170. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
    City of McAllen Engineering Department will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drainage system, or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural best management practices. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural best management practices to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Stormwater Discharge Permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These best management practices shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Stormwater Discharge Permit. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-171. - Watercourse protection. 
    Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-172. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drainage system, or water of the U.S. said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the City of McAllen Public Works Department, in writing, within one business day. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-173. - Notice of violation. 
    Any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of any violation of this article shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-17 and shall be required to bear the expense of any such corrective action. In addition, notification of violation will be forwarded to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality - Compliance and Enforcement Division for further compliance requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-174. - Compensatory action. 
    In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, ditch cleanup, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-175. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-176. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law and it is within the discretion of the City of McAllen to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Secs. 120-177-120-190. - Reserved.. 
ARTICLE III. - POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 

Sec. 120-191. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within the jurisdiction of the City of McAllen. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives. 
(1)  Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development to reduce flooding, erosion, siltation and maintain the integrity of the watershed; 
(2)  Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality; 
(3)  Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable; 
(4)  Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-192. - Applicability. 
    This article shall be applicable to all subdivision or site plan applications, including redevelopment projects, regardless of acreage, and subject to on-site stormwater requirements complying with the Standard Design Guide for Public Infrastructure Improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-193. - Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements. 
    This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Secs. 120-194-120-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN 

Sec. 120-211. - Plan approval requirements. 
(a)  A stormwater management plan is required for all developments or improvement projects, except for: 
(1)  Developments of less than five acres which are not part of a larger common plan of development; 
(2)  Agricultural activities not associated with a development; 
(3)  Maintenance, alteration, use, or improvement to an existing structure which does not significantly change or affect the water quality and hydrologic conditions of the surface water discharge; 
(4)  Maintenance activities undertaken by any municipal, state, or federal governmental agency; 
(5)  Stormwater management measures to be undertaken by the city on an outfall in a specific watershed, when the city engineer has determined that preparation of a stormwater management plan is not required. 
(b)  The stormwater management plan shall be in compliance with the Standard Design Guide for Public Infrastructure Improvements for detention requirements. 
(c)  No building permit shall be issued until a satisfactory final stormwater management plan has undergone a review and been approved by the engineering department after determining that the plan is consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-212. - Maintenance agreements. 
(a)  All stormwater management practices shall have an enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as designed. This agreement shall include any and all procedures to access and inspect the stormwater treatment practices, and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater treatment practice. In addition, a legally binding covenant specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater treatment practices shall be secured prior to issuance of any permits for land disturbance activities. 
(1)  Maintenance and repair plan the design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued function. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. The owner, developer, and/or authorized agent, or homeowner's association shall be responsible for management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished and practices to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(2)  Maintenance agreement(s) The applicant must execute an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management measure in accordance with the specifications of this chapter. 
(b)  The applicant or owner of the site shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the City of McAllen, or their contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this chapter. 
(c)  As part of the plan, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility. The plan shall also include periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-213. - Inspection of stormwater facilities. 
    All stormwater management facilities are subject to inspections by the City of McAllen to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include, but not limited to: removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by the City of McAllen to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility. 
    Inspection programs may be established on a reasonable basis, including but not limited to routine inspections, random inspections, inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations, inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants, inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the NPDES stormwater discharge permit, and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to reviewing maintenance and repair records, sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities, and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater treatment practices. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-214. - Right-of entry for inspection. 
    When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between private property and a public drainage control system, sanitary sewer or combined sewer, the property owner shall grant to the city the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this chapter is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 120-215. - Notice of violation. 
    Failure to comply with this chapter shall be subject to enforcement actions outlined in section 1-17 of the City of McAllen Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 1-28-19) 
Chapter 122 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; utilities, ch. 106; water wells, § 106-101 et seq.; emergency water conservation, § 106-116; flood hazard reduction standards for manufactured homes, § 118-57; conditional use requirements for mobile homes, § 138-118; zoning regulations for the R-4 mobile home and modular home district, § 138-221 et seq. 
State Law reference- Mobile homes and manufactured housing, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 122-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development of the area within the city and within the area surrounding the city and to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-2) 
Sec. 122-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means any person authorized by the licensee of a mobile home or recreational vehicle park to operate or maintain such park under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Building official means the legally designated inspection authority of the city, or his authorized representative. 
    City health director means the legally designated head of the city health department, or his authorized representative. 
    City official means the legally designated head of a city department, or his authorized representative, when acting in an official capacity. 
    Common access route means a private way which affords the principal means of access to individual mobile home or recreational vehicle lots or auxiliary buildings. 
    Driveway means a minor entranceway off the common access route within the mobile home park, into an offstreet parking area serving one or more mobile homes or recreational vehicle lots. 
    Fire chief means the legally designated chief of the fire department of the city, or his authorized representative. 
    Internal street means the same as common access route. 
    License means a written license issued by the city permitting a person to operate and maintain a mobile home or recreational vehicle park under the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued under this chapter. 
    Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home or recreational vehicle park under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Mobile home means a movable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed by a motor vehicle on its own chassis over state roads and highways under special permit, connected to utilities and designed without a permanent foundation, for yearround living. It may consist of one or more units that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional capacity, or of two or more units separately towable but designed to be joined into one integral unit. 
    Mobile home or recreational vehicle park means a unified development of mobile home or recreational vehicle spaces arranged on a tract of land under single person ownership, for the purpose of renting or leasing lots meeting all requirements of this chapter. 
    Parking space, offstreet means a minimum space nine feet in width by 18 feet in length, located within the boundaries of a mobile home or recreational vehicle space, or in a common parking or storage area having unobstructed access to an internal street. 
    Permit means a written permit or certification issued by the building official permitting the construction, alteration or extension of a mobile home or recreational vehicle park, under the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued under this chapter. 
    Plot plan means a graphic representation, drawn to scale, in a horizontal plane, delineating the outlines of the land included in the plan and all proposed use locations, accurately dimensioned, the dimensions also indicating the relation of each use to that adjoining and to the boundaries of the property. 
    Police chief means the legally designated chief of the police department of the city, or his authorized representative. 
    Recreational vehicle means any of the following: 
(1)  Travel trailer means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified as a travel trailer by the manufacture of the trailer and, when factory equipped for the road, it shall have a body width not exceeding eight feet and a body length not exceeding the state maximum. 
(2)  Pickup coach means a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation. 
(3)  Motor home means a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
(4)  Dependent trailer means a trailer which is dependent upon a service building for toilet and lavatory facilities. 
(5)  Self-contained trailer means a trailer which can operate independent of connections to sewer, water and electric systems. It contains a water-flushed toilet, lavatory, shower and kitchen sink, all of which are connected to water storage and sewage holding tanks located within the trailer. 
    Replacement means the act of moving one mobile home or recreational vehicle from its existing stand and replacing it with another mobile home or recreational vehicle. 
    Sanitary station means a facility used for removing and disposing of wastes from mobile home or recreational vehicle holding tanks. 
    Service building means a structure housing toilet, lavatory and such other facilities as may be required by this chapter. 
    Service sink means a slop sink with a flushing rim for the disposal of liquid wastes from mobile homes or recreational vehicles. 
    Sewer connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of a mobile home or recreational vehicle to the inlet of the corresponding sewer service riser pipe or the sewage system serving the mobile home or recreational vehicle park. 
    Sewer service riser pipe means that portion of a sewer service which extends vertically from the ground elevation and terminates at a mobile home or recreational vehicle space. 
    Site plan means the same as plot plan. 
    Space means a plot of ground within a mobile home or recreational vehicle park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home or recreational vehicle, together with such open space as is required by this chapter. This term shall also include the terms "lot," "stand" and "site." 
    Tax assessor-collector means the legally designated tax assessor-collector of the city, or his authorized representative. 
    Water connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within a mobile home or recreational vehicle. 
    Water riser pipe means that portion of the private water service system serving a mobile home or recreational vehicle park which extends vertically from the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at a mobile home or recreational vehicle space. 
    Watering station means a facility for supplying water storage tanks of mobile homes or recreational vehicles with potable water. 
    Zoning ordinance means the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-3) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 122-3. - Permitted location. 
(a)  The placement of a mobile home shall not be permitted except in an approved licensed mobile home or recreational vehicle park or subdivision or sales lot, or provided by an approved conditional use permit, or provided by a certificate of compliance for properties located within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(b)  The placement of a recreational vehicle for occupancy shall not be permitted except in an approved mobile home or recreational vehicle park or sales lot, or provided by an approved conditional use permit, or provided by a certificate of compliance for properties located within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-4(f), (g)) 
Sec. 122-4. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to mobile home parks, recreational vehicle parks and/or subdivisions in existence on May 13, 1974. This does not mean that mobile home park owners, operators or residents therein, and improvements thereon, are exempt from compliance with all other city ordinances. If any such existing mobile home park or recreational vehicle park is enlarged or extended, this chapter shall apply to such enlargement or extension. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13) 
Sec. 122-5. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
    Whenever the applicable standards and specifications in this chapter conflict with those contained in another ordinance, the most stringent or restrictive provision shall govern. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-9) 
Sec. 122-6. - Coordination with subdivision regulations. 
(a)  It is the intent of this chapter that the subdivision ordinance of the city be carried out simultaneously with the review of the mobile home and recreational vehicle park provisions. 
(b)  The plans required under this chapter must be submitted in a form which will satisfy the requirements of the subdivision control ordinance for the preliminary and final plans required under this chapter. 
(c)  Both this chapter and other sections of the subdivision control ordinance contain regulations which apply to such matters in the design of a planned development as streets and open spaces. In any planned development for which the provisions of the two are in conflict, the planning and zoning commission, with advice and recommendations from the city engineer or public works director or planner, shall make the decision as to which shall prevail. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-10) 
Sec. 122-7. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this chapter within the corporate limits of the city shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-11) 
Secs. 122-8-122-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 122-31. - Responsibilities of park management. 
(a)  The licensee or his agent shall observe all responsibilities set out elsewhere in this chapter. 
(b)  The licensee or his agent shall operate the mobile home or recreational vehicle park in compliance with this chapter and other applicable ordinances and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(c)  The licensee or his agent shall maintain a register of mobile home or recreational vehicle park occupancy which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of park residents. 
(2)  Mobile home and recreational vehicle registration data, including, make, length and width. 
(3)  Location of each mobile home and recreational vehicle within the park by space or lot number or street address. 
(d)  A map showing the location, size and depth of all utility, gas or other lines in the mobile home or recreational vehicle park shall be maintained on the premises for inspection and other purposes. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13M(1)) 
Sec. 122-32. - Responsibilities of park occupants. 
(a)  Occupants of a mobile home or recreational vehicle park shall observe all responsibilities set out elsewhere in this chapter. 
(b)  The mobile home park occupant shall comply with all requirements of this chapter and shall maintain his mobile home or recreational vehicle space, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the mobile home or recreational vehicle park occupant to anchor his mobile home or recreational vehicle in accordance with state law governing such anchoring. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13M(2)) 
Sec. 122-33. - Authority of city secretary. 
    The city secretary is hereby authorized to promulgate, or to have promulgated, and to file for public record and use, rules, regulations, standards and specifications for the construction, installation, design, location and arrangement of streets, curbs, streetlights, signs, alleys, utility easements, sidewalks, water supply and water distribution systems, fire hydrants, sewage disposal systems, septic tanks, water wells, monuments, criteria for drainage easement requirements, drainage facilities and crosswalk ways in mobile home and recreational vehicle parks, but all such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be subject to the approval of the board of commissioners. The city secretary may amend such rules, regulations, standards and specifications from time to time, provided that an amendment must be appropriately approved by the board of commissioners. No such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall conflict with this chapter or any other ordinance of the city. All improvements shall be constructed, installed, designed, located and arranged by the park owner or operator in accordance with such rules, regulations, standards and specifications. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-8) 
Sec. 122-34. - Entry on premises. 
    The building official, the city health director, the fire chief, the police chief and the tax assessor-collector shall have the power, after notification within 48 hours to the park owner or manager, to enter during regular business hours upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-6(b)) 
Sec. 122-35. - Inspections required. 
    The building official, the city health director, the fire chief, the police chief and the tax assessor-collector are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-6(a)) 
Sec. 122-36. - Occupants to permit access by licensee. 
    It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home or recreational vehicle park to give the licensee, his agent or authorized employee access to any part of such park occupied by him at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-6(c)) 
Sec. 122-37. - Notice of violations; requirements. 
    Whenever it is determined that there is a violation of any provision of this article, the city shall give notice of such alleged violation to the licensee or his agent, as provided in this section. Such notice of violation shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of the act it requires; 
(4)  Be served upon the licensee or his agent, provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such licensee or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by mail to his last known address, or when he has been served with such notice by any method authorized or required by the laws of this state; and 
(5)  Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-7(a)) 
Sec. 122-38. - Appeal from notice of violation. 
    Any person affected by any notice of violation, which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this article applicable to such park by the city, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of adjustment created in section 138-41; provided, that such person shall file within 15 days after the day the notice of violation was served, in offices of the city, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice of violation and of the suspension of a license as provided in section 122-77, except in the case of an order issued under section 122-40. Upon receipt of such petition, the city shall forward such petition to the board of adjustment to set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice of violation should be modified or withdrawn. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-7(c)) 
Cross reference- Board of adjustment, § 138-41 et seq. 
Sec. 122-39. - Hearing; order. 
    After a hearing under section 122-38 the city shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice of violation, which order shall be served as provided in section 122-37. Upon failure to comply with an order by the city sustaining or modifying a decision thereof, the occupancy permit and the license of the park affected by the order shall be revoked. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-7(d)) 
Sec. 122-40. - Order without notice. 
    Whenever the city finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, it may without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that action is taken as it may deem necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon written petition to the city shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of section 122-39 shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-7(e)) 
Secs. 122-41-122-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 122-51. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home or recreational vehicle park within the corporate limits of the city unless he holds a valid permit for such, issued by the building official in the name of such person. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-4(a)) 
Sec. 122-52. - Application. 
    All applications for permits under this article shall be made upon standard forms provided by the city and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant. 
(2)  Location and legal description of the mobile home or recreational vehicle park. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-4(b)) 
Sec. 122-53. - Site plan to accompany application. 
    Two copies of a site plan shall be attached to the application for a permit under this article. The site plan shall be at a minimum scale of one inch equals 200 feet for sites 30 acres or more and at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet for sites under 30 acres. The site plan shall include all data required under section 122-92. This site plan does not replace or supersede the subdivision plat of the property required by state law to be recorded in the county records of the county in which the property is located, after review and approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-4(b)) 
Sec. 122-54. - Permit fee. 
    All applications to the building official for a permit under this article shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.00. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-4(c)) 
Sec. 122-55. - Issuance of permit. 
    When, upon review of the application for a permit under this article, the building official is satisfied that the proposed plan meets the requirements of this article and other applicable ordinances, a permit shall be issued. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-4(d)) 
Sec. 122-56. - Denial of permit; hearing. 
    Any person whose application for a permit under this article has been denied may request a hearing on the matter under the procedure provided by section 122-57. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-4(e)) 
Sec. 122-57. - Appeal from denial of permit by building official. 
    Any person affected by the refusal of the building official to issue a permit under the provisions of this article as set out in section 122-56, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of adjustment, provided that such person shall file within 15 days after the day the permit was refused, in the office of the building official, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. Upon receipt of such petition, the building official shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such refusal should be modified or withdrawn. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-7(b)) 
Secs. 122-58-122-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE 

Sec. 122-71. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home or recreational vehicle park within the limits of the city unless he holds a valid license issued annually by the city secretary in the name of such person for the specific park. All applications shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the city secretary, who shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with the applicable provisions of this article. All mobile home and recreational vehicle parks must be licensed to operate. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-5(a)) 
Sec. 122-72. - Application for license. 
    Application for the original license required by this article shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application and by the deposit of the license fee provided for in this division, and shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location and legal description of the park. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-5(b)(1), (2)) 
Sec. 122-73. - Approval by fire chief as to fire safety requirements. 
    Before the original license required by this article is issued, the city shall obtain the approval of the fire chief on the firefighting appliances, water supply, accessways or other applicable conditions as meeting fire safety requirements. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-5(b)(3)) 
Sec. 122-74. - License fee. 
    All original license applications under this article shall be accompanied by a fee of $15.00. All applications for renewal of license shall be accompanied by a fee of $5.00. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-5(d)) 
Sec. 122-75. - Transfer of license; fee. 
    Applications for transfer of a license under this article shall be made within ten calendar days of such transfer and accompanied by a fee of $5.00. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-5(e)) 
Sec. 122-76. - Hearing granted applicants on denial of license. 
    Any person whose application for a license under this article has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the zoning board of adjustment under the procedure provided by section 122-57. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-5(c)) 
Sec. 122-77. - Violations, notice; suspension of license. 
    Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home or recreational vehicle park within the corporate limits of the city, the building official, after consultation with other city officials, finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any applicable provision of this chapter, he shall give notice in writing in accordance with the provisions of section 122-37 to the licensee or his agent. Unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time, the license shall be suspended. At the end of such period of time, the building official shall reinspect such park, requesting assistance from other city departments as may be required, and if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the licensee or his agent. Upon receipt of notice of such suspension, the licensee shall cease operation of such park, except in case of a stay of such suspension as provided in section 122-38. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-5(f)) 
Secs. 122-78-122-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 122-91. - Applicability. 
    Any mobile home or recreational vehicle park constructed after May 13, 1974, and any extensions or additions to an existing mobile home or recreational vehicle park in the city or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction thereof shall be done in compliance with the requirements in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13) 
Sec. 122-92. - Site plan. 
    The site plan for the mobile home and recreational vehicle park shall be filed as required in sections 122-52 and 122-53 and shall show the following data. This site plan does not replace or supersede the subdivision plat of the property required by state law to be recorded in the county records of the county in which the property is located, after review and approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
(1)  The area and dimensions of the tract of land, with identification of location and boundaries. 
(2)  The number, location and size of all mobile home or recreational vehicle spaces. 
(3)  The location, width and specifications of driveways, roadways and walkways. 
(4)  The location and specifications of water and sewer lines and riser pipes. 
(5)  The location and details of lighting, electrical, gas, telephone and TV cable. 
(6)  The location and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within the park. 
(7)  Existing and proposed topography of the mobile home or recreational vehicle park. 
(8)  The location of fire mains, including size, hydrants and any other equipment which may be provided. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13A) 
Sec. 122-93. - Location, space, setback and height requirements. 
    Minimum location, space, setback and height requirements for mobile home and recreational vehicle parks shall be as follows: 
Location Lot Size Setbacks Front Side Between 
Buildings Mobile homes: Minimum site of 5 acres in an R-4, mobile home and modular home district 1,500 square feet with mobile home occupying not more than 1/3 of the lot and density not to exceed 12 dwelling units per acre 10 feet from nearest corner of mobile home to the front line of the mobile home space or lot; 15 feet from ROW line adjoining public street 5 feet to lot line 10 feet Recreational vehicles: Park shall not exceed 25 spaces per acre in an R-4, mobile home and modular home district 5 feet from nearest corner of RV to front line of RV space; 15 feet from ROW line adjoining public property 4 feet to lot line  8 feet  
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13B) 
_____
Sec. 122-94. - Access, traffic circulation and parking generally. 
(a)  Internal streets shall be privately owned, built and maintained, and designed for safe and convenient access to all spaces and to facilities for common use of mobile home and recreational vehicle park residents. They shall be constructed of materials and in the method prescribed by the city. Internal streets shall be kept open and free of obstructions in order that police and fire vehicles may have access to any areas of the park. 
(b)  Internal street dimensions and parking requirements for a mobile home or recreational vehicle park shall be as follows: 
(1)  Internal streets or common access routes shall be provided to each mobile home or recreational vehicle space as follows: 
Minimum Width 
(feet) Onstreet Parking Permitted 2 Paved Cul-de-sac 
Diameter 1 
(feet) 20 No 65 24 1 side only 65 30 Both sides 65  
Notes: 
1. 
No internal street ending in a cul-de-sac shall exceed 600 feet in length. 
2. 
Where offstreet parking is provided, each space shall be hard-surfaced with all-weather material and located to eliminate interference with access to parking areas provided for other mobile homes or recreational vehicles and for public parking in the park. 
(2)  Internal streets shall permit unobstructed access to within at least 200 feet of any portion of each mobile home or recreational vehicle space. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13C) 
Sec. 122-95. - Street names and home numbers. 
    Within each mobile home or recreational vehicle park, all streets shall be named and mobile home or recreational vehicle lots numbered. All street name signs and home numbers shall be of reflective material. The street signs shall be of a color and size contrasting with those on public streets. Such signs shall be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13D) 
Sec. 122-96. - Interior streets. 
    Interior streets in a mobile home or recreational vehicle park shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately 90 degrees and at locations which will eliminate or minimize interference with traffic on those public streets. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13E) 
Sec. 122-97. - Recreation areas. 
    All mobile home or recreational vehicle parks shall have at least one recreation area. 
(1)  Extent. Recreation areas and facilities, such as playgrounds, swimming pools and community buildings, shall be provided which in the judgment of the park licensee or agent will meet the anticipated needs of the clientele which the park is designed to serve. Provision of separate adult and tot lot recreation areas is encouraged. 
(2)  Size of recreation area. Not less than five percent of the gross site area of the mobile home or recreational vehicle park shall be devoted to recreational facilities, generally provided in a central location. In large parks, this may be decentralized. Recreation areas include space for community buildings and community use facilities such as adult recreation and child play areas, swimming pools and drying yards, but not including vehicle parking areas. 
(3)  Playground space. When playground space is provided, it shall be so designated and shall be protected from traffic, thoroughfares and parking areas. Such space shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and free of safety hazards. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13F) 
Sec. 122-98. - Soil and ground cover. 
    Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home or recreational vehicle park shall be paved, covered with stone screening or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating dust. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13G) 
Sec. 122-99. - Drainage. 
    The ground surface in all parts of a mobile home or recreational vehicle park shall be equipped so that all public utilities and facilities are located and planned to minimize or eliminate flood damage and to ensure that the park is reasonably safe from flooding. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13H) 
Sec. 122-100. - Water installation. 
(a)  Water supply and distribution. All mobile home and recreational vehicle parks shall be provided with a water distribution system approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  Fire hydrants. Standard hydrants shall be installed in all mobile home and recreational vehicle parks as a part of the water distribution system per specifications of the city engineer and of the state board of insurance. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13I) 
Sec. 122-101. - Sewage disposal. 
    The following provisions shall apply to all mobile home and recreational vehicle parks: 
(1)  All mobile home or recreational vehicle parks shall be connected to an approved sewage collection and disposal system. 
(2)  Connection with the sanitary sewer system of the city shall be required except where the director of public works determines that a separate system may be used. If a separate sanitary sewer system is proposed, it must be approved in writing to the city by the state water quality board and the state health department prior to approval of the final plat by the planning and zoning commission and must be a system which has a waste control order. 
(3)  Septic tanks may be permitted in the extraterritorial jurisdiction in mobile home or recreational vehicle parks or subdivisions as part of a septic disposal system designed by a qualified professional engineer and approved by the state department of health. 
(4)  Individual sewer connections: 
a.  Each mobile home and recreational vehicle stand shall be provided with at least a four-inch diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the sewer connection to the mobile home or recreational vehicle drain outlet will approximate a vertical position. 
b.  The sewer connection to the mobile home or recreational vehicle from the sewer riser pipe and any other sewer connections shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of the city plumbing code. 
c.  All materials used for sewer connections shall be in accordance with the city plumbing code. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13J) 
Sec. 122-102. - Electrical and telephone, cable TV, and gas distribution systems. 
    The following provisions shall apply to all mobile home and recreational vehicle parks: 
(1)  General requirements. Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring fixtures, equipment and appurtenances which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations for such systems. 
(2)  Service entrance lines, individual electrical connections and grounding. Service entrance lines shall be located underground. Individual electrical connections and grounding of the mobile homes and recreational vehicles and equipment shall comply with the city electrical code. 
(3)  Telephone and cable TV systems. All telephone and cable TV distribution systems shall be underground and in accordance with applicable codes and regulations. 
(4)  Gas lines. All natural gas lines will be provided with a cutoff valve at each mobile home and recreational vehicle lot and a main cutoff valve in appropriate locations at the main line running through the park. 
(5)  Storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases and other flammable material. In parks where liquefied petroleum gases are stored and dispensed, their handling shall comply with the requirements of the city plumbing and fire codes and the state railroad commission. The same requirement will be required for the storage and handling of gasoline, fuel oil or other flammable liquids. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13K) 
Sec. 122-103. - Service buildings. 
(a)  A central service building containing the necessary toilet and other plumbing fixtures as specified in this section shall be provided in recreational vehicle parking areas which provide parking spaces for dependent recreational vehicles. Service buildings shall be conveniently located. 
Toilets Urinals Lavatories Showers  No. of 
Parking 
Spaces a Men Women Men Men Women Men Women Other 
Fixtures;sup\sup;  1-15 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 service sink with a flushing rim c 16-30 1 2 1 2 2 1 1 31-45 2 2 1 3 3 1 1 46-60 2 3 2 3 3 2 2 61-80 3 4 2 4 4 2 2 81-100 3 4 2 4 4 3 3  
    For parking areas having more than 100 recreational vehicle spaces there shall be provided one additional toilet and lavatory for each sex per each additional 30 recreational vehicle spaces; one additional shower for each sex per each additional 40 recreational vehicle spaces; and one additional men's urinal per each additional 100 recreational vehicle spaces. 
    Notes: 
a. 
Parking spaces for dependent recreational vehicles. 
b. 
Additional fixtures including laundry trays, clothes washing machines (one for every 30 sites) and an icemaking machine may be provided. 
c. 
A service sink with a flushing rim shall be provided for disposal of liquid wastes unless a sanitary station is conveniently accessible for this purpose. 
_____
(b)  Where a recreational vehicle parking area is designed for and exclusively limited to use by self-contained recreational vehicles, only the following minimum emergency sanitary facilities shall be required: For each 100 recreational vehicle spaces or fractional part thereof, there shall be one flush toilet and one lavatory for each sex. 
(c)  When a recreational vehicle parking area requiring a service building is operated in connection with a resort or other business establishment, the number of sanitary facilities for such business establishment shall be in excess of those required by the schedule for recreational vehicle spaces and shall be based on the total number of persons using such facilities. 
(d)  Exemptions. Any person desiring to furnish temporary facilities for accommodating a recreational vehicle rally, or other group of recreational vehicles assembled for the purpose of traveling together, shall make application for such activity to the health director. The requirements for a service building and other sanitary and physical facilities may be waived by the health director on the determination that public health will not be endangered; but the location of the site, the facilities which are provided, and the method of conducting such rally shall be acceptable to the health director before a special license shall be issued specifying the location of the site, the period of operation not to exceed ten days, and any conditions of issuance. 
(Code 1966, § 181/2-13L) 
Chapter 126 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; site plans required for conditional use permits, § 138-114. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 126-1-126-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 134; subdivisions shall conform with the comprehensive plan, § 134-102; zoning, ch. 138; site plan required in the R-3 multifamily residential districts, § 138-210; airport zoning regulations, app. A. 

Sec. 126-26. - Foresight McAllen adopted as growth management guide. 
(a)  The growth management guide for the city, entitled Foresight McAllen, attached hereto as exhibit "A" and incorporated herein for all purposes, is hereby adopted as the growth management guide to be used by the planning and zoning commission, planning department staff, the city engineer, utility engineer and other applicable boards and city departments of the city relating to the growth of the city. 
(b)  Foresight McAllen, as adopted herein, is a guide to be followed under circumstances relating to the city growth, including the passage of ordinances and administration thereunder, and as such, this guide should be followed to the greatest extent practicable under the then existing circumstances, in order to accomplish an orderly growth for the city. 
(c)  Foresight McAllen, as adopted herein, is intended solely as a guide; it being the intent hereunder to use Foresight McAllen as a guide to establish the policies required to be adopted by ordinance by the city commission, and as a tool to determine the intent under which such ordinances are passed, and as a guideline to the interpretation and enforcement of the various codes and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 231/2-16; Ord. No. 1998-21, §§ I-IV, 2-9-98; Ord. No. 2007-99, §§ I-III, 12-14-07; Ord. No. 2015-74, § I, 8-24-15) 
Editor's note- It should be noted that exhibit A is not set out at length herein but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city secretary. 
Chapter 130 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 130-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned sign means a sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product or activity, or for which no legal owner can be found. 
    Accessory sign means a sign that is incidental to the effective operation of the enterprise to which it pertains, and is not intended to serve as the primary identification of the premises and does not attract the attention of passersby for the purpose of advertising a product or service available therein. 
    Area of sign face means the entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the total sign message or display area of a sign, excluding supports and excluding border and trim, whose total square footage does not exceed 50 percent of the sign face area; the area of stacked and side-by-side signs shall be computed as the total of sign panels making up such a sign; for multiple-faced signs (back-to-back, triangular, columnar, V-type, etc.) only one sign face shall be counted in computing the actual sign area. 
    Back-to-back sign means a structure with two parallel and directly opposite signs with their faces oriented in opposite directions and spaced not more than ten feet apart. 
    Building frontage means the linear length of a building facing a public way or which contains a public entrance. 
    Changeable electronic variable message sign or CEVMS means an electric sign which permits light to be turned on or off intermittently or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including any illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, including an LED (light emitting diode) or digital sign, and which varies in intensity or color. A CEVMS sign does not include a sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the National Standard. 
    Clearance (of a sign) means the smallest vertical distance between the grade of the adjacent street or street curb and the lowest point of any sign, including framework and embellishments, extending over that grade. 
    Construction sign means a sign identifying the property owner, architect, contractor, engineer, landscape architect, decorator, mortgagee or others engaged in the design, construction or improvement of the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Directional/information sign means an on-premises sign giving directions, instructions or facility information and which may contain the name or logo of an establishment, not to exceed 20 percent of the sign face, but no advertising copy, e.g., parking or exit and entrance signs. A sign containing the word "parking" at any parking lot where any person is charged any fee or other monetary consideration for parking shall be considered an advertising sign, not a directional/informational sign. 
    Electric sign means any sign, display, or device containing electrical wiring or using electric energy, but does not include signs illuminated by an exterior light source. 
    Exempt political sign means a sign that contains primarily a political message, including a political issue or a political candidate sign, that is located on private real property with the consent of the real property owner, but not on real property subject to an easement or other encumbrance that allows the City of McAllen to use the property for a public purpose, and that (1) does not have an effective area greater than 36 square feet, (2) is not more than eight feet high, (3) is not illuminated, and (4) does not have any moving elements. 
    Freestanding sign means a sign supported upon the ground by poles or braces and attached to any building. Also referred to as "ground sign," "detached sign" or "pole sign." 
    Height (of a sign) means the vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign to the grade of the adjacent street or the surface grade beneath the sign, whichever is less (compare "clearance"). 
    Highway control zone means an area on either side of U.S. 83 Expressway which is within 600 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of such highway. 
    Identification sign means a sign for the purpose of identifying an apartment building, mobile home park, residential, commercial or industrial subdivision, that contains only the name of the development and address. 
    Institutional sign means a sign which identifies a school, church, hospital or similar publicly owned building. 
    Maintenance means the cleaning, painting, repair or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy, design or structure of the sign. 
    Off-premises sign means a sign structure advertising an establishment, merchandise, service or entertainment which is not sold, produced, manufactured or furnished at the premises on which such sign is located, e.g., billboards, outdoor advertising, or offsite sign. 
    On-premises sign means a sign which pertains to the legal use of the premises on which it is located. 
    Owner means a person recorded as such on official tax records. For the purposes of this chapter, the owner of property on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of the sign, unless facts to the contrary are officially recorded or otherwise brought to the attention of the building official. 
    Political issue sign means any sign, not including a permanent advertising sign structure, whose sole purpose is the transmittal of information concerning an upcoming referendum election. 
    Political candidate sign means any sign, not including a sign that is affixed to a permanent advertising sign structure, whose sole purpose is the transmittal of information concerning an upcoming political campaign for an elected office. 
    Portable sign means a movable sign that is not attached to a permanent support or building, or is designed to be temporary and mobile notwithstanding that the owner or user of such sign renders or modifies it to make it practically mobile. This definition includes signs attached to trailers, but does not include signs permanently placed on the sides of motor vehicles. 
    Premises means any lot, tract or parcel of land, whether or not under common ownership, including all buildings thereon and appurtenances thereto. 
    Right-of-way means any property interests dedicated for public use and owned or controlled by the City of McAllen. Right-of-way includes the property behind the street which is part of the dedicated street right-of-way or may be a dedicated utility easement. Right-of-way includes fee ownership of the City of McAllen. 
    Sign means any device, structure, fixture or placard using graphics, symbols and/or written copy designed specifically for the purpose of informing, advertising or identifying any establishment, product, goods or services. 
    Sign licensee means a person who is engaged in the manufacturing, renting, leasing, sales, erection, installation or servicing of signs and has met the licensing requirements of the city. 
    Street frontage means the length of the property line along the street right-of-way. The total length of the property line along a particular street would be considered one street frontage. A lot abutting upon two or more public streets at their intersection will be considered to have two or more frontages, but the same linear frontage may not be used to determine the permitted area of more than one sign. 
    V-type sign means a structure composed of two signs in the shape of the letter "V" when viewed from above, and with their faces oriented in opposite directions. 
    Wall/flat sign means a sign attached parallel to and extending not more than 12 inches from the wall of a building. This definition includes painted, individual letter and cabinet signs, and signs on a mansard. Also referred to as "fascia sign." 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-4; Ord. No. 2000-65, § I, 8-14-00; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 2004-15, § 1, 2-9-04; Ord. No. 2008-25, § 1, 4-14-08) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 130-2. - Title; administrative official; purpose. 
(a)  This chapter shall be known as the city sign ordinance. The city building official is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all the provisions of this chapter and shall have the right to enter any premises for inspection purposes during reasonable hours and after reasonable notice has been given in order to ensure the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  The purpose of this chapter shall be to coordinate the type, placement and physical dimensions of signs within the different land use zones; to recognize the commercial communication requirements of all sectors of the business community; to encourage the innovative use of design; to promote both renovation and proper maintenance; to allow for special circumstances; and to guarantee equal treatment under the law through accurate recordkeeping and consistent enforcement. This shall be accomplished by regulation of the display, erection, use and maintenance of signs. The use of signs is regulated according to the zone in which located. The placement and physical dimensions of signs are regulated primarily by type and length of street frontage. No sign shall be erected or maintained by any person except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-1) 
Sec. 130-3. - Scope. 
    This chapter is enacted to provide uniform standards for location, spacing, setbacks, lighting, and other regulations of signs in the City of McAllen. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of the general public and to protect the general public from injury that may be caused by unregulated construction of signs. It is the intent of these regulations as provided in this chapter to do the following: 
(1)  To enhance the economic value of the landscape by avoiding visual clutter which is potentially harmful to property values and business opportunities; 
(2)  To promote the safety of persons and property by providing that signs do not create a hazard, due to collapse, fire, collision, weather or decay; 
(3)  To protect the safety and efficiency of the city's transportation network by reducing the confusion and distraction of motorists and enhancing motorists ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, other vehicles and traffic signs; 
(4)  To enhance the impression that the city should convey to tourists and visitors; 
(5)  To protect adjacent and nearby properties from the impact of lighting, size, height, and location of signs; and 
(6)  To preserve, protect, and enhance areas of historical, architectural, scenic and aesthetic value, regardless of whether they be cultural, natural, or manmade. 
    This chapter is not intended to regulate building design, nor does this chapter regulate official traffic or governmental signs, the copy and message of signs, unless otherwise provided, signs not intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way, such as window displays, product dispensers or point of purchase displays, scoreboards on athletic fields, gravestones located in a cemetery. The requirements of this chapter, however, are in addition to any state law requirement relating to the placement of signs. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-2; Ord. No. 2001-14, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 130-4. - Compliance with regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place or maintain a sign in the city except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and all applicable codes. Any person occupying any premises on which a sign is located shall be subject to the same duties and responsibilities under this chapter as the owner of such premises. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-3) 
Sec. 130-5. - Extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
    The city shall, to the full extent allowed by law, exercise its regulatory jurisdiction and authority over outdoor signs, and shall enforce this chapter in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction as it presently exists or may hereafter be extended. The city has given notice to the state according to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.902. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-83; Ord. No. 2008-25, § 1, 4-14-08) 
Sec. 130-6. - Address signs. 
    In order to promote the efficient transfer of directional information and to enhance the efficiency of police and fire protection and other city services, all new residences and commercial and industrial buildings in the city shall be required to have address identification numerals. All owners of existing residences are encouraged to place address numerals in such a way that they are legible from the street in front of the residence. Owners of existing commercial and industrial establishments shall be required to place address numerals on the front of the premises in such a way that they are legible from the nearest street or driveway in front of the premises. Commercial and industrial establishments shall also have address numerals no less than four inches in height placed at the rear of the establishment. Address identification numerals shall not require sign licenses or permits. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-86) 
Sec. 130-7. - Removal of dangerous signs. 
(a)  Any sign which shall be in danger of falling or so dilapidated as to be a menace to public safety is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be ordered to be removed or repaired. 
(b)  The building official shall send written notice by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of a sign identified under subsection (a) of this section, informing such owner that the sign is dangerous and must be removed or repaired in such a way that it conforms with the requirements of this chapter for new signs. The notice shall state that the owner has ten days to remove or repair the sign. If the building official is unable to identify or locate the owner of the sign, then the notice shall be published three consecutive times in a local newspaper of the city. Such published notice shall identify the sign involved by stating the location and type of sign. Such notice, given as provided in this section, shall be sufficient and binding on all persons who own or claim to own an interest in the sign in question. 
(c)  Should the owner of the premises where the sign in question is located fail to remove or repair the sign within the time period specified in this section, the building official may place on the agenda for the board of commissioners an item to consider the question of whether or not the sign is a public nuisance. The building official shall at this time serve written notice by hand-delivered or certified mail to the owner of the premises where the sign is located and to the owner of the sign, if known, of the time and date at which the board of commissioners will consider such item. 
(d)  When the agenda item is considered by the board of commissioners, the building official shall present evidence of the condition of the sign, and the sign owner or premises owner shall have the opportunity to present evidence to support his position. The board of commissioners shall make the determination of whether or not the sign is a danger to public safety, and if so, shall order its removal or repair within a specified time upon notice to the owner in the manner as provided for in this section. The board of commissioners shall also order that if such removal or repairs are not made within the specified time period, the city manager may proceed to cause the removal of such sign. The cost of removal of such sign shall be taxed against the owner of record of the real property from which it is removed, and such costs shall constitute a valid lien against such real property. 
(e)  [ Reserved. ] 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-81; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 2, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 2001-63, § 1, 9-10-01) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 46-26 et seq. 
Sec. 130-8. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Where a lawful sign exists at the effective date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived or of an amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, zoning, size, height, setbacks, location on the lot, spacing, construction or other requirements concerning the sign, such sign, except portable signs, and sign benches may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming sign may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
(2)  Should such nonconforming sign be blown down or otherwise destroyed or dismantled for any purpose other than maintenance operations to an extent of more than 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the time of destruction and at the same location, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Should such sign be moved for any reason for any distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(4)  The replacement of plastic-faced signs where the original frame is used and the frame size is not altered and the substructure is not altered or moved is permitted for legal nonconforming signs. 
(5)  Nonconforming signs shall be properly maintained so that such signs do not constitute a danger to the public health and welfare. 
(6)  Any portable sign considered to have nonconforming sign status pursuant to this chapter shall lose its nonconforming status if placed illegally and shall be considered a new portable sign, thereby prohibited by this chapter. Each portable sign placed prior to the effective date of this article shall be designated as a nonconforming sign pursuant to section 130-83. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-75; Ord. No. 1997-107, § I, 11-24-97) 
Sec. 130-9. - Conflict with other provisions. 
    If any portion of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any other provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance of this Code, the provision which establishes the higher standard shall prevail. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-85) 
Sec. 130-10. - Obligation of sign owner; penalty for violation of chapter; additional remedies. 
(a)  It shall be the obligation of any person owning a sign to inform the person leasing or renting such sign of the requirements set forth in this chapter. Any person renting or leasing a sign shall not be hereby absolved, however, of the responsibility to know and conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, shall for each and every violation or noncompliance be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(c)  The remedies provided in this section should not be construed as exclusive, and the city hereby provides that any other remedy available to it in the enforcement of this chapter, in law or in equity, is not intended to be, and is not, foreclosed by the provision of such remedies. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-82) 
Sec. 130-11. - Protection of First Amendment Rights. 
    Signs containing noncommercial speech are permitted anywhere that commercial signs are permitted. Any sign allowed under this chapter may contain, in lieu of any other copy, any otherwise lawful noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a business, activity conducted, or product sold or offered at a location not on the same premises where such sign is located, provided that such sign otherwise complies with all other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-25, § 1, 4-14-08) 
Secs. 130-12-130-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 130-31-130-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 130-41. - Required; fee. 
    No person shall erect, construct, reconstruct, install, replace, rent, lease or service any sign for which a permit is required within the corporate limits of the city until such person has obtained a sign license as required by this chapter. The original license fee shall be $50.00 per year and the renewal license fee shall be $10.00 per year with each renewal license fee payable on or before January 1 of each year. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-15; Ord. No. 2002-57, § 9, 9-11-02) 
Sec. 130-42. - Exemption from requirement. 
    No license will be required under this chapter for: 
(1)  The installation or maintenance of those signs that are exempted in section 130-60 from the requirement to obtain a permit; or 
(2)  The installation of nonelectrified signs of less than 32 square feet to be erected personally by the owner or occupant of a parcel of real estate to advertise the business activity located thereon. 
The exemptions set out in this section from the license requirement shall not operate to exempt a person from the permit requirements or regulations of this chapter nor from any other applicable ordinance, statute or regulation. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-16) 
Sec. 130-43. - License not transferable. 
    No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable. It shall be unlawful for any holder of any license issued under this chapter to allow his name to be used by any other party, either for the purpose of doing work requiring such a license, or for the purpose of obtaining a permit for such work. It shall further be unlawful for any person not holding a license under this chapter to use the name or the license of any other party for the purpose of doing such work, or obtaining a license or permit for such work. The building official shall revoke the license of any license holder who violates this section. It shall further be unlawful for a person not entitled to an exemption from the license or permit requirements of this chapter to fraudulently claim such exemption. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-17) 
Sec. 130-44. - Service equipment. 
    All service equipment utilized by the licensee and operating within the city must have the firm's or individual's name, as listed on the sign license, on the equipment. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-18) 
Sec. 130-45. - Bond requirements. 
    A surety bond issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the state shall be furnished by the applicant for a license under this chapter, providing for payment to the city or applicable property owner in the maximum amount of $2,000.00 upon the failure of such licensee to maintain or construct according to this chapter any sign for which such licensee is responsible for. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-19) 
Sec. 130-46. - Revocation of license; reinstatement. 
(a)  Upon learning of any sign erected, maintained, serviced, sold, rented, leased, altered or neglected in violation of this chapter, the building official may give notice of such violation by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the responsible license holder or owner of the sign, as applicable. If the violation involves erection or alteration of such sign, the person who performed the work shall also be responsible. If a license holder or employee of a license holder is responsible, the building official may inform such license holder that continued violation for a period of 30 days from such notice will result in the revocation of such license holder's license. If the license holder so notified fails to correct the violation within 30 days of such notice, the building official may revoke such sign license and request the appropriate state official to revoke the highway department permit of the license holder, as applicable. During the time that a license is revoked, the affected license holder shall not be issued any sign permit and no new work shall be commenced under any sign permit which was granted to the affected license holder. 
(b)  Any person who has his license revoked under the provisions of this chapter shall not have his license reinstated nor a new license issued until after the expiration of 30 days from the later of the date of revocation or the date of correction of the cause of revocation, and upon payment of a license fee in the same amount as is then required for an original license. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-80) 
Secs. 130-47-130-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT 

Sec. 130-56. - Required. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall erect, construct, reconstruct, move, install or replace a sign until a sign permit has been issued by the city according to this division. No permits are required for the maintenance of a sign or for a change of copy on painted, printed or changeable copy signs. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-30) 
Sec. 130-57. - Application; suspension, revocation of permit. 
(a)  Application for a sign permit shall be made to the building official upon a form provided by such official and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the owner of the sign. 
(2)  Street address or location of the property on which the sign is to be located, along with the name and address of the property owner. 
(3)  The type of sign or sign structure, as defined in this chapter. 
(4)  A site plan showing the proposed location of the sign along with the locations and square footage areas of all existing signs on the same premises or drawings of buildings showing the area where the sign shall be installed. 
(5)  Specifications and scale drawings showing the materials, design, dimensions, structural supports and electrical components of the proposed sign. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the building official, the size, shape or design of a proposed sign renders it structurally unsound, he shall disapprove the application for a permit. 
(c)  The building official may suspend or revoke an issued permit for any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application. All signs must be erected in accordance with approved plans, without changes, unless authorized by the building official. 
(d)  Permits shall be processed as expeditiously as possible, and shall be deemed denied if no action is taken by the building official within 30 days of filing. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-31; Ord. No. 2008-25, § 1, 4-14-08) 
Sec. 130-58. - Fees and conditions. 
(a)  All applicants for a permit under this chapter must tender a required fee of $50.00. 
(b)  A sign permit shall expire after 120 days after date of issuance if it is not used. A permit may be canceled by an applicant at any time but the permit fee may be retained by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-32; Ord. No. 2002-57, § 10, 9-11-02) 
Sec. 130-59. - Inspection. 
(a)  Any person installing, altering or relocating a sign for which a permit has been issued shall notify the building official upon completion of the work. The building official may require a final inspection, including an electrical inspection and inspection of footings on freestanding signs. 
(b)  The building official may require in writing, upon issuance of a permit, that he be notified for inspection prior to the installation of certain signs. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-33) 
Sec. 130-60. - Signs not requiring permits. 
    The following types of signs, provided such signs are not electrified, are exempt from permit requirements, but must be in conformance with all other requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  Agricultural signs not more than 32 square feet in area. 
(2)  Construction signs of 32 square feet or less. 
(3)  Directional/information signs of eight square feet or less. 
(4)  Nameplates of two square feet or less and fastened directly to the building; one per occupancy. 
(5)  Exempt political signs, except any such sign, including a billboard, that contains primarily a political message on a temporary basis and that is generally available for rent or purchase to carry commercial advertising or other messages that are not primarily political. 
(6)  Real estate signs not more than 12 square feet in single-family or low density residential districts and 32 square feet per face for multifamily residential, commercial, industrial and agricultural. 
(7)  Incidental signs. 
(8)  Window signs. 
(9)  Flags: 
a.  Noncommercial flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, municipality, educational institution or noncommercial organization. 
b.  Commercial flags advertising a business, product or service and limited to one per premises, not to exceed 48 square feet. 
(10)  Identification signs, wall or ground signs which are limited to not more than two per street frontage, not more than four square feet per sign in area, and not more than ten feet in height above grade. 
(11)  Repair or maintenance of existing signs: Any sign being repainted where the painting constitutes the only alteration to the sign, when the sign is not being enlarged or structurally altered, and further provided that the painting is done with the sign structure in place. Service on any electric sign consisting only of the replacement of electrically identical components. 
(12)  Any changing of copy to be done on poster panels. 
(13)  Temporary/special events signs approved by the city manager after consultation with the building official, traffic safety coordinator and planning director. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-34; Ord. No. 1997-107, § II, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 2004-15, § 2, 2-9-04) 
Sec. 130-61. - Variances. 
    In obtaining a permit, the applicant may apply to the building official for a variance from certain requirements of this chapter. A variance may be granted where the literal application of this chapter would create a particular hardship for the sign user and the following criteria are met: 
(1)  A literal application of this chapter would not allow the property to be used at its highest and best use as zoned. 
(2)  The granting of the requested variance would not be materially detrimental to the property owners in the vicinity. 
(3)  The hardship caused the sign user under a literal interpretation of this chapter is due to conditions unique to that property and does not apply generally to the city. 
(4)  The granting of the variance would not be contrary to the general objectives of this chapter. 
In granting a variance, the board of commissioners may attach additional requirements necessary to carry out the spirit and purpose of this chapter in the public interest. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-84) 
Secs. 130-62-130-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITED ACTS AND SIGNS 

Sec. 130-81. - Acts prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts: 
(1)  To place or cause to be placed anywhere in the city any poster, placard, handbill or advertising material on any motor vehicle, or in any location in such a manner that such poster, placard, handbill or advertising material may reasonably be expected to be blown about by the wind. 
(2)  Except for exempt political signs. to park or cause to be parked any automobile, truck, wagon or vehicle of any kind to which there is attached any character of sign where the main purpose of parking is for advertising purposes. 
(3)  To paste, post, attach or otherwise place a sign upon any telephone pole, electric light pole or other structure within the right-of-way or easements of the city, state, railroads, or other utility. 
(4)  Place or cause to be placed on public property any sign not expressly authorized by the public entity controlling said property. No political candidate signs or political issue signs shall be placed on public property owned and/or controlled by the city except as provided in this subsection. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than two political candidate and/or political issue signs of not more than nine square feet each may be placed in the areas designated for the placement of such signs on public property near the entrance to polling places designated for voting in the election for which the signs are placed. Signs placed pursuant to this subsection shall not be erected before the day before such voting is to occur and shall be removed not later than the second day after the voting on such election or referendum occurs. Signs placed pursuant to this subsection may not be placed in the right-of-way and must otherwise comply with state law. 
(5)  Place or cause to be placed on the city any sign prohibited by this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-45; Ord. No. 1997-107, § III, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 2001-14, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 2004-15, § 3, 2-9-04) 
Sec. 130-82. - Signs prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain the following types of signs in any district: 
(1)  Abandoned signs. 
(2)  Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs or signals not placed by the governmental agency. 
(3)  Signs that, due to design, location or illumination, obscure or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, signal or device, or obstruct or interfere with the driver's view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic or otherwise interfere with any driver's operation of a motor vehicle. 
(4)  Signs with flashing, intermittent or moving lights are expressly prohibited within 100 feet of any intersection, except for signs providing only time and temperature information. 
(5)  Portable signs not otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
(6)  Off-premise sign, unless the same may be maintained under the provisions of the section dealing with non-conforming signs, after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this subsection. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-46; Ord. No. 1997-107, § IV, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 2001-14, § 3, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 130-83. - Sign restrictions. 
(a)  Setbacks shall be measured from the right-of-way (except where otherwise explicitly stated) to the edge of the part of the sign that is nearest the curb. No sign may project over the right-of-way line, except projection, marquee, awning or canopy signs that are attached to a building that has been built up to the right-of-way. Those signs shall not project farther than a point located two feet back from the curb. Clearance over sidewalks for marquee and projection signs shall be nine feet; clearance for canopy signs shall be eight feet. 
(b)  No more than three different types of signs shall be located or maintained on any one premises. 
(c)  No sign or part of a sign, except supporting structures not to exceed 26 inches in circumference, shall be at a height of less than eight feet above the street flow gutter line on any property area in the form of a triangle bounded by two intersecting boundaries for a distance of 25 feet on each of such boundaries from the points of intersection and bounded by a third side determined by drawing a straight line from the points of the two intersecting boundaries 25 feet from their intersection. For the purposes of this section, "boundaries" shall refer to streets, roads, alleys, driveways and entrances and exits to parking lots. 
(d)  No sign shall be located within the five-foot area surrounding any place of pedestrian ingress or egress to a building or structure or shall be so placed as to prevent free ingress or egress from any window, door, required exit or fire escape. 
(e)  Signs which exceed 350 square feet in area may not be multiple-faced (stacked or side-by-side). 
(f)  Roof signs shall have a clearance of three feet around the ends of the sign. Roof signs that exceed 20 feet in length shall have had plans submitted and approved by the fire marshal. 
(g)  Sign structures with more than one sign are permitted provided the total area of all signs on the structure does not exceed the maximum square footage allowed based on the type of sign. 
(h)  [ Reserved. ] 
(i)  Failure to comply with terms of this article will subject the property owner and/or occupant of the premises where the sign is located, the sign owner, and if leased, the lessee, to a fine as per section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-47; Ord. No. 1997-107, § V, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 2001-14, § 4, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2009-77, § I, 11-23-09) 
Sec. 130-84. - Right to removal of unlawfully placed signs. 
    The board of commissioners hereby declares that any sign which is unlawfully placed or existing in the right-of-way, in violation of setback requirements, or in violation of any other provision of this chapter, or any other ordinance, constitutes a public nuisance. 
    Any sign, including bench signs and portable signs, unlawfully placed or existing in the right-of-way, in violation of the setback requirements, or in violation of any other provision of this chapter or any other ordinance shall be subject to removal by city under this section unless section 130-7 is applicable. Upon discovery and inspection of any unlawful sign by the city, the sign shall be tagged for immediate removal. Notice shall be given to the occupant of the premises by posting such notice on the front entryway of the premises if such premises exits, where the sign is located and on the sign. If the sign continues to be unlawfully place after 72 hours, the city shall remove the sign. The sign will be placed at a city sponsored storage facility site. The sign may be redeemed upon the payment of a $25.00 administrative fee and $1.00 a day storage fee. Proof of ownership or right to possession must be presented by the person retrieving the sign. The sign may not be relocated within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1997-111, § I, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 2001-14, § 4, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2001-63, § 2, 9-10-01; Ord. No. 2003-74, § 1, 10-27-03) 
Secs. 130-85-130-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF ON-PREMISES SIGNS BY ZONES 

Sec. 130-106. - Signs permitted in all zoning districts generally. 
    The following signs are permitted in all zones of the city, provided that such signs are otherwise not prohibited or regulated by other ordinances of the city: 
(1)  All signs not requiring permits as provided in section 130-60. 
(2)  One construction sign for each street frontage of a construction project, not to exceed 24 square feet in sign area in residential zones or 64 square feet in sign area in all other zones. Such signs may be erected 30 days prior to beginning of construction and shall be removed 15 days following completion of construction. 
(3)  One nonilluminated real estate sign per lot per street frontage, not to exceed 32 square feet in sign area. Such signs must be removed 15 days following sale, rental or lease. 
(4)  Political candidate signs, provided that, except for exempt political signs, such signs shall not be erected earlier than the first day upon which a person may file to become a candidate for office or the day that the election is called by the authority holding the election, whichever is earlier, and shall be removed seven days following such election or referendum. 
(5)  Political issue signs, provided that, except for exempt political signs, such signs shall not be erected before the date on which the authority holding the referendum elections calls the referendum election, and shall be removed seven days following such election on the referendum. 
(6)  One directional/information sign per entrance or exit to a structure or building, not to exceed eight square feet in sign area or eight feet in height. 
(7)  One development sign for each street frontage of a development site not to exceed 32 square feet in sign area in residential zones or 450 square feet in sign area in all other zones. Such signs must be removed upon completion of the development. 
(8)  One identification sign per entrance not to exceed ten feet in height and 70 square feet in sign area in residential zones or 150 square feet in sign area in all other zones. 
(9)  Sign benches shall be allowed at bus stop locations designated by the city through license agreements. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-55; Ord. No. 1997-107, § VI, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 2000-65, § II, 8-14-00; Ord. No. 2004-15, § 4, 2-9-04) 
Cross reference- Zoning districts of the city, § 138-141 et seq. 
Sec. 130-107. - Location restriction of signs; definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the reference to zoning districts, residential zoning district, neighborhood commercial zones, etc., shall have the meaning contained in and shall refer to the city zoning ordinance and the zoning map of the city, as amended. No person may erect and maintain any type of sign in any zone unless expressly authorized under this article. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-56) 
Sec. 130-108. - Signs permitted-Residential zones. 
(a)  The following signs are permitted in all single-family and multifamily zoning districts: 
(1)  All signs as permitted in section 130-106. 
(2)  For permitted and otherwise lawful nonresidential uses, including churches and synagogues, one freestanding sign, not to exceed 48 square feet in sign area. 
(3)  One subdivision identification sign per entrance per neighborhood, subdivision or development, not to exceed 16 square feet in sign area. One identification sign per entrance per apartment or condominium complex, not to exceed 16 square feet in sign area. 
(b)  Special regulations for residential zones are as follows: All allowed freestanding signs shall have a maximum height limit of 15 feet and shall have a setback of zero feet from the property line or ten feet from the back of curb, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-57) 
Cross reference- R-1 single-family residential district, § 138-176 et seq.; R-2 duplex-fourplex residential district, § 138-191 et seq.; R-3 multifamily residential district, § 138-206 et seq. 
Sec. 130-109. - Same-Neighborhood commercial and office zoning districts. 
    The following signs are permitted in neighborhood commercial and office building zoning districts: 
(1)  All signs as permitted in sections 130-106 and 130-108. 
(2)  One freestanding sign per premises; provided that an additional sign shall be permitted for each 150 feet of frontage for a premises, not to exceed two square feet in sign area for each linear foot of primary street frontage, up to a maximum of 200 square feet. Such signs may not exceed a height of 35 feet. 
(3)  One under-canopy sign per occupancy, not to exceed eight square feet in sign area. 
(4)  One projection or flag mount not to exceed the top edge of the building and two square feet in sign area for each linear foot of an occupancy's building frontage, up to a maximum of 200 square feet. 
(5)  [ Reserved. ] 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-58; Ord. No. 1997-107, § VII, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 2001-14, § 4, 2-13-01) 
Cross reference- C-1 office building district, § 138-236 et seq.; C-2 neighborhood commercial district, § 138-251 et seq. 
Sec. 130-110. - Same-Commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
    The following signs are permitted in general business and industrial zoning districts: 
(1)  All signs as permitted in sections 130-106, 130-108 and 130-109. 
(2)  One freestanding sign per premises; provided that an additional sign shall be permitted for each 150 feet of frontage for a premises, not to exceed three square feet in sign area for each linear foot of primary street frontage up to a maximum of 300 square feet. Such signs shall not exceed a height of 35 feet, except where such signs are within 600 feet of Expressway 83, they may have a maximum height of 80 feet. 
(3)  Wall signs. 
(4)  One awning sign per occupancy. 
(5)  One under-canopy sign per occupancy, not to exceed eight square feet in sign area. 
(6)  One projection or flag mount not to exceed the height of the top edge of the building and two square feet in sign area for each linear foot of an occupancy's building frontage, up to a maximum of 200 square feet. 
(7)  Changeable electronic variable message signs ("CEVMS"). 
a.  Time. A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect, install or place a CEVMS sign on a property until after the issuance of a building permit for a building on the property. 
b.  Place. CEVMS signs shall be permitted only along minor arterials or greater as designated in the city's thoroughfare plan, as it currently exists or as may be amended. 
c.  Manner. The maximum brightness of a CEVMS shall not exceed 5,000 candelas per square meter during daylight hours and 500 candelas per square meter) between dusk to dawn. The sign must have an automatic dimmer control which produces a distinct illumination change from a higher allowed illumination level to a lower allowed level for the time period between one-half hour before sunset and one-half hour after sunrise. User must submit documentation of this capability and compliance with sign permit application. 
1.  CEVMS colors shall not include the red, yellow or green color spectrum used for traffic control devices. No CEVMS signs may be of such intensity or brilliance as to interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device or signal. CEVMS signs shall not produce glare or other lighting nuisances. 
2.  CEVMS shall not display a message or picture that scrolls, fades, blinks, bursts, flashes, travels, or by any other means that does not provide constant illumination. Every message or picture display must remain static for a minimum of eight seconds and must accomplish a change in display within two seconds or less. 
3.  All approved CEVMS signs shall be made available for usage for Amber Alerts and other emergency community notifications as deemed necessary by the chief of police or emergency management coordinator. 
(8)  [ Reserved. ] 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-59; Ord. No. 1998-08, § I, 1-12-98; Ord. No. 2001-14, § 4, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2009-77, § I, 11-23-09) 
Cross reference- C-3 general business district, § 138-276 et seq.; C-4 commercial industrial district, § 138-291 et seq.; I-1 light industrial district, § 138-306 et seq.; I-2 heavy industrial district, § 138-321 et seq. 
Sec. 130-111. - Same-Agricultural zoning districts. 
    The following signs are permitted in agricultural zoning districts: 
(1)  [ Reserved. ] 
(2)  One freestanding sign per premises; provided that an additional sign shall be permitted for each 600 feet of street frontage for a premises, not to exceed three square feet in sign area for each linear foot of primary street frontage up to a maximum of 300 square feet. Such signs shall not exceed a height of 35 feet except within 600 feet of the expressway, where the maximum height shall be 80 feet. 
(3)  Wall signs. 
(4)  Of those portable signs granted nonconforming status, only one portable sign per occupancy per street frontage. Such signs must have a minimum setback of one foot from the property line or ten feet from the back of the curb or pavement, whichever is greater. 
(5)  One projection or flag mount not to exceed the height of the top edge of the building and two square feet in sign area for each linear foot of an occupancy's building frontage, up to a maximum of 200 square feet. 
(6)  Accessory signs as required, not to exceed 32 square feet in sign area. Such signs shall not exceed a height of ten feet. Accessory signs shall have a minimum setback of ten feet from the property line or 20 feet from the back of the curb, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-60; Ord. No. 1997-107, § VIII, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 2001-14, § 4, 2-13-01) 
Cross reference- A-O agricultural and open space district, § 138-161 et seq. 
Sec. 130-112. - Special regulations and allowances for signs. 
    The following special regulations and allowances shall apply in neighborhood commercial, office, commercial, industrial and agricultural zoning districts: 
(1)  Freestanding signs shall have a setback of zero feet from the property line or ten feet from the back of the curb, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Where a premises is on a corner or has more than one street frontage, one additional freestanding sign will be allowed on the additional frontage, not to exceed the size of the allowed freestanding sign on the primary street frontage. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-61) 
Secs. 130-113-130-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 130-136. - Compliance with building and electrical codes. 
    All signs shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the International Building Code, as adopted in section 22-26, and the applicable electrical code. 
(1)  Any roof sign more than 20 feet high from the top of the sign to the roof below shall have the plans sealed by a structural or civil engineer licensed to practice in the state. 
(2)  Any sign more than 50 feet in height shall have the plans sealed by a structural or civil engineer licensed to practice in the state. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-65; Ord. No. 2009-07, § XI, 1-26-09) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; building code provisions, § 22-26 et seq.; electrical code provisions, § 22-56 et seq. 
Sec. 130-137. - Lighting. 
    Unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter, all signs may be illuminated. However, no sign may utilize: 
(1)  An exposed incandescent lamp with an external reflector and without a sunscreen or comparable diffusion. 
(2)  Any exposed incandescent lamp in excess of 25 watts unless a screen is attached or unless the sign is placed over ten feet above the ground. 
(3)  Any revolving beacon light. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-66) 
Sec. 130-138. - Maintenance. 
    All signs shall be properly maintained. Exposed surfaces shall be clean and painted as required. Defective parts shall be replaced. The building official shall have the right to order the repair or removal of any sign which is defective, damaged or substantially deteriorated. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-67) 
Sec. 130-139. - Precautions for severe weather. 
    If a weather service warning has been issued for a severe thunderstorm, a tornado or a hurricane, it shall be the responsibility of the lessee of a portable sign, or the owner or occupant of any premises enjoying the use of a portable sign, temporary sign or any sign that is not permanently affixed to a building or sign structure, to move such sign indoors or otherwise secure such sign until the severe conditions have abated. 
(Code 1966, § 251/2-68) 
Chapter 134 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Platting, art. 1, § 5. 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; water wells, § 106-101 et seq.; flood hazard reduction standards for subdivision proposals, § 118-58; comprehensive plan, § 126-26 et seq. 
State Law reference- Subdivisions and property development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 134-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. Those words not expressly defined in this section are to be construed in accordance with the zoning ordinance or other applicable ordinance of the city, or in the absence of such definition, then in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. 
    Agricultural purposes means uses, buildings and accessory uses related to farming and ranching activities that involve the production of raw farm and ranch products. Standard Industrial Classifications Codes (SIC) included in agricultural purposes are SIC Codes 01 to 09, Agricultural, Forestry and Fishing; except 0723, Crop preparation services for market, and 0724, Cotton ginning. The term "agricultural purposes" includes facilities for raising animals, such as barns, kennels or stables, or one single-family dwelling or mobile home, provided the owner of any such property complies with the exemption provisions under section 134-10. 
    Alley means a minor public right-of-way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the backs or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street, and not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots. 
    Any office. Reference made to any office in this chapter by title means the person employed or appointed by the city in that position, or his duly authorized representatives. 
    Building setback line means the line within a property defining the minimum permissible horizontal distance between a building and the adjacent street right-of-way line or other property lines. 
    Commission means the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
    Comprehensive general plan means a statement of public policy containing the goals and objectives of the community, the capital improvement program, the land use plan, the major thoroughfare plan, the community facilities plan, the subdivision and zoning regulations, and other development codes, ordinances, policies and plans or amendments promulgated by the board of commissioners for the quality and orderly growth of the community. 
    Crosswalk means a public right-of-way, six feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian circulation. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street having but one outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Dead-end street means a street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet. 
    Engineer means a person duly authorized under the provisions of the state engineering registration act, as amended, to practice the profession of civil engineering. 
    Extraterritorial jurisdiction. The extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city is five miles as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001(1). 
    Lot means an undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public or private street and which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract; and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been property filed for record. 
    Lot of record means a parcel of land which is part of a subdivision, the map or plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk; or a tract of land not a part of an urban or town lot subdivision, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk prior to October 15, 1973, which has not been divided since recording. 
    Pavement width means the portion of a street available for vehicular traffic where curbs are laid; it is the portion between the face of curbs. 
    Person means any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency or political subdivision. 
    Planned unit development (PUD) means and includes a combination of different dwelling types and/or a variety of land uses which creatively complement each other and harmonize with existing and proposed land uses in the vicinity. 
    Planner, land or city means a person having an occupation classified as city or land planning. 
    Plat means a map or drawing of a tract of land which presents the developer's plan of his subdivision. As a general rule, the plat will show the tract's location, boundaries and area, as well as individual lot boundaries, proposed streets, utilities, public areas and other information the city must have to determine whether the proposed subdivision complies with the requirements of local regulations for approval, and a copy of which the developer intends to file for record. 
    Private subdivision means a subdivision that has restricted access to the general public and where the internal streets, street lights, traffic control devices, such as signs and pavement markings, and sidewalks are not dedicated to the public but are maintained by the lot owners. 
    Single lot subdivision means a tract of land previously divided from a larger tract of land but not a part of a plat approved under the provisions of this chapter or under the rules and regulations promulgated by the county commissioners court for the division of land into suburban or building lots in a subdivision as defined under state law. 
    Street means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however otherwise designated. 
    Arterial street means a free flowing street, normally the main thoroughfare through a community, receiving traffic from collector and minor streets. 
    Collector street carries traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
    Minor street means a street used primarily for access to abutting residential property. 
    Subdivider means any person who owns a tract of land located within the city limits or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city who divides a tract into two or more parts to lay out a subdivision of the tract, including an addition to the city; or to lay out suburban, building or other lots including mobile home lots or spaces; or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use for the use of the purchasers or owners of the lot fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks or other parts; or a person owning a single lot subdivision in the city limits or its extraterritorial jurisdiction where such owner utilizes or improves the property as to require a building permit from the county or city, as applicable, or utility connection. A person is a subdivider of land under this chapter regardless of whether the person subdivides or divides the land by using a metes and bounds description in a deed or of conveyance in a contract for deed or by using a contract of sale or other executory contract to convey or lease, in this case of a mobile home park, or by using any other method. 
    Subdivision means a division of land which results in dividing a tract into two or more parts. "Subdivision" includes resubdivision but it does not include a division of land for agricultural purposes in tracts of more than five acres, where each tract has access and no public improvement is being dedicated. 
    Surveyor means a licensed state land surveyor or a registered public surveyor, as authorized by the state statutes to practice the profession of surveying. 
    Total costs means all costs of a completed system, including engineering and contingencies. 
    Utility easement means an interest in land granted to the city, to the public generally, and/or to a private utility corporation for the installation of and maintaining utilities across, over or under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of such utilities. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-4; Ord. No. 1991-88-A, § II, 11-27-91; Ord. No. 2000-89, § 1, 11-27-00; Ord. No. 2006-09, § 1, 1-31-06; Ord. No. 2006-14, § 1, 2-15-06) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 134-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development of the area within the city and within the area surrounding the city and to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-2) 
Sec. 134-3. - Review of chapter; recommendations for amendment. 
    The planning and zoning commission and the public utility board shall review the provisions of this chapter as it relates to the specific areas of authority under this chapter and make recommendation to the board of commissioners for amendment to this chapter as required to meet the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-2) 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; public utility board, § 106-26 et seq. 
Sec. 134-4. - Conformance to general plan. 
(a)  No plat or subdivision of land constituting an urban subdivision within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction as defined under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq. shall be approved unless the plat conforms to the general plan of the city in its roads, streets, alleys, easements, drainage, and public utility facilities, including those which have been or may be laid out or required to be laid out as necessitated by the subdivision, and to the general plan for the extension of the city and of its roads, streets, alleys, easements, drainage, and public utilities, including access to drainage and public utilities relating thereto. 
(b)  No plat or subdivision of land within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city shall be approved unless the plat conforms to the general plan or requirements for subdivisions of land as promulgated by the City of McAllen. In addition thereto, provisions shall be made for the supply of potable water to each lot within such subdivision. Such potable water supply source shall be approved by the state department of health for the supplying of potable water to consumers. The planning and zoning commission is hereby authorized to approve any such plats on behalf of the city and shall, therefore, submit such plats to the county planning department for its approval. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-3; Ord. No. 1991-88-A, § I, 11-27-91; Ord. No. 2006-09, § 2, 1-31-06) 
Sec. 134-5. - General policies. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued within the city by the city for the installation of septic tanks upon any tract or lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, or upon any tract or lot in a subdivision in which the standards contained in this chapter or referred to in this chapter have not been complied with in full. 
(b)  No building, repair, plumbing or electrical permit shall be issued by the city for any structure on a lot or tract for which a final subdivision plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a lot within a subdivision in which the standards contained in this chapter or referred to in this chapter have not been complied with in full. 
(c)  The city shall not repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services in any subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor in which the standards contained in this chapter or referred to in this chapter have not been complied with in full. 
(d)  The city shall not sell or supply any water or sewage service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained in this chapter or referred to in this chapter have not been complied with in full. 
(e)  On behalf of the city, the city attorney shall, when directed by the board of commissioners, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this chapter or the standards referred to in this chapter with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within the city, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as determined by agreement with other municipalities in the area, or within any area subject to all or a part of the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  If any subdivision exists for which a final plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained in this chapter or referred to in this chapter have not been complied with in full, the board of commissioners shall pass a resolution reciting the fact of such noncompliance or failure to secure final plat approval, and reciting the fact that the provisions of subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section will apply to the subdivision and the lots therein, the city secretary shall, when directed by the city, cause a certified copy of such resolution under the corporate seal of the city to be filed in the deed records of the county or counties in which such subdivision or part thereof lies. If full compliance and final plat approval are secured after the filing of such resolution, the city secretary shall forthwith file an instrument in the deed of records of such county or counties stating that subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section no longer apply. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the issuance of building, repair, plumbing or electrical permits with respect to any lot or building tract, nor prohibit the repair, maintenance or installation of any street or public utility services for, to, or abutting any lot, in these instances: where the last recorded conveyance of such lot or tract prior to the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter derives (October 15, 1973) was by metes and bounds; or where a building is in existence on such lot prior to the passage of such ordinance; or where such subdivision, whether by recorded plat or by actual occupancy and use, was in existence prior to the passage of such ordinance. 
(h)  The owner of a tract of land that divides the tract in any manner that creates lots intended for residential purposes of five acres or less must have a plat of the subdivision prepared. 
(i)  No subdivided land intended for residential purposes shall be sold or conveyed until the subdivider: 
(1)  Has received approval of a final plat of the tract; and 
(2)  Has filed and recorded with the county clerk of the county in which the tract is located a legally approved plat. 
(j)  A division of a tract is defined as including a metes and bounds description, or any description of less than a whole parcel, in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, using a contract of sale or other executory contract, lease/purchase agreement, or using any other method to convey property. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-5; Ord. No. 2000-89, § 2, 11-27-00) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22. 
Sec. 134-6. - Variances. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission may recommend variances from this chapter to the city commission when in its opinion, undue hardships will result from requiring strict compliance. In recommending a variance, the planning and zoning commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or desirable in the public interest. In making the findings required in this section, the planning and zoning commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. No variance can be recommended unless the planning and zoning commission finds that: 
(1)  A written request of the developer is submitted in advance of making such request; 
(2)  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land; 
(3)  The granting of a variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of the legal property rights of its owner; 
(4)  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to the legal rights other property owners enjoy in the area; and 
(5)  The granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Such findings of the planning and zoning commission, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the planning and zoning commission meeting at which such variance is considered. Variance may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice accomplished. Financial hardship to the subdivider, standing alone, shall not constitute undue hardship. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall have the ultimate power to grant or reject variances upon the receipt of a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-6) 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq. 
Sec. 134-7. - Administrative enforcement. 
(a)  The city may elect at its option to enforce one or more of the following options to this chapter. 
(1)  Denial of plat approval. No plat shall be recorded unless it contains such data, nor shall any court clerk record a plat which has not received the prior approval of the board of commissioners or planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  Institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Denial of public utilities. 
(4)  Denial of building permits. 
(5)  Provide for offenses within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person residing in any subdivision shall have the requisite standing and authority to enforce the standards established pursuant to this chapter and may file suit in any court of competent jurisdiction for his damages or for declaratory or injunctive relief or such other relief as may be deemed appropriate. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-7) 
Sec. 134-8. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
    Whenever the standards and specifications in this chapter conflict with those contained in another ordinance, the most stringent or restrictive provision shall govern. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-8) 
Sec. 134-9. - Authority of city engineer. 
    The city engineer is hereby authorized to promulgate or to have promulgated from time to time, and to file for public record and use in the office of the city secretary, rules, regulations, standards and specifications for the construction, installation, design, location and arrangements of streets, curbs, streetlights, street signs, alleys, utility layouts, utility easements, sidewalks, water supply and water distribution systems, fire hydrants, sewage disposal systems, septic tanks, water wells, drainage facilities and crosswalks, and such rules, regulations and standards shall be applicable for all subdivisions thereafter developed within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The board of commissioners may, but is under no obligation to, review any such rule, regulation, standard or specification as promulgated by the city engineer. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-9) 
State Law reference- Public hearing requirements, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.002. 
Sec. 134-10. - Plat exemption requirements. 
(a)  Application. The director of planning shall determine the subdivision exemption status of a tract of land for agricultural use upon receipt of a completed application form and accompanying documents by the property owner or authorized agent. The application form shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  Warranty deed for the subject tract indicating date of last conveyance. 
(2)  Evidence of a building on the subject tract prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, if applicable. 
(3)  Evidence of subdivision for the subject tract, occupied or in use prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, if applicable. 
(4)  Current tax certificates. 
(5)  Survey of the tract showing property line, right-of-way widths, easements and existing improvements, signed and sealed by a registered public surveyor. 
(6)  Separate instruments dedicating additional right-of-way along perimeter streets. 
(7)  Recording fees for separate instruments. 
(b)  Requirements. The following is required in order for a tract of land to receive subdivision exemption status for agricultural use: 
(1)  Minimum tract size: A tract size of greater than five acres within the city limits and more than ten acres in the extraterritorial jurisdiction (gross). 
(2)  Minimum tract width: One hundred feet. 
(3)  Access: Each building site is provided access to existing public street. 
(4)  Minimum building site: One acre (net) in a zone B and/or zone C flood area as indicated on the current FEMA maps. 
(5)  Water supply: A letter of commitment from a potable water supplier agreeing to supply and the ability to serve all tracts; or evidence that adequate drinking water is immediately available to all tracts in accordance with state regulations. 
(6)  Sewage disposal: A letter of commitment from a sewage disposal utility agreeing to dispose and the ability to serve all tracts; or evidence that onsite sewage disposal facilities are capable of complying with state regulations. 
(7)  Rights-of-way: Separate instruments dedicating additional right-of-way along perimeter streets in accordance with adopted thoroughfare plans. 
(c)  Certificate of compliance. The director of planning shall issue a certificate of compliance indicating the exemption status of a tract upon a determination that the tract satisfies the eligibility and exemption requirements of this chapter. Copies of the certificate of compliance shall be forwarded to the county planning department, potable water supplier, sewage disposal utility and electric utility company. The director of planning shall forward the warranty deeds of proposed divisions of land and accompanying separate instruments to the county clerk for recording. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-20; Ord. No. 2000-89, § 3, 11-27-00) 
Sec. 134-11. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person found guilty of a violation of any provision of this chapter, as amended, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as provided by section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-21) 
Sec. 134-12. - Effective date. 
    This ordinance from which this chapter derived shall be effective from and after October 15, 1973. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-18) 
Secs. 134-13-134-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 134-36. - Layout of entire area required where subdivision is unit of a larger tract. 
    Where the proposed subdivision constitutes a unit of a large tract owned by the subdivider which is intended to be subsequently subdivided as additional units of the same subdivision, the preliminary and final plats shall be accompanied by a layout of the entire area, showing the tentative proposal layout of streets, blocks, drainage, water, sewerage and other improvements for such areas. The overall layout, if approved by the planning and zoning commission, shall be attached to and filed with a copy of the approved subdivision plat in the permanent files of the city. Thereafter, plats of subsequent units of such subdivision shall conform to such approved overall layout, unless changed by the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission may change such approval overall only when it finds that: 
(1)  Adherence to the previously approved overall layout will not hinder the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or 
(2)  Adherence to the previously approved overall layout will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or will be injurious to other property in the area. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-17) 
Sec. 134-37. - Delegation of approval responsibility for certain plats. 
(a)  Any person proposing to subdivide a property under the conditions set out below may file a plat directly with the director of planning. The director of planning, upon the receipt of a plat filed under this section, shall verify the conditions set out below and upon verification thereof is hereby authorized to approve such plat. Upon such approval, the signature and recording requirements for other plats covered by this section shall be carried out. 
(b)  In order to qualify for approval under this section, the plat must conform to the following conditions: 
(1)  There will be no more than four lots in the subdivision. 
(2)  All lots must front on an existing street. 
(3)  The subdivision does not require the creation of any new street. 
(4)  All lots will be served by existing municipal facilities (water, sewer, drainage). 
(c)  If the director of planning determines that any of the foregoing conditions will not be met in such subdivision, then the subdivision shall be processed as otherwise provided under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1993-57, § I, 8-9-93; Ord. No. 2017-09, § I, 1-23-17) 
Secs. 134-38-134-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 134-46. - Preliminary conference. 
    Prior to the official filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider, his planner, or representative should consult with and present a proposed plan of subdivision to the city planner for comments and advice on the procedures, specifications and standards required by the city for the subdivision of land. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-10) 
Sec. 134-47. - Required; title report. 
    The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat by a registered public surveyor and certified engineer, registered to practice in this state, in accordance with this chapter for review by the city planning department before the filing of the subdivision plat with the planning and zoning commission. The subdivider shall also furnish the city with sufficient evidence of legal title in and to the subject property along with sufficient evidence of a record of any lienholders holding security interest in the property in lieu of a title report. The furnishing of this preliminary plat is for the purpose of determining whether such plat is sufficient for review by the planning and zoning commission as required under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq., and the 30-day limitation imposed on the planning and zoning commission for consideration of a plat shall not commence until such plat is placed on the agenda of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-11(a); Ord. No. 1991-88-A, § III(A), 11-27-91; Ord. No. 1993-59, § I, 8-23-93) 
Sec. 134-48. - Time for filing; copies required; fees. 
(a)  The subdivider shall file six blue or black line copies of the preliminary plat together with the original, with the city planner at least 15 days prior to the date at which formal application for the preliminary plat approval is made to the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee per plat which is on file in the city secretary's office. No action by the planning and zoning commission shall be valid until the filing fee has been paid. This fee shall not be refunded should the subdivider fail to make formal application for preliminary plat approval or should the plat be disapproved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-11(B), (C)) 
Sec. 134-49. - Form and contents. 
    The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to one inch. When more than one sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate scale shall be attached to the plat. The plat shall show the following: 
(1)  Names and addresses of the subdivider, record of owner(s) of land to be subdivided, and the engineer and/or surveyor preparing the plat. 
(2)  Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not have the same spelling as or be pronounced similar to the name of any other subdivision located within the city or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. 
(3)  Description by metes and bounds of the subdivision. 
(4)  Primary control points, description and location and ties to such control points from which all dimensions, angles, bear-ings, block numbers and similar data shall be referred. Control point designations shall meet all requirements of the appropriate state statutes. 
(5)  Subdivision boundary lines shall be indicated by heavy lines, and the actual acreage of the subdivision shown. 
(6)  Existing conditions, as follows: 
a.  The exact locations, dimensions, names and descriptions of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements or other public rights-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting or contiguous with its boundaries or forming such boundaries. 
b.  The exact location, dimensions, description and flow line of existing watercourses and drainage structures within the subdivision or on contiguous tracts. 
c.  The exact location, dimensions, descriptions and name of all existing or recorded residential lots, parks, public areas, permanent structures and other sites within or contiguous with the subdivision. 
(7)  The exact location, dimensions, grade, descriptions and names of all proposed streets, alleys, drainage structures and irrigation lines; location of electric, gas, telephone, television cable, parks, other public areas, reservations, easements, or other rights-of-way, blocks, lots and other sites within the subdivision. 
(8)  Date of preparation, scale of plat and north arrow. 
(9)  Topographic information which shall include elevations on 100-foot centers each way on the property, including elevations of flow line of gutters, centerlines of streets and drainageways, and shall include contour lines at a vertical interval that will accurately show the slope and shape of the existing ground. An engineer's detailed statement describing the drainage patterns of the subdivision and the adequacy of the proposed plan shall also be included. Topographic and utility details shall be shown on a separate plat. 
(10)  A number or letter to identify each lot or site and each block. 
(11)  Front, rear and side yard building setbacks lines as set out in Chapter 138 as applicable for the proposed use for all lots and sites. 
(12)  Location of the city's corporate limits lines, the outer border of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, and zoning district boundaries, if they traverse the subdivision, form part of the boundary of the subdivision, or are contiguous to such boundary. 
(13)  Restrictive covenants imposed on the land, if desired by the subdivider, are to be shown on the plat, or on a separate document to be made a part thereof, or recorded by separate document in the office of the county clerk. If not shown on the recorded plat, a copy of such restrictions, with recording data thereon, shall be furnished to the city. 
(14)  Irrigation canals: No open irrigation canals, except main canals, shall be permitted within a subdivision. The subdivider shall place such canal underground if its continued use is required by the water district. If an existing canal, except the main canal of Hidalgo County Water Control and Improvement District Number Three, is partly included within the boundaries of the land from which the subdivision is made, the subdivider or developer, if the developer or subdivider and the owner of the adjacent land do not agree jointly to place such canal underground when its continued use is required by the water district, shall deposit in escrow with the city public utility, as the case may be, a sufficient sum of money, based on current cost at the time, to pay for his share of the cost to place such canal underground. Should it develop thereafter that the continued use of such canal not be required, and it has not been placed underground in the meantime, such escrow fund, without interest, shall be returned to the depositor. 
(15)  Vicinity sketch or map at a scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch, which shall show existing subdivisions, streets, easements, rights-of-way, parks and public facilities in the vicinity, the general drainage plan and ultimate destination of water, and possible storm sewer, water, gas, electric and sanitary sewer connections by arrows. 
(16)  No more than one single family detached dwelling shall be located on each lot. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-11(D); Ord. No. 2000-89, § 4, 11-27-00) 
Sec. 134-50. - Processing of preliminary plat. 
(a)  The city planner shall check the preliminary plat as to its conformity with the general plan, major street plan, land use plan, zoning districts and the standards and specifications set forth in this chapter or referred to in this chapter. 
(b)  The city engineer shall review all proposed subdivision plats to determine if the proposed subdivision is reasonably safe from flooding and that the grade inclinations for all streets, alleys and lots are established and recorded on the plat to assure maximum drainage within the dictates of the general topography of the platted area and the areas surrounding the subdivision. 
(c)  It shall also be determined that all public utilities and facilities are located and planned to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(d)  Mandatory referral. Within ten days of receipt, all preliminary plats of subdivisions of land within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction submitted by the developer to the planning and zoning commission will be referred as follows: 
(1)  For review and comment by the various departments of the City of McAllen; 
(2)  For informational purposes, the applicable independent school district, and franchised gas, electrical, water supply, telecommunications and cable television companies and any applicable irrigation district or water control and improvement district; 
(3)  To the city public utility board for water and sewer utilities approval. 
(e)  The city planner shall return the preliminary plat and accompanying data to the planning and zoning commission with recommendations as to modifications, additions or alterations of such plat data. 
(f)  Within 30 days after the preliminary plat is formally filed with the planning and zoning commission, the planning and zoning commission shall approve the preliminary plat; disapprove the preliminary plat; or conditionally approve the preliminary plat with modifications. The city planner shall inform the subdivider of the reasons for disapproval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat at the time such action is taken, unless the subdivider is present at such meeting. 
(g)  Approval of a preliminary plat by the planning and zoning commission shall be deemed as an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat and is contingent on public utility board approval. The approved preliminary plat shall act as a guide for the installation of streets, water, sewer and other required improvements and utilities for the preparation of the final or recorded plat. Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute an automatic approval of the final plat. 
(h)  Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for only one year unless reviewed by the planning and zoning commission in the light of new or significant information which would necessitate a revision of the preliminary plat. If the planning and zoning commission should deem changes in a preliminary plat as necessary, it shall so inform the subdivider in writing. 
(i)  If no development has occurred which would affect the proposed preliminary plat after one year of effective approval, the planning and zoning commission may, upon the application of the subdivider, extend the approval for an additional six months. At the end of this six-month extension, the preliminary approval shall be revoked in writing by the city to the subdivider. 
(j)  Approval of the preliminary plat may be considered as approval of the final plat if no changes are required by the planning and zoning commission and all requirements of this chapter are included on the plat. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-11(E); Ord. No. 1991-88-A, § III, 11-27-91; Ord. No. 1998-15, § I, 1-26-98; Ord. No. 1998-118, § 1, 11-23-98) 
Secs. 134-51-134-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 134-61. - Form and contents. 
(a)  The final plat and accompanying data shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved or conditionally approved by the planning and zoning commission, incorporating any and all changes, modifications, alterations, corrections and conditions recommended by the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet to one inch. Where more than one sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate scale shall be attached to the plat. 
(c)  The final plat shall be submitted in an original and six copies and shall contain all of the features required for preliminary plats in division 2 of this article, and it shall be accompanied by site improvement data bearing the seal of an engineer or a registered public surveyor. 
(d)  The final plat and the accompanying site improvement data shall be referred to the board of commissioners when recommended by the planning and zoning commission. 
(e)  In addition to the various requirements for the preliminary plat, the final plat shall also include the following: 
(1)  The exact location, dimensions, names and descriptions of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements or other public rights-of-way, blocks, lots and other sites within the subdivision with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflection angles, degrees of curvature, tangent distances and lengths of all curves where appropriate. 
(2)  The exact location, grades, dimensions, descriptions, and names of all proposed streets, alleys, parks and other public areas, reservations, easements or other public rights-of-way, blocks, lots and other sites within the subdivision with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflection angles and radii, areas, central angles, degrees of curvature, tangent distances and lengths of all curves where appropriate. 
(3)  The exact location, grades, dimensions, descriptions and names of all proposed drainage structures and irrigation lines; and locations of electric, gas, telephone and television cables. 
(4)  An engineer's statement of the minimum permissive floor elevation that will protect the improvements from flood and high waters. 
(5)  Owner's acknowledgement: 
The State of Texas 
County of Hidalgo 
    I (We), the undersigned, owner(s) of the land shown on this plat and designated herein as the ___________ Subdivision to the City of McAllen, Texas, and whose name is subscribed hereto, hereby dedicate to the use of the public all streets, alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements, water lines, sewer lines, storm sewers, fire hydrants and public places which are installed or which I (we) will cause to be installed thereon, shown or not shown, if required otherwise to be installed or dedicated under the subdivision approval process of the City of McAllen, all the same for the purposes therein expressed, either on the plat hereof or on the official minutes of the applicable authorities of the City of McAllen. 
_____
(Owner)  
(6)  Lienholder's acknowledgement: 
State of Texas 
County of Hidalgo 
    I/We, the undersigned, holder(s) (or duly authorized officers of the holder(s)) of a security interest in the above described property, being the land shown on this plat and designated herein as the ________ Subdivision of the City of McAllen, Texas, do hereby consent to the subdivision of the property as provided for under the plat and do hereby provide that any foreclosure relating to the security interest on the above described property shall be subject to the platting of the property as provided for herein. 
Security Interest Holder _____
Signature  
(7)  Certification by the chairman of the commission: I, the undersigned, Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of McAllen hereby certify that this subdivision plat conforms to all requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of this City wherein my approval is required. 
_____
Chairman, Planning Commission 
(8)  Certification of the surveyor responsible for surveying the subdivision area, attesting to its accuracy: 
State of Texas 
County of Hidalgo 
I, the undersigned, a (registered professional engineer and/or registered professional land surveyor) in the State of Texas, hereby certify that this plat is true and correctly made and is prepared from an actual survey on the property made under my supervision on the ground. 
(Engineer or Surveyor Seal) _____
Registered Professional Engineer or Registered Professional Land Surveyor  
(9)  Certification of the mayor of the City of McAllen: I, the undersigned, Mayor of the City of McAllen, hereby certify that this subdivision plat conforms to all requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of this City wherein my approval is required. 
_____
Mayor, City of McAllen 
(10)  Certification of the engineer responsible for proper engineering and compliance with the Model Rules. 
State of Texas 
County of Hidalgo 
I, the undersigned, a registered professional engineer in the State of Texas, hereby certify that proper engineering consideration has been given to this plat. 
I certify that the water and sewer service facilities for lots intended for residential purposes described above are in compliance with the Model Rules adopted under Section 16.343, Water Code. The estimated cost to install unconstructed water and sewage facilities described above are as follows: 
Water facilities: These facilities will be constructed. 
Sewage facilities: (Sewer service connection/Installation of septic systems) are estimated to cost $___.___ per lot (all inclusive), for a total of $___.___ for the subdivision. The subdivider has paid a total of $_______ to _______ to cover the cost of (sewer service connection/installation of septic systems). 
(Engineer Seal) _____
Registered Professional Engineer  
(Code 1966, § 261/2-12(A); Ord. No. 1991-88-A, § IV, 11-27-91; Ord. No. 1998-38, § I, 3-23-98; Ord. No. 2000-89, § 5, 11-27-00) 
Sec. 134-62. - Processing of final plat. 
    The final plat may be considered officially approved when all fees and expenses incurred have been paid, and when all requisites of the subdivision have been met. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-12(B)) 
Secs. 134-63-134-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPROVEMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 106. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 134-86. - Construction of improvements prior to final plat recordation. 
(a)  Inspection and approval; certificate of inspector. If the subdivider chooses to construct the required improvements prior to the recording of the final plat, all such construction shall be inspected while in progress by the city, and must be approved upon completion by the director of public works or his duly authorized representative. A certificate by such officer stating that the construction conforms to the specifications and standards contained in or referred to in this chapter must be presented to the planning department prior to filing of the final plat for recordation. 
(b)  Security in lieu of construction. If the subdivider chooses to file security in lieu of completing construction prior to the final plat approval for recordation, he may utilize one of the following methods of posting security. If the subdivider chooses to file security, the plat shall not be filed for recordation unless the subdivider has done one of the following: 
(1)  Performance bond. The developer has filed with the administrator of internal services a bond executed by a surety company holding a license to do business in the state and acceptable to the city, on the form provided by the city, in an amount equal to the cost of the improvements required by this chapter and within the time for completion of the improvements as estimated by the city engineer and utility manager. The performance bond shall be approved as to form and legality by the city attorney and shall be in compliance with the Model Rules as specified under 31 TAC 364.54. 
(2)  Unconditional guarantee from local banks, local federally insured savings and loan associations or other financial institutions as approved by the city and shall be in compliance with the Model Rules as specified under 31 TAC 364.54. The subdivider or developer shall file with the administrator of internal services a letter, on the form provided by the city, signed by the principal officer of a local bank or local federally insured savings and loan association or other financial institution, acceptable to the city, agreeing to pay the city on demand, a stipulated sum of money to apply to the estimated cost of installation of all improvements for which the subdivider or developer is responsible under this chapter. The guaranteed payment sum shall be estimated costs and scheduling as approved by the city engineer and utility manager. The letter shall state the name of the subdivision and shall list the improvements for which the subdivider or developer is required to provide for. 
(c)  Acceptance or rejection of construction. If one of the three types of security is filed by the subdivider under subsection (b) of this section, the director of public works shall inspect the construction of the improvements while in progress, and he shall inspect each improvement upon completion of construction. After final inspection, he shall notify the subdivider and the city attorney in writing as to his acceptance or rejection of the construction. He shall reject such construction only if it fails to comply with the standards and specifications contained or referred to in this chapter. If he rejects such construction, the city attorney shall on direction of the board of commissioners proceed to enforce the guarantees provided in this chapter. 
(d)  Extension of time. Where good cause exists, the director of public works may extend the period of time required for completion under subsection (b) of this section. Such extension of time shall be reported to the planning and zoning commission and recorded in the minutes. No such extension shall be granted unless security as provided in subsection (b) has been provided by the subdivider covering the extended period of time. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-15(a)-(d); Ord. No. 2000-89, § 6, 11-27-00) 
Sec. 134-87. - Waivers and releases. 
(a)  Any subdivider or owner of a single lot subdivision resulting in or owning any lots greater than one acre in area which is located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction may apply for a waiver of the requirements of construction of utilities or improvements required under this chapter. The board of commissioners may grant such waiver for drainage, streets, fire protection, sidewalks and other improvements; and the public utility board may grant such waiver for the purposes of water and sewer improvements. Adequate facilities must otherwise be present for the property, taking into consideration existing facilities and the nature and condition of such property. Such waiver shall be conditioned upon the owner or subdivider of the property entering into a contract with the city providing that when improvements for which a waiver is granted are extended to a point within 660 feet of the subject property, the owner of the subject property at that time shall provide for the construction of such improvements, as applicable. Upon the failure to construct such improvements by the responsible party, the city may, but is not required to, construct such improvements. If the city does construct such improvements, it shall enforce the lien covering the property for the costs of such improvements. Such contract shall be promulgated by the city attorney and approved by the applicable authority. After execution, the agreement shall be recorded in the official records of the county, and such agreement shall run with the land. Except for those subdivision requirements specifically covered in the variance granted by the appropriate boards, all other requirements of this chapter shall be applicable. 
(b)  In consideration of releasing an approved agreement as provided for in subsection (a), and upon approval of the board of commissioners or the public utility board, as applicable, the subdivider or owner may deposit with the city a sum of money equal to the estimated cost of all the site improvements and extensions required by this chapter. Such amount shall be placed in a fund created by the city. The city engineer shall approve the estimated costs. If the amount of the costs estimated by the city engineer is deposited with the city, the subdivider and any subsequent owner of the property shall be relieved of any responsibilities relating to the applicable extensions unless otherwise required under any assessment or legal proceedings or unless the property is resubdivided. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-15(e), (f)) 
Sec. 134-88. - Responsibility for payment of utility lines and other improvements. 
    If water and sewer installations necessary to provide adequate and appropriate services to subdivisions developed under the terms of this chapter (or to subdivisions or additions, or any part thereof, platted and approved pursuant to October 15, 1973, or the effective date of any former ordinance which had not been made on October 15, 1973) have not been made, they shall be constructed by or under the direction and supervision of the city. Prior to the beginning of any such utility construction, the subdivider shall deposit with the city treasurer the cost of such construction which shall be as follows: 
(1)  All deposits shall be paid in cash, and shall be paid into such special or general fund as the board of commissioners may from time to time determine. Such payments shall not be considered as a trust fund, but rather as a contribution to construction of the city's utility systems. 
(2)  Upon completion of the system and acceptance by the city, the installation becomes the property of the public utility of the city to operate and maintain. 
(3)  The subdivider's contribution for water line extensions to the subject subdivision shall be an amount equal to the installed cost, including all labor, excavation, trenching, engineering and material, fire hydrants, valves, fittings and other appurtenances necessary to furnishing water or water service to the subdivision; provided however, that if any part of a water line is required to be larger than necessary to serve the subdivision in order to provide the service deemed necessary by the board of commissioners or public utility board within the subdivision or elsewhere in the city water system, the public utility board may, but is not required to, pay for the pipe in excess of the size required as soon as funds can be made available or be appropriated. 
(4)  The subdivider's contribution to sewer line extensions to the subject subdivision shall be an amount equal to the installed cost, including all labor, excavation, trenching, engineering and material, lift stations, manholes, and other appurtenances necessary for furnishing sewer or sewer service to the subdivision; provided however, that if any part of a sewer line is required to be larger than necessary to serve the subdivision in order to provide the service deemed necessary by the board of commissioners or public utility board within the subdivision or elsewhere in the city sewer system, the public utility board may, but is not required to, pay for the pipe in excess of the size required by the developer as soon as funds can be made available or be appropriated. 
(5)  Streets: The city may pay, provided funds are available, for street right-of-way in excess of 60-foot width and for street paving width in excess of 40 feet, except where such extra widths are in commercial or industrial developments or where they are not required by the city. 
(6)  Bridges: The city may participate, provided funds are available, in the extra cost of large drainage structures on principal streets shown on the major thoroughfare plan. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-16) 
Sec. 134-89. - Perimeter streets, requirements, standards. 
(a)  In all future subdivision developments where the owner or developer is required by the city to dedicate, and at his expense pave, curb and gutter any or all of the perimeter streets of such subdivision, which will now or may in the future improve, enhance, serve or be beneficial to adjacent property, the owner of such adjacent property, upon development of such adjacent property, will pay to the city, for the benefit of such original subdivision developer, one-half of the original developer's cost of such perimeter street improvements, including the cost of any land dedicated for such street which is in addition to the land normally required to be dedicated for the subject subdivision, based on the front footage of the property along the street. A condition of the approval by the city of a subdivision of such adjacent property and the issuance of building, water or sewer permits thereon, will be the payment under the applicable reimbursement certificate amount which the city will in turn pay to the original developer upon payment. This procedure is necessary in order to eliminate half streets in subdivisions. 
(b)  At the time of the development of an original subdivision as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the city will issue a reimbursement certificate to the subdivision developer or owner describing the land in the subdivision as well as the adjacent land which will benefit from the dedication, paving, curbing, and guttering of the perimeter street, setting forth the amount of one-half of the cost of the perimeter street improvements paid by such developer, and the costs per front foot to be reimbursed by adjacent property owners, providing that such amounts will be paid to the original developer who advanced such improvement costs, or to his heirs, successors or assigns if and when collected by the city pursuant to subsection (a) above. 
(c)  Should a fact situation develop in the application of this section to any property adjacent and contiguous to any such perimeter street, which is unique and not contemplated by this section and which would be manifestly unusual and inequitable in the opinion of the board of commissioners, such board reserves the right, after notice to all interested parties, to grant a variance or exception to the terms of this section. 
(d)  At any time where the city constructs, at its expense, paving, curbing or guttering and such work is on a perimeter or interior street of a future subdivision, the owner of any property thereafter subdivided who would otherwise be required to construct such perimeter or interior street shall pay one-half of the costs incurred by the city therefor according to the front footage of such subdivided property. The city engineer shall prepare a reimbursement certificate in favor of the city setting out the applicable information relating to the city paving project. 
(e)  The adoption of this procedure relating to the subdivision of property shall not preclude the city from adopting paving assessment programs from time to time within the city as authorized by law. In the event the city adopts an assessment plan for property otherwise covered by this section, this section shall not apply to such property assessed. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-19; Ord. No. 1994-73, § I, 10-24-94) 
Secs. 134-90-134-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 134-101. - Conformity with article. 
    No preliminary or final plat shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission, and no completed improvements shall be accepted by the city, unless they conform to the standards and specifications in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-13) 
Sec. 134-102. - Conformity with comprehensive plan. 
    The subdivision shall conform to the comprehensive plan of the city and parts thereof and shall conform to the requirements of section 134-4. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-13(1)(a)) 
Cross reference- Comprehensive plan, § 126-26 et seq. 
Sec. 134-103. - Provision for future subdivisions. 
    If a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to allow the opening of future streets. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-13(1)(b)) 
Sec. 134-104. - Reserve strips prohibited. 
    There shall be no reserved strips controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-13(1)(c)) 
Sec. 134-105. - Street requirements. 
(a)  Street layout. Adequate and paved streets shall be provided by the subdivider and the arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of each shall conform to the comprehensive plan of the city and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographic conditions, to public safety and convenience, and in their appropriate relationship to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. The street layout shall be devised for the most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood. 
(b)  Relation to adjoining street systems. Where necessary to the neighborhood pattern, existing streets in adjoining areas shall be continued and shall be at least as wide as such existing streets and in alignment therewith. 
(c)  Projection of streets. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall make provisions for the proper projection of streets into such unsubdivided areas. 
(d)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. 
(e)  Street intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable, giving due regard to terrain, topography, site distances and safety. 
(f)  Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited except as short stubs to permit future expansion. 
(g)  Culs-de-sac. In general, culs-de-sac shall not exceed 600 feet in length, and shall have a turnaround of not less than 100 feet in diameter (right-of-way) with a pavement diameter of 80 feet in residential areas, and shall have a turnaround not less than 200 feet in diameter (right-of-way) with pavement diameter of 180 feet in commercial and industrial areas. 
(h)  Streets on comprehensive plan. Where a subdivision includes a street as shown on the major street plan of the city, that street shall be platted in the approximate location shown on the plan. The right-of-way shall be equal to or greater than that indicated on the comprehensive plan for streets. 
(i)  Minor streets. Minor streets shall be laid out so as to discourage their use by fast and through traffic. 
(j)  Pavement widths and rights-of-way. 
(1)  Major and secondary thoroughfares shall have right-of-way widths and pavement widths as shown in typical street cross sections of the major street plan. The board of commissioners may require a minimum right-of-way width of not more than 120 feet in those cases where such additional width is considered advisable in the opinion of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Collector streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet and a pavement width as specified by the city. 
(3)  Minor streets shall have a right-of-way width of at least 50 feet and a minimum paved width of 32 feet back to back of curb. 
(4)  Pavement widths and rights-of-way of streets forming part of the boundary of the subdivision (adjacent) shall be as follows: 
a.  Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon an existing street or half-street that does not conform to subsection (j) of this section, the subdivider shall dedicate right-of-way width sufficient to make the full right-of-way to width to conform to such subsection, and there shall be paved so much of such right-of-way as to make the full pavement width comply with such subsection. Before any pavement is laid to widen existing pavement, the existing pavement shall be cut back two feet to assure an adequate subbase and pavement joint. 
b.  No half-streets will be permitted in new subdivisions. 
(k)  Curbs. Curbs and gutters shall be installed by the subdivider on both sides of all interior streets, and on all streets forming part of the boundary of the subdivision. 
(l)  Street construction. Materials and workmanship shall conform with city standards for comparable construction elsewhere in the city. 
(m)  Street names. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or cause confusion with the names of existing streets, unless the new streets are a continuation of or in alignment with existing streets, in which case names of existing streets shall be used, and shall conform to the existing street naming system. Street signs shall conform to city standards and shall be installed at the expense of the subdivider. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-13(2); Ord. No. 1997-12, § I, 1-27-97; Ord. No. 1999-96, § 1, 11-9-99) 
Sec. 134-106. - Alleys. 
(a)  No alleys are permitted in any residential subdivision after the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived, except as may otherwise be provided in this section. 
(b)  Private alleys shall be permitted in any residential zoning district provided the alleys are 
(1)  Paved to city standards and specifications by the developer, 
(2)  In a subdivision that either (i) has a mandatory membership homeowners' association that is required to maintain them according to city specifications, or (ii) in which all the homeowners, by their deeds' restrictive covenants or otherwise, are required to pay an assessment to the city in an amount to be determined by the city, which shall be deemed sufficient for purposes of maintenance, 
(3)  Accessible to private and public utility providers, emergency and city services vehicles, and 
(4)  Generally parallel to streets and not less than 20 feet wide, subsection (e) of this section notwithstanding. 
(c)  Alleys shall be required in all non-residential zoning districts. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, streets indicated on the Foresight McAllen Thoroughfare Plan as major or minor arterials or major collectors shall be deemed the streets to which this subsection (d) applies. Alleys serving residential lots which abut major or minor arterial and major collector streets shall conform to the following specifications: 
    In residential subdivisions which have lots abutting major or minor arterials or major collectors, the residences on such lots: 
a.  Shall not face the major or minor arterial or major collector, unless: 
1.  There shall be provided, in addition to any front setback, a 20-foot planting area (as defined in chapter 110, article II, Landscaping) between such lot and the major or minor arterial or major collector; 
2.  If rear garbage pickup and/or rear access are not available to such lot, there shall be placed a service street, in addition to the planting area described in subsection (d)a.1., between the front lot line of such lot, and such planting area. Such service street shall also be at least 20 feet wide, and built to city plans and specifications by the developer. 
b.  If not facing the major or minor arterial or major collector, and the subdivision intends to have rear access and/or rear garbage pickup, shall have an alley between the rear lot line of such lots and the right-of-way line of the major or minor arterial or major collector. There shall also be constructed a buffer (as defined in chapter 110, article II, Landscaping) between such alley and such right-of-way line. 
(e)  Where unplatted business property is separated from platted residential property by a street, a developer may be required to have an alley parallel and adjacent to such street. In such case there shall also be required a buffer located and designed as described in subsection (d)b. of this section, unless the location is otherwise approved by action of the board of commissioners. If the board approves a location for the buffer other than that required in subsection (d)b. of this section, a planting strip or sidewalk at least four feet wide shall be maintained between the curb line of the street and the buffer. The city and the developer of the property requiring an alley, buffer and/or planting strip, as described in this subsection (e), shall enter into a contract for the perpetual maintenance of the buffer and/or the planting strip. 
(f)  Where two alleys meet at a right angle, a cutoff of 20 feet from the inside corner of the intersection shall be required. 
(g)  Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted. 
(h)  Alleys which do not connect on a straight course. All easements required for the maintenance of utilities shall be in the alley even if the course of the alley deviates in such a manner as to require additional easement dedications to properly maintain the guy wires and support poles for any such utilities. 
(i)  Subdivisions containing no alleys shall be required to place all electrical and telephone utilities serving such subdivision underground according to city, state and federal plans and specifications. 
(j)  In all subdivisions containing alleys that are approved on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection derives, the developer shall be required to grade and slope alleys in accordance with the engineering requirements of the city so that storm and drainage waters will drain toward streets that connect with or intersect such alleys. The subdivider shall be required at the time of the development of each of his subdivisions in which alleys are located, to deposit with the city a sufficient sum of money, to be determined by the city, to pay for necessary work in such alleys after the construction of improvements in such subdivisions is all or substantially completed, and all or substantially all of the utility connections in such alleys have been completed. 
(k)  The city may, but is not required to provide maintenance for any item required to be maintained by the homeowners association. In the event the city does provide any such maintenance then, after written notice to them, the city may assess each individual lot owner their apportioned share of the costs of such maintenance, including an administrative charge and a penalty of ten percent of the total costs, and surcharge such costs in their water and sewer utility billing from the McAllen Public Utility, and/or the city may charge for such maintenance costs as if they were dues or assessment by the homeowners association, or the city may enforce payment or compliance herewith by other provisions of law. The city may require that all of the estimated maintenance costs be paid in full prior to performing the maintenance work. The applicability of this subsection and reference to the same shall be included in the restrictive covenants. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-13(3); Ord. No. 1991-88-A, § VI, 11-27-91; Ord. No. 2007-33, § 1, 4-23-07; Ord. No. 2011-57, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 134-107. - Minimum lot size. 
    Minimum lot size in subdivisions shall be no less than the minimum requirements in other applicable city ordinances. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-13(4)) 
Sec. 134-108. - Water distribution system. 
(a)  Water supply and distribution. All subdivisions shall be provided with a water supply and distribution system approved by the utility manager as consistent with the standards developed by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) as set out in 30 TAC Chapter 290. Water wells or non-public water systems which do not meet the water quality standards developed by the TNRCC and set out in 30 TAC Chapter 290 are prohibited. 
(b)  Fire hydrants. Standard hydrants shall be installed as part of the water distribution system as approved by the water supplier with the certificate of convenience and need for the area including the subdivision where fire rated water lines are provided. A contractual agreement between the owner and the city shall be required for the provision of hydrants in areas without fire rated water lines. 
(c)  Transfer from SWSC's CCN. All subdivisions located in areas which are within the CCN responsibility of SWSC and for which there is an agreement between the city and SWSC for transfer of SWSC's CCN to the city's CCN, will be so transferred to the city's CCN upon the payment by the developer of the cost to be paid to SWSC therefor. In the case where the city or utility board has already provided for the transfer of the CCN from SWSC to the city, then the developer will reimburse the city or utility board for the pro rata costs of such transfer. 
(d)  Water meters. Water meters shall be required from the developer as part of the water supply and distribution system for subdivisions located outside of the corporate limits. Water meters shall be required from the property owner at the time of issuing a building permit for construction on lots in subdivisions located within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-13(5); Ord. No. 1994-4, § I, 1-24-94; Ord. No. 2000-89, § 7, 11-27-00; Ord. No. 2006-09, § 3, 1-31-06) 
Sec. 134-109. - Connection to sewers. 
(a)  Unless an exception exists under the provisions of this chapter or unless a variance is granted, all subdivisions shall be connected to the McAllen Public Utilities Sewage Collection and Disposal System. All systems other than the McAllen Public Utilities System must be approved by the utility manager as consistent with the standards developed by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) as set out in 30 TAC Chapters 305 and 317 and in Health Safety Code, Chapter 366. Pit privies and portable toilets are prohibited. Onsite sewerage facilities that do not meet wastewater treatment standards as developed by TNRCC as set out in 30 TAC Chapter 285 are prohibited. 
(b)  Connection with the McAllen Public Utilities Sanitary Sewer System of the city shall be required except where the utility manager recommends and the McAllen Public Utility Board determines that a separate system may be used. If a separate sanitary sewer system is proposed, it must be approved in writing to the city by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission and the state health department prior to approval of the final plat by the planning and zoning commission and must be a system which has a waste control order. 
(c)  [ Reserved. ] 
(d)  Onsite sewage disposal systems may be permitted in the extraterritorial jurisdiction or in the city limits, upon approval of the McAllen Public Utilities Board of Trustees, in a subdivision with lots, or on individual tracts, meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  For economic hardship caused by distance from existing facilities, and where the applicant is able to demonstrate that compliance with the subdivision requirements has not been circumvented by piece-meal metes and bounds conveyances; 
(2)  On lots of one acre or greater in size; 
(3)  On lots which have at least 100 feet of frontage along an existing dedicated public right-of-way; 
(4)  On lots where a septic tank/drainfield has been constructed to county standards as required under section 134-110 Onsite sewage facilities; and 
(5)  On lots where the owner of the property executes and delivers a contractual agreement for the extension of sewer utility lines as provided under section 134-87 of this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-13(6); Ord. No. 1994-20, § I, 3-28-94; Ord. No. 2000-89, § 8, 11-27-00; Ord. No. 2006-09, § 4, 1-31-06) 
Sec. 134-110. - On-site sewage facilities. 
(a)  The City of McAllen hereby adopts the Rules and ("Design Criteria for On-Site Sewage Facilities") and Administrative Rules TAC 285.1, 285.91 which such rules are on file with the utility manager and the City Engineer of the City of McAllen and as such rules and criteria are promulgated by the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission for on-site sewage systems. Such rules are hereby adopted and all officials and employees of the City of McAllen having duties under such rules are authorized to perform such duties as are required of them under such rules. 
(b)  Any owner of a structure discharging sewage into an on-site sewage facility within the jurisdiction area of the City of McAllen, Texas, must comply with the rules adopted in subsection (1) of this section. 
(c)  Such rules as hereby adopted shall apply to all areas lying within the City of McAllen, Texas. The City of McAllen clearly understands the technical criteria, legal requirements, administrative procedures and duties associated with regulating on-site sewage facilities and does adopt and will willfully enforce Chapter 336 of the Texas Health and Safety Code and the City of McAllen hereby authorizes and directs all employees having authority thereunder to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(d)  The design criteria and all future amendments and revisions of such rules are hereby incorporated by referenced and are otherwise made a part of this section. Copies of the current design criteria and rules are on file with the Utility Manager and the City Engineer of the City of McAllen and may be reviewed by the general public during the normal business hours of the City of McAllen. 
(e)  The City of McAllen in adopting these rules is hereby declaring that it is the designated representative for the enforcement of the rules within its jurisdictional area. Any individuals providing for inspection and enforcement of such rules as employees of the City of McAllen must be approved and certified by the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission before assuming the duties and responsibilities of the representative of the City of McAllen. 
(f)  The City of McAllen shall establish from time to time by minute order appropriate fees for the issuance of permits and/or inspections of OSSF's. Such fees shall be made payable to the City of McAllen, Texas. 
(g)  Persons aggrieved by any action or decision of the designated representative of the City of McAllen may appeal such action or decision to the Utility Board of the City of McAllen, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1998-45, § 2, 5-12-98; Ord. No. 1999-71, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-99) 
Sec. 134-111. - Designated representative for the City of McAllen. 
    The designated representative for the City of McAllen is a registered sanitarian employed by the City of McAllen Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 1999-71, § 3, 8-9-99) 
Secs. 134-112-134-114. - Reserved. 
Sec. 134-115. - Utility lines. 
    All utility lines in a subdivision that pass under a street or alley shall be installed before the street or alley is paved. When it is necessary that utility lines pass under the street or alley pavement, they shall be extended to a point at least three feet beyond the edge of the pavement. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-13(7); Ord. No. 1998-45, § 2, 5-12-98) 
Sec. 134-116. - Monuments and corner markers. 
(a)  All block corners, angle points and points of curves, and all corners of boundary lines of subdivisions shall be marked with a one-inch steel rod, two feet in length, with the top flush with the finished ground surface. 
(b)  Where, due to topographic conditions, permanent structures or other conditions, the view is obstructed between any two adjacent monuments in a subdivision, intermediate monuments shall be so set as to assure a clear view between adjacent monuments. 
(c)  Lot corner markers, consisting of a one-half-inch steel rod or three-quarter-inch pipe, two feet in length, shall be driven flush with the ground surface to mark the corners of all lots in a subdivision. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-13(8); Ord. No. 1998-45, § 2, 5-12-98) 
Sec. 134-117. - Drainage. 
(a)  Easement. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, natural channel or stream, or where there is a necessity for such, there shall be provided an easement or right-of-way conforming substantially to the limit of such watercourse, plus additional widths to accommodate future needs. 
(b)  Drainage facilities. Drainage facilities in subdivisions shall be provided and constructed at the expense of the subdivider pursuant to the city drainage policy and as specified by the city engineer. The subdivider shall be solely responsible for the design and installation of drainage facilities, so as to prevent flooding or like damage to any adjoining property. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-13(8.1); Ord. No. 1998-45, § 2, 5-12-98; Ord. No. 2000-52, § I, 7-10-00) 
Sec. 134-118. - Blocks. 
    Block lengths in subdivisions shall not exceed 800 feet. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-13(9); Ord. No. 1998-45, § 2, 5-12-98; Ord. No. 1999-96, § 2, 11-9-99) 
Sec. 134-119. - Crosswalks. 
    Crosswalk rights-of-way six feet in width shall be dedicated to the public where deemed necessary by the planning and zoning commission to provide pedestrian circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, and transportation and other community facilities, or to provide pedestrian circulation within the subdivision. Crosswalks shall be provided with a concrete sidewalk at least five feet wide. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-13(10); Ord. No. 1998-45, § 2, 5-12-98) 
Sec. 134-120. - Sidewalks. 
    Sidewalks in subdivisions shall be installed at the expense of the developer in the manner described in this section. 
(1)  A sidewalk complying with the provisions of this section shall be provided at the fronts of lots, and also along the street sides of corner lots at the time of completing construction of building improvements on the lot. A sidewalk shall be provided by the developer along perimeter streets of subdivisions at the time of completing perimeter street improvements. 
(2)  All sidewalks shall be not less than four feet in width and four inches in depth, and of concrete, stone or masonry construction; provided, that a greater width may be required in multifamily, commercial and industrial areas. 
(3)  Sidewalks shall be as nearly parallel to the street as possible. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall be placed so that they are at least three feet from the curb or in line with existing sidewalks in the area. 
(5)  Sidewalks shall be installed along both sides of all streets. 
(6)  In lieu of construction, cash or its equivalent may be deposited with the city in a sum equal to the actual cost of construction, plus any engineering that might be required, as an alternative to the mandatory construction of sidewalks. Such funds will be set aside by the city for the installation of sidewalks as the need arises. 
(7)  Additional sidewalks may be provided as deemed necessary and in the interest of the city by the planning and zoning commission in commercial, industrial, public and multifamily areas; and such additional sidewalks as the developer may desire shall be permitted. 
(Code 1966, § 261/2-13; Ord. No. 1998-45, § 2, 5-12-98; Ord. No. 1999-96, § 3, 11-9-99) 
Secs. 134-121-134-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1999-96, § 4, adopted Nov. 9, 1999, amended Art. IV, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 138; zoning district regulations, § 138-141 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 134-136. - Purpose and applicability. 
    The purposes of this chapter may be achieved by the development of planned units which do not conform in all respects with the land use pattern designated on the zoning map or the district regulations prescribed by the zoning ordinance. A planned development may include a combination of different dwelling types and/or a variety of land uses which creatively complement each other and harmonize with existing and proposed land uses in the vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 1999-96, § 4, 11-9-99) 
Sec. 134-137. - Minimum site area. 
    The minimum site area for a planned development shall be five acres. 
(Ord. No. 1999-96, § 4, 11-9-99) 
Secs. 134-138-134-150 - Reserved 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 134-151. - Conditional use permit required. 
    A planned unit development may be located in zoning districts Single-Family Residential (R-1), Duplex-Fourplex Residential (R-2), Multifamily Residential (R-3), Mobile Home and Modular Home (R-4), Office Building (C-1), and Neighborhood Commercial (C-2) upon the granting of a conditional use permit for life of the use in accordance with the provisions of this division and Chapter 138 Zoning, Article IV, Conditional Use Permits. 
    A planned shopping center may be located in zoning districts General Business (C-3), Light Commercial (C-3L), Commercial Industrial (C-4), Light Industrial (I-1) and Heavy Industrial (I-2) upon the granting of a conditional use permit for life of the use in accordance with the provisions of this division and Chapter 138 Zoning, Article IV, Conditional Use Permits. 
    A planned industrial park may be located in zoning districts Light Industrial (I-1) and Heavy Industrial (I-2) upon the granting of a conditional use permit for life of the use in accordance with the provisions of this division and Chapter 138 Zoning, Article IV, Conditional Use Permits. 
    A planned development, planned shopping center or planned industrial park located outside the corporate limits is not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1999-96, § 4, 11-9-99) 
Sec. 134-152. - Site plan requirements. 
    The conditional use permit application for a planned unit development, planned shopping center or planned industrial park shall be accompanied by a site plan of the entire development. The site plan shall show the following items: 
(1)  Owner, engineer and surveyor certification 
(2)  Survey of the property showing boundary of the property and exact acreage; exact location, dimensions, names and description of existing or recorded streets, alleys, easements, reservations or other public right-of-way within, contiguous or intersecting the property; exact location, dimension, description and flow line of existing watercourses and drainage structures within or contiguous to the property; contour information at two foot intervals; and exact location, description and name of existing or recorded lots and ownership of all unplatted properties within or contiguous to the property. 
(3)  Location, dimension, names, width of right-of-way and pavement of proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalks and trails. 
(4)  Location, dimension, identification number or letter, land use, building setback lines, and maximum building height for proposed lots. 
(5)  Location, number of dwelling units, number of bedrooms by dwelling units for triplex-multifamily units, gross floor area by type of nonresidential use for proposed structures. 
(6)  A tabulation of average dwelling unit density per gross acre in the area or areas proposed for residential use. 
(7)  Location and dimension of driveways, parking and maneuvering space, loading areas, fire lanes, type of pavement surfaces, sanitary collection facilities and compliance with accessibility standards. 
(8)  Location and dimension of landscape areas, type and caliper of trees, height of walls, fences or planting screens, type of irrigation systems, and percent of xeriscape areas. 
(9)  Location, height, type and orientation of signs. 
(10)  Typical utility assignment plan for locating of street lights, utility poles and boxes, fire hydrants and mailboxes within rights-of-way. 
(11)  Reference note to homeowner's association or condominium regime establishing restrictive covenants and including by [but] not limited to typical building elevations, architectural controls and maintenance of common areas including perimeter fences and landscaping within rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1999-96, § 4, 11-9-99) 
Sec. 134-153. - Granting of permit. 
    The conditional use permit for a planned development may be granted based upon the following findings: 
(1)  That the location of the development is in accord with the objectives of the comprehensive general plan and the zoning and subdivision ordinances and the major purposes of the district in which the site is located. 
(2)  That the standards of dwelling unit density, site area and dimensions, site coverage, yard spaces, heights of structures, distances between structures, usable open space, and offstreet parking and offstreet loading facilities will be such that the development will not generate more traffic than the streets in the vicinity can carry without congestion and will not overload utilities. 
(3)  That the combination of different dwelling types and/or the variety of land uses in the development will complement each other and will harmonize with existing and proposed land uses in the vicinity. 
(4)  That the design of grades, paving, gutters, drainage and treatment of turf are adequate to handle stormwaters and prevent erosion, and to minimize flooding and formation of dust. 
(5)  That the arrangement of pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, offstreet parking and loading spaces, and facilities for waste disposal and illumination are adequate, safe and convenient. 
(6)  That the location of pedestrian walks, malls and public transportation loading places from general vehicular circulation facilities are adequate, safe and convenient. 
(7)  That the arrangement of buildings, open spaces and vehicular circulation does not unnecessarily expose pedestrians to vehicular traffic. 
(8)  That the arrangement of signs and lighting devices with respect to traffic control devices and adjacent residential districts does not interfere with driver operations or invade the privacy of residential areas. 
(9)  That fences, walls, or year-round planting screens are adequate to shield adjacent residential districts from parking illumination, headlights, fumes, heat, blowing papers and dust; and are proper to increase the visual privacy and residential neighborhood character. 
(10)  That the average dwelling unit density per gross acre of the development does not exceed the maximum number of dwelling units per gross acre of the zoning district wherein the development is located. 
(Ord. No. 1999-96, § 4, 11-9-99) 
Sec. 134-154. - Site plan review. 
    Each site plan shall be submitted to the planning director and shall be reviewed in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The applicant shall file with the conditional use permit application six copies of the site plan, two location maps and two eight and one-half-inch by 11-inch copies of the site plan with name and north arrow. 
(2)  The site plan shall be reviewed by city departments for compliance with development standards, and the director of planning shall recommend to the planning and zoning commission whether such site plan shall be approved subject to compliance with modifications or conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1999-96, § 4, 11-9-99) 
Sec. 134-155. - Site plan recording. 
    After approval of the site plan by the board of commissioners, the applicant shall submit a tracing and copy of the revised site plan for final review showing all required modifications. Upon approval of the final site plan by city departments, the director of planning shall file a reproducible copy of the site plan with the engineering department and paper copies of the site plan with the Building Official, Manager of McAllen Public Utilities and Planning Department. 
(Ord. No. 1999-96, § 4, 11-9-99) 
Sec. 134-156. - Amendments. 
    Amendment to an approved conditional use permit and site plan shall be reviewed in accordance with the same time limits and procedures as provided in this division for an original submission. 
(Ord. No. 1999-96, § 4, 11-9-99) 
Sec. 134-157. - Effects of recording site plan. 
    All site plans approved and filed under this division shall be binding upon the applicants; therefore, their successors and assignees shall limit and control the issuance and validity of all permits and shall restrict and limit the construction, location, use and operation of all land and structures included within such plans to all conditions and limitations set forth in such plans. The restrictions and requirements of the site plan shall become effective upon the recording of a final plat. The recording of a final plat shall bind future unplatted areas covered by the conditional use permit to the approved site plan. The board of commissioners shall set the expiration date of the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1999-96, § 4, 11-9-99) 
Secs. 134-158-134-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 134-166. - Application for private subdivision. 
    At the time of filing of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may apply for and designate the plat as a private subdivision. The name of the subdivision shall include directly or in parenthesis after the name the designation "private subdivision" or "gated community." The approval process for a private subdivision shall be the same as for a subdivision under this chapter except as specifically provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 2006-14, § 2, 2-15-06) 
Sec. 134-167. - Private streets and sidewalks; gated entries. 
(a)  All interior streets, street lights, traffic control devices and sidewalks will be considered private streets, private street lights, private traffic control devices and private sidewalks and restrictions such as walls and gates may be erected to restrict the general public from entering upon and using such interior streets and sidewalks. Such streets will be accessible to private and public utility providers and to emergency vehicles by providing entry information or the installation of "break away barriers" as deemed necessary by the city engineer during the approval process. 
(b)  Private streets, street lights, private traffic control devices and sidewalks shall be constructed in conformance with the same right-of-way, pavement width, curb and gutter, sidewalk and construction specifications as public streets, public streetlights, public traffic control devices and sidewalks. Alternative standards providing less right-of-way or pavement width, alternative curb and gutter designs, nonstandard sidewalk designs or construction materials, nonstandard street lights or traffic control devices, nonstandard construction specifications and landscaping within private street right-of-way shall be approved by the city engineer on the construction plans. 
(c)  Gates on private streets shall be setback with a turnaround as specified by the city engineer. Gate clearance and mechanisms shall comply with the requirements of the fire marshall for emergency access. A secondary access shall be required for gated streets providing access to 30 or more dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 2006-14, § 2, 2-15-06) 
Sec. 134-168. - Maintenance obligations and homeowner's association. 
(a)  The subdivider/developer/owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all private streets, private street lighting (including any electrical service charges or meters) private traffic control devices and private sidewalks and common areas (including perimeter fencing or walls) of the subdivision. Such maintenance obligation shall be to city standards or alternative standards as specified and approved on the construction plans at the time of subdivision. In addition, the subdivider/developer/owner shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of all exterior landscaping between the property line or fence or wall line of the private subdivision and the curbline of the adjacent road or street. The subdivider/developer/owner may transfer such maintenance obligation to the subdivision homeowner's association upon the sale of 75 percent of the lots in the subdivision or upon a lesser number of lots being sold if such number is approved by the city engineer as part of the subdivision approval and included in the homeowner's association declarations. 
(b)  A homeowner's association shall be created for each private subdivision by reference in the plat and the recording of restrictive covenants for the subdivision in the official records of Hidalgo County so as to "run with the land" and be binding on subsequent lot owners as part of the plat approval process. The restrictive covenants shall include the obligations and restrictions set out herein as a minimum and may provide for additional provisions including more stringent requirements at the discretion of the subdivider/owner. The restrictive covenants shall require the homeowner's association, upon transfer from the subdivider/developer/owner, to maintain private streets, street lights, traffic control devices and sidewalks, common areas (including perimeter fencing or walls and exterior landscaping) to city standards or alternative standards as specified on the construction plans. The homeowner's association shall designate an agent for the homeowner's association for the purpose of receiving communication from the city and shall notify the city secretary of such designation and any substitution or replacement of such agent. 
(c)  The city may, but is under no obligation, to provide any maintenance for any item required to be maintained by the homeowner's association. In the case that the city does provide any of such maintenance, after notice, the city may surcharge the individual lot owners for the costs of such maintenance (including an administrative charge) in the water and sewer utility billing from the McAllen Public Utility and/or the city may charge for such maintenance as if it was a dues or assessment by the homeowner's association or the city may enforce payment or compliance herewith by other provisions of law. The foregoing right of the city as it relates to compliance with maintenance obligations of the homeowner's association and individual lot owners shall be included in the restrictive covenants. 
(d)  Prior to the commencement of any maintenance service by the city, the homeowner's association shall be given ten business days' written notice of the maintenance deficiency to be corrected by the city. In the case where the agent for the homeowner's association is unknown to the city, then such notice shall be sent to the individual lot owners as shown on the tax records. If the homeowner's association or lot owner(s) provide sufficient written assurance that such maintenance deficiencies will be corrected within a reasonable period of time agreed to by the city engineer, and the city is paid its administrative costs for sending the notice, and such deficiencies are then corrected, then the city will not correct the deficiencies. If the city does correct the deficiencies then the city shall collect the costs therefore as provided for above. 
(Ord. No. 2006-14, § 2, 2-15-06) 
Secs. 134-169-134-174. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-14, § 2, adopted Feb. 15, 2006, renumbered Ch. 134, Art. IV, Div. 3 as Div. 4. Said ordinance also renumbered former § 134-166 as § 134-175. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 

Sec. 134-175. - Coordination with subdivision regulations. 
    It is the intent of this division that the subdivision ordinance be carried out simultaneously with the review of the conditional use permit and site plan under other pertinent sections of this chapter. 
(1)  The plats required under this division must be submitted in a form which will satisfy the requirements for preliminary and final plats required under this chapter. 
(2)  Both this division and other sections of this chapter contain regulations which apply to such matters in the design of a planned development as streets and open spaces. In any planned development for which the provisions of the two are in conflict, the board of commissioners shall make the decision as to which shall prevail. 
(3)  No preliminary or final plat under this division shall be approved unless it is in full compliance with the approved site plan. 
(Ord. No. 1999-96, § 4, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2006-14, § 2, 2-15-06) 
Note- Formerly § 134-166. 
Chapter 138 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- General corporate powers, art. 2, § 1. 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; regulations regarding proximity of alcoholic beverage establishment to church, school or hospital, § 6-2; beekeeping regulations and restrictions, § 14-111 et seq.; aviation, ch. 18; comprehensive plan, § 126-26 et seq.; planned unit developments, § 134-136 et seq.; airport zoning regulations, app. A. 
State Law reference- Land use and zoning regulations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 138-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory building means a subordinate building, located on the same lot as the main building, the use of which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with the main building or principal use of the property. 
    Accessory use means a use which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with the principal use of the premises and which is located on the same lot as the principal use. 
    Accessory use of building means a subordinate use or structure customarily incident to and located on the lot occupied by the main use or structure and conforming with setback and other regulations concerning location. 
    Adopted policies means a written administrative directive discussed at a public meeting and officially adopted by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. 
    Alley means a minor public right-of-way which is used primarily for vehicular and utility service access to the backs or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a public street. 
    Apartment means a room or suite of rooms located in a building with other such rooms or suites arranged, designed, or to be occupied as a residence by a family. (See Dwelling unit.) 
    Apartment house. See Dwelling, multiple. 
    Associated recreation means recreational uses which are an integral part of a common ownership or associated or high density residential development (example: homeowners' association with a private club or facility). 
    Authorized agent means an architect, builder, developer or other person empowered to act on behalf of such persons. 
    Bar, cocktail lounge, tavern, saloon or cantina means an establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold for on-premises consumption, other than a restaurant as defined in this section. 
    Base station. As defined in section 138-1.A - Eligible facilities request (Section 6409) Definitions, below, except for new base stations that are not eligible for Section 6409, need not be existing at the time of the application, nor does subsection 138-1.A(a)1.c. apply to a new base station. 
    Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel where lodging and meals are provided for compensation. 
    Broadcast tower means a structure exceeding 120 feet in height, with or without guide wires, used to transmit and/or receive commercial radio or HDTV television signal. This does not include any telecommunication facilities or personal wireless service facility used for wireless communications. 
    Building means any structure designed to be built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind. The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
    Carrier on wheels or cell on wheels ("COW"). A portable self-contained mobile facility moved to a location and set up to provide wireless services on a temporary or emergency basis. 
    Collocation. As defined in section 138-1.A - Eligible facilities request (Section 6409) Definitions, below, except for new towers and base station that are not eligible for Section 6409, need not be existing at the time of the application. 
    Concealed or stealth design elements. A design elements of any tower, base station or transmission equipment that allows it to be integrated as an architectural feature of a tower or base station or so that it is not readily apparent to a casual observer. It may be screened, disguised, concealed or otherwise camouflaged as a natural structure, structure or part of a structure so that it is not easily recognizable from other natural structures. 
    Conditional use means a use which may be suitable in certain locations in a zoning district if developed and operated under specific conditions and/or for a limited period of time. 
    Depth of lot means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. (See definitions of Front and Rear lot lines.) 
    District means a section of the city for which the regulations governing the areas, heights or uses of buildings are uniform. 
    Dwelling unit means any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used primarily for residential occupancy, but not including hotels, boardinghouses or mobile homes. 
(1)  Single-family means a building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one family as a separate dwelling unit. 
(2)  Duplex means a building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other. 
(3)  Triplex means a building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by three families living independently of each other. 
(4)  Fourplex means a building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by four families living independently of each other. 
(5)  Multiple means a building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by five or more families living independently of each other. 
The determination of whether one family is living independent of another is based on one or more of the following criteria: separate sanitary facilities; separate kitchen facilities; separate entrances; or separate utilities. 
    Eligible facilities request. As defined in section 138-1.A - Eligible facilities request (Section 6409) Definitions, below. 
    Eligible support structure. As defined in section 138-1.A - Eligible facilities request (Section 6409) Definitions, below. 
    Exempt political sign has the same meaning as it does in section 130-1 of the McAllen Code of Ordinances. 
    Existing. As defined in section 138-1.A - Eligible facilities request (Section 6409) Definitions, below. 
    Family means one or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit with common sanitary and kitchen facilities. 
    Garage, commercial means a building or premises used for storage, repair, rental or servicing of motor vehicles. 
    Garage, private means an accessory building, attached or detached, designed or used for the storage of motor-driven vehicles owned and used only by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
    Guesthouse means an accessory building designed for the temporary occupancy of guests of the primary dwelling for which there is no remuneration. "Maids' quarters" means a portion of a dwelling unit, within the same enclosure and not a separate accessory building attached to the primary building, that may contain separate sanitary and/or kitchen facilities which is designed for or used for residential occupancy by an employee of the primary residence. 
    Height means, for a building or portion of a building, the vertical distance from grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, the deckline of a mansard roof, and the mean height level between eaves and ridge for hip, gable or gambrel roofs. In measuring the height of a building, the following structures shall be excluded: chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, mechanical rooms, tanks, water towers, radio towers, television antennas, ornamental cupolas, domes or spires, and parapet walls not exceeding four feet in height. Heights authorized in this chapter are subordinate to the airport zoning ordinance, appendix A. 
    Home occupation means an activity carried on by a member of the immediate family, residing on the premises, that meets the provisions of subsection 138-118(a)(1). 
    Hotel or motel means a building occupied as a temporary abiding place of individuals at which parking may be conveniently located at each unit and where there are more than six sleeping rooms provided for compensation. 
    Institution means a nonprofit or for-profit organization or building of a public or charitable character, educational facilities, places of worship, cemeteries, or agencies of government. 
    Loading space means a space within the main building or on the same lot therewith, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and having a minimum dimension of 12 by 35 feet and a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. 
    Lot means an undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street, and which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement, which is designated as a distinct and separate tract, and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed of record. The word "lot" includes the word "plot." 
(1)  Corner lot means a lot abutting upon two or more public streets at their intersection. 
(2)  Building coverage means percentage of the lot that is occupied by the ground area of a building and its accessory buildings. 
(3)  Lot, double frontage means a lot abutting on two nonintersecting public streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
(4)  Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as defined in this section. 
a.  Front lot line means the property line between the front yard and the contiguous street right-of-way boundary. 
b.  Rear lot line means the property line between the rear yard and the adjacent property or right-of-way, and contiguous with the legal boundary of such use. 
c.  Side lot line means the property between two adjacent lots or between the side yard and the contiguous street right-of-way boundary on corner lots. 
    Lot of record means a parcel of land which is part of a subdivision, the map or plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk; or a tract of land not a part of an urban or town lot subdivision, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk prior to October 15, 1973, which has not been divided since recording. 
    Maneuvering space means the space entirely on private property required for maneuvering vehicles in such a manner as to preclude the backing of any vehicle into any street right-of-way. 
    Mobile home means a movable or portable dwelling originally constructed to be towed, on its own chassis, by a motor vehicle over public roads. 
    Mobile home and modular home park means a unified development of five acres or more for mobile homes arranged on a tract of land owned by an individual or a single business entity for the purpose of renting or leasing lots, and meeting the requirements of chapter 122, article II of this Code. 
    Mobile home and modular home subdivision means a unified development of five acres or more for mobile homes arranged on a tract of land in such a manner as to provide an individual lot (see definition of Lot) for each of the mobile homes. 
    Modular home means a dwelling unit in which more than 50 percent of the structure is constructed at other than the construction site, brought to the site in modules, and set on a permanent foundation. 
    Nightclub, discotheque, disco or dancehall means an establishment whose primary activity is the provision of facilities for dancing, including a dance floor and live entertainment or amplified music. Such establishment may or may not provide on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages. Schools of dance are exempted from this definition. 
    Ornamental feature means an addition to a structure designed to enhance the appearance of the structure, in compliance with all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Any space occupied by or enclosed by the ornamental feature should not be included in or made a part of the air conditioned, heated, or enclosed portion of the structure; 
(2)  The feature should serve no purpose or function for the structure other than ornamentation. The building should be equally functional without the feature as with the feature; and 
(3)  The feature shall extend no further than 24 inches into a required yard. 
    Parking area means a space used exclusively for the parking of vehicles and where no other business is conducted. 
    Parking space means an area, not closer than six feet from the back edge of the curb, the width and length of which shall exceed by a minimum of two feet the dimensions of the type of vehicle normally to be parked in the space, and connected with a street or alley by a driveway affording satisfactory ingress and egress. The minimum dimension of a parking space shall be in accordance with the city off-street parking requirements in article VII of this chapter. 
    Personal wireless service. As defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7). 1 [] 
    Personal wireless service facilities. As defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7). 2 [] 
    Planned unit development (PUD) means and includes a combination of different dwelling types and/or a variety of land uses which creatively complement each other and harmonize with existing and proposed land uses in the vicinity, and which comply with the Planned Unit Development provisions of chapter 134, article IV of this Code. 
    Portable building means a temporary building that does not have a foundation and is transportable. 
    Recreational vehicle or travel trailer means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified as a travel trailer by the manufacturer of the trailer and, when factory-equipped for the road, it shall have a body width not exceeding eight feet and a body length not exceeding state maximums. 
    Residential storage building means any building, either portable or constructed onsite, utilized for storage purposes and not requiring plumbing and electrical wiring, and not used for living quarters. 
    Restaurant means a building or portion of a building where the primary business is the on-premises sale of prepared food, with adequate kitchen facilities for the preparation of the food to be sold, the adequacy of such kitchen facilities to be based upon the seating capacity of the restaurant and the type of menu offered, and where alcoholic beverages may be sold under the following conditions: 
(1)  At least 51 percent of the gross income shall be derived from the sale of prepared food. 
(2)  Any outside entrances, outside separate identification, outside signs or other separate advertising for lounge or bar areas shall be permitted only as an accessory or secondary feature of the restaurant. 
(3)  Live entertainment may be permitted. 
(4)  Whenever the director of planning on the basis of a sworn complaint from any person determines that a violation of this section exists, he may require any person serving alcoholic beverages as an incidental use to provide the city, within 30 days of notification, a verified audit for each quarter of the calendar year, showing the gross income derived from the sale of food. 
    Retail means the sale of goods directly to a consumer; engaged in, pertaining to or relating to the sale of merchandise at retail; or selling by individual items, or by the piece, directly to a consumer. 
    Right-of-way line means a dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and the public right-of-way. 
    Sign means a name, identification, image, description, display or illustration which is affixed to, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, facility, service, event, attraction, person, institution, organization or business and which is visible from any street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park or other public property. Customary displays of merchandise or objects and material without lettering placed behind a store window are not signs or parts. Included in this definition are the following signs: 
(1)  Animated sign, meaning a sign with action or motion, flashing color ranges requiring electrical energy, electronic or manufactured sources of supply, but not including wind-actuated elements such as flags, banners or special items. 
(2)  Directional sign, meaning a sign containing directional information about public places owned or operated by federal, state or local governments or their agencies; publicly or privately owned natural phenomena; historic, cultural, scientific, educational and religious sites; and areas of natural scenic beauty or naturally suited for outdoor recreation deemed to be in the interest of the traveling public and having statewide or regional significance. 
(3)  Freestanding sign, meaning a sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces in or upon the ground. 
(4)  Illuminated sign, meaning a sign in which a source of light is used in order to make the message readable. This definition shall include internally and externally lighted signs and reflectorized, glowing or radiating signs. 
(5)  Nameplate, meaning a sign attached to a building not more than one square foot in area identifying the owner or lessor, and his title or occupation. 
(6)  Off-premises sign, meaning a sign, including the supporting sign structure, which directs the attention of the general public to a business, service or activity not usually conducted or a product not usually offered or sold upon the premises where such a sign is located. None of the following shall be deemed an off-premises outdoor advertising sign: 
a.  Directional and other official signs authorized by law. 
b.  Real estate signs. 
c.  Political signs. 
d.  Signs which have a significant portion of their face area devoted to giving public service information such as, but not limited to, time, date, temperature, weather or similar information. 
(7)  Official signs, meaning directional and other official signs authorized by law, including signs pertaining to natural wonders and scenic and historic attractions, and signs which have as their purpose the protection of life and property. 
(8)  On-premises sign, meaning a sign which directs the attention of the general public to a lawful use of the premises on which it is located, including signs or sign devices indicating the business transacted at, services rendered, goods sold or produced on the premises, name of the business, and name of the person occupying the premises. 
(9)  Political sign, meaning any sign whose sole purpose is the transmittal of information concerning an upcoming political issue or campaign, or a public issue of potential concern to the community as a whole. 
(10)  Portable sign, meaning a freestanding and movable sign designed to be temporary and mobile. This definition includes signs attached to trailers, but does not include signs permanently placed on the sides of motor vehicles. 
(11)  Private directional sign, meaning a sign not erected by or under authority of any governmental agency, which contains only information designed to direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic and which contains no advertising material or a business name. Examples of private directional signs include signs bearing only the word "entrance" or "exit" located on or near a parking lot. No sign which contains the name of a business or activity or any other advertising material shall be considered a private directional sign, even though such sign may also contain the word "entrance" or "exit." A sign containing the word "parking" at any parking lot where any person is charged any fee or other monetary consideration for parking shall be considered an advertising sign, not a private directional sign. 
(12)  Real estate sign, meaning any sign smaller than three feet by four feet, temporarily advertising the sale or lease of the property upon which it is located, or any permanent sign affixed to a gate or entryway advertising only the name and address of a subdivision, apartment complex or residential district. 
    Site. As defined in section 138-1.A - Eligible facilities request (Section 6409) Definitions, below. 
    Street means a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, excluding alleys. 
    Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    Structure means anything constructed, erected or artificially built up; or composed of parts and joined together in a permanent manner. 
    Substantial change. As defined in section 138-1.A - Eligible facilities request (Section 6409) Definitions, below. 
    Tourist court. See Hotel or motel. 
    Tower. As defined in section 138-1.A - Eligible facilities request (Section 6409) Definitions, below, except for new towers that are not eligible for Section 6409, they need not be existing at the time of the application. 
    Townhouse means a single-family dwelling unit constructed in a series or a group of units having common walls, each on a separate lot. 
    Transit vehicle is any transport vehicle used as a common carrier with a rated passenger capacity minimum of eight, excluding the driver position, with provisions for safe seating of adult passengers. 
    Transit terminal means a facility for the provision of passenger services for transit vehicles such as ticketing, baggage check-in and claim areas, restrooms, lockers and waiting areas; and transit vehicles services such as bus bays for passenger loading and layover parking, interior bus cleaning and non-mechanical repair services. 
    Transmission equipment. As defined in section 138-1.A - Eligible facilities request (Section 6409) Definitions, below. 
    Transport vehicle means a motor vehicle traversing the public streets of the city used in the operation of a common carrier. 
    Wholesale means the sale of commodities for the purpose of resale, as to retailers or jobbers rather than to consumers directly; opposed to "retail." Of, pertaining to, or engaged in sale at wholesale. 
    Yard means an open space between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in the definitions of "yard" set out in this section. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
(1)  Front yard means a yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way line and wall of the main building or any projections thereof other than projections of the usual uncovered steps, uncovered balconies or uncovered porches. On corner lots, the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension, except where corner lots may be square in dimension and/or have double frontage, in which case the front yard shall correspond to the lot's side adjacent to the longest block face in which it occurs and to which the majority of the existing structures front. 
(2)  Rear yard means a yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the required minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections thereof other than projections of uncovered steps, uncovered balconies or uncovered porches. On all lots, the rear yard shall be in the rear of the front yard. 
(3)  Side yard means a yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the sides of the main buildings or any projections thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 32-2; Ord. No. 1996-8, § I, 1-22-96; Ord. No. 1996-70, § I, 11-18-96; Ord. No. 1998-68, § 1, 2-27-98; Ord. No. 1999-69, § 1, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 2004-15, § 5, 2-9-04; Ord. No. 2015-38, § II, 5-11-15) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Note- 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C) Definitions. For purposes of this paragraph-(i) the term "personal wireless services" means commercial mobile services [cellular service], unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services..."; 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) ....(1) the term "commercial mobile service" means any mobile service (as defined in section 153 of this title) that is provided for profit and makes interconnected service available (A) to the public or (B) to such classes of eligible users as to be effectively available to a substantial portion of the public, as specified by regulation by the Commission;..." 

--- () --- 
Note- 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C) Definitions For purposes of this paragraph... (ii) the term "personal wireless service facilities" means facilities for the provision of personal wireless services..." 

Sec. 138-1.A. - Eligible facilities request (Section 6409) Definitions and Procedures. 
    These definitions and related Section 6409 procedures only apply to the city to the extent the FCC's Acceleration of Broadband Deployment by Improving Wireless Facilities Siting Policies, Report and Order, 29 FCC Rcd 12865 (2014), ("2014 Infrastructure Order") preempts existing city procedures and to the extent the 2014 Infrastructure Order is effective as federal law. 3 [] 
    The city expressly reserves its rights to revise or repeal any or all of these definitions and related Section 6409 procedures to the extent the 2014 Infrastructure Order is interpreted, modified, revised or enjoined on any appeal or reconsideration in a manner inconsistent with the definitions in or procedure in this section. 
(a)  Eligible facilities request (Section 6409) Definitions. For the purposes of a personal wireless facilities siting permit under Section 6409(a), 4 [] as interpreted by the Federal Communications Commission's ("FCC") in the 2014 Infrastructure Order, which is asserted to be a qualified application for a Section 6409 eligible facilities request, [] the following defined terms shall be used: 
(1)  Base station. A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in subsection (a)(1)a, below or any equipment associated with a tower. Base station includes, without limitation: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
b.  Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems ("DAS") and small-cell networks). 
c.  Any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the city, supports or houses equipment described in subsections (a)(1)a and b, that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing that support. 
The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the city, does not support or house equipment described in subsections (a)(1)a and b of this section. 
(2)  Collocation. The mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes. 6 [] 
(3)  Eligible facilities request. Any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving: 
a.  Collocation of new transmission equipment; 
b.  Removal of transmission equipment; or 
c.  Replacement of transmission equipment. 
(4)  Eligible support structure. Any tower or base station, as defined in these Section 6409 Definitions, provided that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the city. 
(5)  Existing. A constructed tower or base station is existing for purposes of Section 6409 if it has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, provided that a tower that has not been reviewed and reviewed because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of Section 6409. 
(6)  Site. For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other eligible support structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground. 
(7)  Substantial change. A modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the following criteria: 
a.  For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than ten percent or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than ten percent or more than ten feet, whichever is greater; 7 [] 
b.  For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet; 
c.  For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure; 
d.  It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site; 
e.  It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or 
f.  It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment, provided however that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is noncompliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in subsections (a)(7)a-f, above. 
(8)  Transmission equipment. Equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
(9)  Tower. Any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. 
(b)  Eligible facilities request (Section 6409) application review. 8 [] 
(1)  Application. The city shall prepare and make publicly available an application form which shall be limited to the information necessary for the city to consider whether an application is a qualified eligible facilities request. The application may not require the applicant to demonstrate a need or business case for the proposed modification. 
(2)  Type of review. Upon receipt of self-described application for an eligible facilities request, the designated city department shall review such application to determine whether the application qualifies as a Section 6409 eligible facility request, in accordance with the 2014 Infrastructure Order. 
(3)  Timeframe for review. Within 60 days of the date on which an applicant submits an application seeking approval, the city shall approve the application unless it determines that the application is not a qualified Section 6409 eligible facilities request. 
(4)  Tolling of the timeframe for review. The 60-day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement by the city and the applicant, or in cases where the city determines that the application is incomplete. The timeframe for review is not tolled by a moratorium on the review of applications. 
a.  To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the city must provide written notice to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application. 
b.  The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the city's notice of incompleteness. 
c.  Following a supplemental submission, the city will notify the applicant within ten days that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in subsection (4)b of this section. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness. 
(5)  Failure to act. In the event the city fails to approve or deny a request seeking approval of an eligible facilities request within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted. The deemed grant does not become effective until the applicant notifies the city in writing after the review period has expired (accounting for any tolling) that the application has been deemed granted. 9 [] 
(6)  Remedies. Applicants and the city may bring claims related to Section 6409(a) to any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(7)  Interaction with Section 332(c)(7). 10 [] If the city determines that the applicant's request is not a Section 6409 eligible facilities request, the presumptively reasonable timeframe under Section 332(c)(7), as prescribed by the FCC's Shot Clock order, [] as interpreted by the 2014 Infrastructure Order, [] will begin to run from the issuance of the city's decision that the application is not an eligible facilities request. To the extent such information is necessary, as determined by the city, the city may request additional information from the applicant to evaluate the application under Section 332(c)(7), pursuant to the limitations applicable to other Section 332(c)(7) reviews. 
(Ord. No. 2015-38, § III, 5-11-15) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Note- The 2014 Infrastructure Order rules are effective April 8, 2015, except following portions of the Section 6409, (a) FCC rules requiring Office of Management and Budget (OMB) approval before they are effective: 47 C.F.R. §§ 1.40001(c)(3)(i) [30-day time line from date of application filing for city to provide notice of incompleteness and request for supplemental information to toll the 60 days "shot clock"]; 1.40001(c)(3)(iii) [City ten-day review of supplemental information, and subsequent request to submit information to further toll the "shot clock"]; and 1.40001(c)(4) [60-day failure to act "deemed granted"]. The link to the FCC's OMB approval request is: FR Notice. As of April 16, 2015 there has not been a federal register FCC notice of OMB approval. Until there has been OMB approval those identical requirements, deadlines to act, and procedural requirements or limitations, as they are set forth in this section 138-1.A., (b), are not effective. 

--- () --- 
Note- Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, 112 Pub. L. 96, [Feb. 22, 2012] ("Spectrum Act"), Section 6409 codified at 47 U.S.C. § 1455. ("Section 6409"). 

--- () --- 
Note- Section 6409 eligible facility request means the applicant has met all the Section 6409(a) criteria, as set forth in the 2014 Infrastructure Order. 

--- () --- 
Note- The FCC has clarified that "collocation" includes the first placement of transmission equipment on a wireless tower or base station (as a base station, by definition, already has a wireless device on it). See 2014 Infrastructure Order ¶ 179. 

--- () --- 
Note- Changes in height should be measured from the original support structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on buildings' rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height should be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act, Feb. 22, 2012. 47 CFR § 1.40001(b)(7)(i)(A). 

--- () --- 
Note- The 2014 Infrastructure Order rules are effective April 8, 2015, except following portions of the Section 6409, (a) FCC rules requiring Office of Management and Budget (OMB) approval before they are effective: 47 C.F.R. §§ 1.40001(c)(3)(i) [30-day time line from date of application filing for city to provide notice of incompleteness and request for supplemental information to toll the 60 days "shot clock"]; 1.40001(c)(3)(iii) [City ten-day review of supplemental information, and subsequent request to submit information to further toll the "shot clock"]; and 1.40001(c)(4) [60-day failure to act "deemed granted"]. The link to the FCC's OMB approval request is: FR Notice. As of April 16, 2015 there has not been a federal register FCC notice of OMB approval. Until there has been OMB approval those identical requirements, deadlines to act, and procedural requirements or limitations, as they are set forth in this section 138-1.A., (b), are not effective. 

--- () --- 
Note- If the city does not act on the application and the application is "deemed granted", that deemed grant shall not be construed to include any granted variance, or other previously or currently required zoning condition, except as to height, width, excavation and cabinets, but only to the extent allowed by the 2014 Infrastructure Order. The deemed grant shall not extend to any other required zoning requirement or constitute as city consent to waive any prior imposed conditions. The deemed grant shall not be deemed a waiver of any of the requirements for information required of owners of the property site in the application, as to either privately owned property or city owned public property or city controlled public property, as set forth in the application. The deemed grant shall not be deemed as consent or a grant or license by the city for the applicant to use or occupy any publicly owned or controlled public property, or as a waiver for the city to require consent or a grant or license by the city to use or occupy any publicly owned or controlled public property. 

--- () --- 
Note- 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7). 

--- () --- 
Note- In re Petition for Declaratory Ruling to Clarify Provisions of Section 332(c)(7)(B) to Ensure Timely Siting Review and to Preempt Under Section 253 State and Local Ordinances that Classify All Wireless Siting Proposals as Requiring a Variance, Declaratory Ruling, 24 FCC Rcd 13994 (2009) ("Shot Clock Ruling"). 

--- () --- 
Note- Set out in 2014 Infrastructure Order ¶¶ 258-260. 

Sec. 138-1.B. - Application for a personal wireless service facility. 
    The applicant for a personal wireless service facilities site shall complete the application, and any addendum to the application, provided by the planning and zoning department. The application must be completed for all personal wireless service facilities sites, both for those sites which require a conditional use permit and for those sites meet the then current zoning criteria. 
    The application may be revised from time to time, as reasonably determined by the planning and zoning department to be consistent with state and federal law. 13 [] 
(Ord. No. 2015-38, § III, 5-11-15) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Note- 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7), imposes several restrictions on local authority concerning "the placement, construction and modification of personal wireless service facilities", while otherwise preserving municipal regulatory and zoning authority. Section 6409 also imposes certain restrictions on the city. The application assist the city in determining the applicability of 47 U.S.C. § 332(c) and Section 6409. 

Sec. 138-2. - Exemptions from chapter. 
    This chapter does not apply to a building, other structure or land under the control, administration or jurisdiction of state or federal agencies. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.013(c). 
Secs. 138-3-138-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[15] 
Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 138-26. - Enforcement of chapter. 
(a)  Director of planning. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the director of planning, or his duly authorized representative, of the city. 
(b)  Right to enter. The director of planning or any duly authorized person shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspection of buildings or premises necessary to carry out the duties in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  Stop orders. Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the director of planning or his duly authorized representative may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on the owner or contractor doing the work or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized to proceed with the work. 
(Code 1966, § 32-4) 
Sec. 138-27. - Application requirements for building permits. 
    In addition to the requirements set out in chapter 22 of this Code, all applications for building permits shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  Accurate site plans drawn to scale and showing: 
a.  The actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon; 
b.  The exact size and locations on the lot of the buildings and accessory buildings then existing; 
c.  The setback lines within which the proposed building and structure shall be erected or altered; 
d.  The existing and intended use of each building or part of building; 
e.  The number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate; and 
(2)  Such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. A plan inspection period shall be completed as soon as practical, but not to exceed ten days. 
(Code 1966, § 32-5) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22. 
Sec. 138-28. - Effect of chapter upon existing permits, agreements, rights, etc. 
(a)  Existing permits and private agreements. This chapter is not intended to abrogate or annul: 
(1)  Any permits issued before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived; or 
(2)  Any easement, covenant or any other private agreement. 
(b)  Preserving rights in pending litigation and violations under existing ordinances. By the passage of this chapter, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless such use falls specifically within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or illegal uses, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this chapter that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, shall be discharged or affected by the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures may be instituted, or causes presently pending be proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance had not been repealed. 
(c)  Completion of existing buildings. Nothing in this chapter or in any amendments hereto which change district boundaries shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building which shall be completed in its entirety within two years from the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived or any amendments to this chapter and was authorized by building permit before the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, provided construction shall have been started within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Building construction is hereby defined as the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. 
(Code 1966, § 32-6) 
Sec. 138-29. - Appeals. 
    Any persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the planning and zoning commission, may present to the board of commissioners a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is unjust, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of injustice. Such petition shall be presented to the board of commissioners within ten days after the final decision of the planning and zoning commission, and not thereafter, for notification and calling of a public hearing to hear and act on the appeal. 
(Code 1966, § 32-24) 
Cross reference- Board of commissioners, § 2-26 et seq.; planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; conditional use permits, § 138-111 et seq. 
Secs. 138-30-138-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-76 et seq.; procedure for appointment and terms and qualifications of board members, § 2-77; substantial evidence rule in effect regarding appeals from decisions of boards, commissions and committees, § 2-82; board of adjustment for the airport zoning regulations to be the zoning board of adjustment, app. A, § 9; appeals regarding the landscape requirements will be to the board of adjustment, § 110-68; appeals regarding mobile home and recreational vehicle parks to the board of adjustment, § 122-38. 

Sec. 138-41. - Organization. 
(a)  A board of adjustment is hereby created in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008. It shall consist of five regular members and four alternates whose method of appointment, terms, qualifications, attendance requirements, and governance shall conform to the applicable provisions of chapter 2, article III, division 1 of this Code. The alternate members shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members so that all cases to be heard by the board of adjustment will be heard by a minimum of four members. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member by appointment by the board of commissioners, provided that in the event of a regular member vacancy first consideration is given to the existing alternate members in the order of their seniority in that position. 
(b)  A quorum shall consist of four members of the board of adjustment. 
(Code 1966, § 32-15; Ord. No. 2005-53, § 1, 6-13-05; Ord. No. 2011-71, 12-12-11; Ord. No. 2013-69, § II, 8-26-13) 
Sec. 138-42. - Procedures and appeals. 
    Procedures before the board of adjustment to and from such board shall be governed by the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.008-211.011. 
(Code 1966, § 32-16) 
Sec. 138-43. - Powers. 
    The board of adjustment shall have the following powers, and it shall be its duty: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  In hearing and deciding appeals, to grant special exceptions in the following instances: 
a.  Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the chapter, as shown on the maps fixing the several districts, accompanying and made a part of this chapter, where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on such maps. 
b.  Permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has been damaged to the extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost. 
c.  Waive or reduce the parking and loading requirements in any of the districts whenever the character or use of the building is such as to make unnecessary the full provisions of parking or loading facilities, or where such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely granting an advantage or a convenience. 
d.  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of structure, or structure and premises in combination, may, as a special exception, be changed to another nonconforming use, provided the board of adjustment shall find that the proposed nonconforming use is not more nonconforming in the district as the previously existing nonconforming use. 
(3)  In permitting such exceptions, the board of adjustment may require any conditions and safeguards as it shall deem appropriate to see that the purpose and intent of this chapter are met, and the violation of any such conditions or safeguards shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(4)  The board shall have the power to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. Such variances from the strict application of the terms of this chapter must be in harmony with its purpose and intent, and shall be authorized only when the board is satisfied that a granting of such variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant. At the same time, the surrounding property must be properly protected. In making its determination, the board must be assured that the applicant has proved the following: 
a.  That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return if used only for a purpose allowed in that zone; 
b.  That the plight of the owner is unique and not shared in general by others in the neighborhood also as a result of this chapter and thus perhaps requiring rezoning; and 
c.  That the use to be authorized by the variance will not alter the essential character of the locality. 
(5)  In exercising the abovementioned powers, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.009 et seq. and this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(6)  The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it its required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variation in such chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 32-17; Ord. No. 2008-83; § I, 12-8-08; Ord. No. 2017-10, § I, 1-23-17) 
Sec. 138-44. - Administrative costs. 
    The board of adjustment, with the concurrence and approval of the board of commissioners, shall determine and set forth a fee schedule for the purpose of recovering the administrative costs of processing requests and the public hearings called for by this chapter. Such fee shall be paid by the applicant and shall not be designed for restricting an applicant's ability to seek a hearing and/or to generate revenue for other than recovery of actual administrative cost incurred by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 32-18) 
Cross reference- Board of commissioners, § 2-26 et seq. 
Secs. 138-45-138-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 138-56. - General policy. 
    The board of commissioners may from time to time amend, supplement or change by ordinance the boundaries of the districts or the regulations established in this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 32-19) 
Cross reference- Adoption of ordinances by the board of commissioners, § 2-56 et seq. 
Sec. 138-57. - Amendment procedures generally. 
Before taking action on any proposed amendment, supplement or change: 
(1)  The board of commissioners shall submit the proposed revision to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendations and report. 
(2)  The planning and zoning commission shall make a preliminary report and hold public hearings thereon before submitting its final report. 
(3)  Before the tenth day before the hearing date, written notice of each public hearing before the planning and zoning commission on a proposed change in a zoning classification shall be sent to each owner, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax roll, of real property within 200 feet of the property on which the change in classification is proposed. The notice may be served by its deposit in the municipality, properly addressed with postage paid, in the United States mail. If the property within 200 feet of the property on which the change is proposed is located in territory annexed to the municipality and is not included on the most recently approved municipal tax roll, the notice shall be given in the manner provided by section 138-58. 
(4)  An official sign measuring one and one-half feet by two feet with the words "NOTICE OF REZONING FOR THIS PROPERTY" in letters not less than one and one-half inches in height shall be posted in the front of the property in public view not less than ten days before the date of the public hearing. An official sign measuring four feet by four feet with proportionally larger letters shall be required for commercial and industrial zoning requests. The zoning case number and city web address shall be included on the official sign. Said signs shall not be posted within the 25-foot sight obstruction easement for corner lots or driveways entrances or exits. The planning and zoning commission shall determine the location of official signs for public hearing notice for city initiated rezoning or initial zoning prior to commencement of public notification procedures. 
(Code 1966, § 32-20; Ord. No. 2005-87, § 1, 10-24-05; Ord. No. 2008-82, § I, 11-24-08) 
Sec. 138-58. - Public hearings. 
    After receipt of the final report from the planning and zoning commission, a public hearing shall be held by the board of commissioners before adopting any proposed amendment, supplement or change. Before the 15th day before the date of the hearing, notice of the time and place of the hearing must be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. 
(Code 1966, § 32-21; Ord. No. 2008-82, § II, 11-24-08) 
Sec. 138-59. - Rulings. 
    In all cases in which the board of commissioners deems it feasible and practicable to do so, public hearings provided for in this chapter to be held before the planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners, respectively, may be held jointly before such commissions, and the board of commissioners shall not take final action until it has received the final report of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1966, § 32-22) 
Sec. 138-60. - Protests and recommendations for denial. 
(a)  In case of a written protest against any change in zoning, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more either of the area of the lots or land included in such proposed change, or of the lots or land immediately adjoining the same and extending 200 feet therefrom, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the board of commissioners of the city. 
(b)  A vote of three-fourths of the members of the board of commissioners, including the mayor, that are present and voting at the properly noticed public hearing, is required to overrule a recommendation of the planning and zoning commission that the proposed amendment, supplement or change be denied. 
(c)  At the option of the applicant, his request for a change in zoning shall be heard by the full board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 32-23; Ord. No. 2016-51, § I, 8-8-16) 
Sec. 138-61. - Administrative costs. 
    The city planning and zoning commission, with the concurrence and approval of the board of commissioners, shall determine and set forth a fee schedule which is on file in the city secretary's office for the purpose of recovering the administrative costs of processing zoning and subdivision requests and the public hearings called for by this chapter. Such fee shall be paid by the applicant and shall not be designed for restricting an applicant's ability to seek a hearing and/or generate revenue for other than recovery of actual administrative costs incurred by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 32-25) 
Sec. 138-62. - Applications for zoning change. 
(a)  Applications for a zoning change shall be made on forms provided by the city. 
(b)  No zoning change applications shall be considered on any parcel more than once in any six-month period of time unless otherwise approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1966, § 32-26) 
Secs. 138-63-138-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 138-86. - General policy. 
    The general public, the board of commissioners, and the planning board are directed to take note that nonconformities in the use and development of land and buildings are to be avoided, or eliminated where now existing, wherever and whenever possible, except: 
(1)  When necessary to preserve property rights established prior to the date the ordinance from which this article is derived became effective as to the property in question, and 
(2)  When necessary to promote the general welfare and to protect the character of the surrounding property. 
(Code 1966, § 32-9) 
Sec. 138-87. - Nonconforming structures. 
    Where a lawful structure exists, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its structural nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its structural nonconformity. 
(2)  Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portions of structure be damaged by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of section 138-43 of this chapter. 
(3)  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(Code 1966, § 32-10) 
Sec. 138-88. - Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in combination. 
    If a permitted use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of $1,000.00 or more, or a structure and land combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the use may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered. 
(2)  The use of the structure shall only be changed to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(3)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(4)  When a nonconforming structure and land combination in which a nonconforming use is converted to a permitted use or is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period (except when government action impedes access to the premises), the structure or structure and land combination shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(5)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure or a structure and land combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming use status. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50 percent of the replacement cost at the time of destruction. 
(Code 1966, § 32-11) 
Sec. 138-89. - Repairs and maintenance. 
(a)  On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, no work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-load-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent exceeding ten percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the structure, as the case may be. 
(b)  If 50 percent or more of a nonconforming structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs or maintenance, and is declared by a duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Code 1966, § 32-12) 
Secs. 138-90-138-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference- Appeals of decision of the planning and zoning commission, § 138-29; conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit in the A-O agricultural and open space district, § 138-163; conditional uses in the R-1 single-family residential district, § 138-178; conditional uses in the R-2 duplex-fourplex residential district, § 138-193; conditional uses in the R-3 multifamily residential districts, § 138-208; conditional uses in the R-4 mobile home and modular home district, § 138-223; conditional uses in the C-1 office building district, § 138-238; conditional uses in the C-2 neighborhood commercial district, § 138-253; conditional uses in the C-3 general business district, § 138-278; conditional uses in the C-4 commercial-industrial districts, § 138-293; conditional uses in the I-1 light industrial district, § 138-308; conditional uses in the I-2 heavy industrial district, § 138-323. 

Sec. 138-111. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the regulations described by this article is to allow the compatible and orderly development, within the city, of uses which may be suitable only in certain locations in a zoning district if developed in a specific way or only for a limited period of time. A conditional use permit is required for all conditional uses as set forth in the conditional use paragraph of each use district. At no time may a structure or property be adapted to a conditional use without first obtaining a conditional use permit. 
(Code 1966, § 32-49) 
Sec. 138-112. - Approval, procedure, responsibility and appeals. 
    The city's planning director shall have the responsibility for processing all permits required for conditional uses and presenting them to the planning and zoning commission for processing as described below. The following procedures shall be complied with prior to the approval or denial of any conditional use permit: 
(1)  Notice to all owners of real property within 400 feet of the property for which application has been made shall be mailed, but in no case shall this notification occur less than ten working days prior to consideration at a meeting of the planning and zoning commission to consider such application. Notice to all owners of real property within 400 feet of the property for which application for a bar, cocktail lounge, tavern, cantina, saloon, dance hall, discotheque, disco or nightclub has been made shall be mailed, but in no case shall this notification occur less than ten working days prior to consideration at a meeting of the planning and zoning commission to consider such application. 
(2)  Application concerning permits for those uses which are conditional shall be automatically referred to the planning and zoning commission for a public hearing. The planning director shall investigate, notify the adjacent property owners and provide necessary professional advice. The planning and zoning commission may deny an application for a conditional use permit after a public hearing if the proposed use fails to meet one of the criteria set forth in requirements for approval. 
(3)  Appeal shall be in accordance with section 138-29. 
(4)  Notice for a permit renewal shall be given by publication one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city stating the nature and location of the permit. The director of planning shall waive the public hearing and approve the renewal of a permit when no written complaints for a renewal have been filed with the planning department after ten days from the time of publication of the notice. If a written complaint has been filed with the planning department concerning a permit renewal, the permit shall be processed as an original application in compliance with subsections 138-112(1) through (3). Permit renewal for bars and nightclubs shall be processed as an original application in compliance with subsections 138-112(1) through (3). 
(5)  An official sign measuring one and one-half feet by two feet with the words "NOTICE OF (type of conditional use permit) FOR THIS PROPERTY" in letters not less than one and one-half inches in height shall be posted in the front of the property in public view not less than ten days before the date of the public hearing. The conditional use permit case number and city web address shall be included on the official sign. Said signs shall not be posted within the 25-foot sight obstruction easement for corner lots or driveways entrances or exits. 
(Code 1966, § 32-50; Ord. No. 1996-8, § II, 1-22-96; Ord. No. 2001-84, § 1, 11-26-01; Ord. No. 2005-87, § 2, 10-24-05; Ord. No. 2018-50, § I, 7-9-18) 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq. 
Sec. 138-113. - Application, filing procedures and fees. 
    The property owner or certified agent shall make application on a form prescribed by the city and such application shall provide drawings as set forth in section 138-114, Site plans required, subsections (a) through (c). Obtaining a conditional use permit does not exempt the applicant from complying with requirements of the building code or other ordinances. The fee for a conditional use permit shall be recommended by the city planning and zoning commission and approved by the board of commissioners. Payment of such fees shall not be refundable in whole or in part. 
(Code 1966, § 32-51) 
Sec. 138-114. - Site plans required. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the site plan is to ensure compliance with this chapter and to assist in the orderly and harmonious development of the city, the stability of land values and investments, and enhancement of the general welfare. 
(b)  Recording. The applicant shall file with the planning director one copy of a site plan. 
(c)  Contents. The site plan shall contain drawings to scale to indicate as needed: 
(1)  The location of all structures on the subject property and on adjoining property; 
(2)  Landscaping and/or fencing of yards and setback areas and proposed changes; 
(3)  Design of ingress and egress; 
(4)  Off-street parking and loading facilities; 
(5)  Height of all structures; 
(6)  Proposed uses; and 
(7)  The location and types of all signs, including lighting and heights. 
(Code 1966, § 32-52) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; planning, ch. 126; site plan required in the R-3 multifamily residential districts, § 138-210. 
Sec. 138-115. - Requirements for approval. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission may permit a conditional use subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards when the commission finds: 
(1)  That the proposed use meets all the minimum standards established in this chapter and other applicable ordinances. 
(2)  That the proposed use will not be detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of the surrounding neighborhood or its occupants, nor be substantially or permanently injurious to neighboring property. 
(b)  Appeal of a decision of the planning and zoning commission shall be in accordance with section 138-29 of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 32-53) 
Sec. 138-116. - Development, revocation and/or automatic cancellation of permit. 
(a)  The building official shall ensure compliance with this chapter and the conditional use permit. He shall: 
(1)  Make inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the conditional use permit, and initiate appropriate action if necessary. 
(2)  Investigate thoroughly any complaints of noncompliance concerning a permitted special use, and keep a record of all complaints, indicating any action taken. These records shall be made available at the time of renewal of the conditional use permit. 
(b)  Upon determination of noncompliance with the provisions of the conditional use permit, the building official shall take action as follows: 
(1)  Give written notice to the permit holder of the nature of the violation, the necessary action to remedy the violation, and the time period, not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the date of notification, within which to comply. 
(2)  Notify the planning and zoning commission of the noncompliance if the violations have not been corrected within the prescribed time period. 
(c)  The planning and zoning commission, after due hearing, may revoke any conditional use permit that has been reported in violation by the building official. Continued use without a conditional use permit will be a violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties provided in section 1-14. 
(d)  If a conditional use permit has not been used within six months after the date granted, the permit is automatically cancelled. 
(e)  Appeal of a decision of the planning and zoning commission shall be in accordance with section 138-29 of this chapter. The procedures for voting for the issuance of a conditional use permit by the board of commissioners shall be followed in case of protests of adjoining property owners or negative vote by the zoning commission as if the matter was a zoning change under section 138-60 of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 32-54; Ord. No. 1996-8, § VIII, 1-22-96) 
Sec. 138-117. - Period of conditional use and renewal. 
    A conditional use permit shall have a time limit of not more than one year unless otherwise approved by the board of commissioners. If the conditional use permit has a time limitation attached, the expiration date shall be as set forth in the permit. Any permittee wishing a renewal of such conditional use permit for successive time periods shall make application for renewal not less than 20 days before the permit expiration date. 
(Code 1966, § 32-55) 
Sec. 138-118. - Requirements of conditional use. 
(a)  The requirements to be met for each conditional use shall be as follows: 
(1)  Home occupations. The applicable conditions for home occupations shall include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  The area used in conducting the home occupation will be clearly secondary to the residential use. 
b.  One nameplate attached to the building not larger than two square feet is permitted in all districts except R-1 single-family residential district. 
c.  There shall be no exterior display or alterations indicating that the building is being used for any purpose other than that of a dwelling. 
d.  There shall be no more than one additional unrelated employee other than immediate members of the family residing on the premises. 
e.  There shall be no outside storage of materials or products. 
f.  The permitted use shall not create frequent or heavy traffic, not greater than ten percent of the average load per hour as determined by the traffic safety engineer of the city. 
g.  No retail sales (items can be delivered). 
h.  No additions to the residence or accessory buildings specifically to accommodate the business. 
i.  The business must take place in the primary residential structure on the property rather than in a detached garage or separate accessory building. 
j.  The activity must take place at the location for which the permit was issued. 
(2)  Mobile homes: 
a.  A mobile home for residential purposes only is permitted on a vacant unsubdivided tract of five acres or more. 
b.  A mobile home for security or office purposes is permitted: 
1.  Accessory to a permitted use; 
2.  Provided that there is only one per premises; and 
3.  It must be related to an existing ongoing business located on that site. 
c.  The mobile home must be located in such a manner as to have access to a public right-of-way within 200 feet. 
d.  The mobile home must be connected to an approved water distribution and sewage disposal system. 
e.  The mobile home must be tied down and meet all other applicable provisions of the mobile home ordinance. 
f.  There must be provision for garbage and trash collection and disposal. 
(3)  Portable buildings: 
a.  The home or building must be located in such a manner as to have access to a public right-of-way within 200 feet. 
b.  Portable buildings, if approved for occupancy, must have an approved water distribution and sewage disposal system available for its use. 
c.  There must be a provision for garbage and trash collection and disposal. 
(4)  Bars, cocktail lounges, taverns, cantinas, saloons, dancehalls, event centers, discotheques, discos or nightclubs: 
a.  The property line of the lot of any of the abovementioned businesses must be at least 400 feet from the nearest residence or residentially zoned property, church, school, or publicly owned property, and must be designed to prevent disruptions of the character of adjacent residential areas, and must not be heard from the residential area after 10:00 p.m. 
b.  The abovementioned businesses must be as close as possible to a major arterial, and shall not allow the traffic generated by such businesses onto residential streets, or allow such traffic to exit into and disrupt residential areas. 
c.  The abovementioned businesses must provide parking in accordance with the city off-street parking ordinance as a minimum, and make provisions to prevent use of adjacent streets for parking, especially those in adjacent residential areas, by providing additional onsite parking. 
d.  The abovementioned businesses must do everything possible to prevent the unauthorized parking by the patrons of such businesses on adjacent business or residential properties including, when necessary, the installation of fences and hedges, and the reorientation of entrances. 
e.  The abovementioned businesses should do everything possible and be designed to discourage criminal activities and vandalism, both on the site and on adjacent properties. Included would be provision of sufficient lighting and perimeter fencing, elimination of dark areas, and the orientation of the building such that it provides maximum visibility of as much as possible of the site from a public street. 
f.  The abovementioned businesses must make provisions to keep litter to a minimum, and to keep it from blowing onto adjacent streets and properties. 
g.  The abovementioned businesses shall restrict the number of persons within the building to those allowed by the planning and zoning commission at the time of permit issuance, after having taken into account the recommendations of the fire marshal, building official and director of planning. This number cannot exceed the number provided for in existing city ordinances. 
(5)  Guesthouses. Applicable conditions for guesthouses include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Only one allowed per lot; 
b.  Must meet setback requirements; 
c.  Must be on same utilities as primary residence on lot; 
d.  Lot must be a minimum of 8,000 square feet; 
e.  There can be no separate driveway or garage for the guesthouse; 
f.  It must not be rented out; and 
g.  If money is ever paid for rent or share of utilities, etc., permit will be revoked. 
(6)  Parking facilities. The applicable conditions for parking facilities include but are not limited to: 
a.  Sides adjacent to residentially zoned property are screened by a six-foot opaque fence; and 
b.  The paved area is landscaped in compliance with the off-street parking and loading ordinance and landscape ordinance. 
(7)  Produce stands. The applicable conditions for produce stands include but are not limited to: 
a.  Must take place in an agricultural, commercial or industrial zoning district; 
b.  Must take place on a vacant tract of land no smaller than one-half acre with no less than 75 feet of frontage on a public street; 
c.  Produce may be sold out of one pickup truck or car; and no trucks with a bed longer than 12 feet, trailers, or structures of any kind are permitted; 
d.  No more than one pickup truck or car may be permitted on a tract at one time; 
e.  The produce sold must be raised by the vendor; 
f.  The site must be vacated completely every night; 
g.  The operation cannot be located on the same site longer than four months out of a year; 
h.  Proof of ownership of the property or written authorization from the owner must be presented; 
i.  A new permit must be obtained if the location changes; 
j.  The pickup truck or car must be parked on private property, not on public right-of-way; 
k.  The pickup truck or car must be at least 50 feet from the intersection of street right-of-way lines; 
l.  Ingress and egress of traffic to a produce stand must not unreasonably interfere with flow of traffic on the adjacent streets; and 
m.  Must be approved by the city health department. 
(8)  Day care facilities. The applicable requirements for day care facilities include but are not limited to: 
a.  Must meet requirements of department of human resources; 
b.  Must have fenced-in area for outside play of children; 
c.  Must have paved area adjacent to street for pickup and delivery of children off of street; 
d.  Area used for day care facilities should be clearly secondary to residential use of structure; 
e.  Person who applies for permit must reside at location for which permit is applied; 
f.  There shall be no more than two day care facilities within 600 feet of each other as measured over the shortest distance of street right-of-way between the facilities; 
g.  No more than one day care facility shall be permitted on a dead-end street or cul-de-sac. That day care facility shall care for no more children than are permitted in a registered family home by the state department of human resources; 
h.  No day care facilities shall be permitted on a half-street or on a street which has a half-street as a means of access; 
i.  Day care facilities which care for more than 12 children shall not be permitted in a residential zoning district; 
j.  No signs are permitted. A one-square- foot nameplate bearing the person's name and occupation may be displayed if attached flat against the wall of the residence; 
k.  No more than one additional employee that does not reside on the premises is permitted; and 
l.  If the person operating the day care facility is not the owner of the property, then the application must be signed by the owner or a letter of authorization from the owner must be submitted. 
(9)  Portable and/or temporary food concession stands. The applicable conditions for portable and/or temporary food concession stands shall include but are not limited to: 
a.  Cannot be located in residentially zoned area; 
b.  Stand must be inspected by building inspection department and meet applicable building codes; 
c.  Must have paved off-street parking available over and above what is required for the business to which it is adjacent; 
d.  If it is a portable building or trailer it must be anchored to the ground properly; 
e.  Must meet setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located; and 
f.  Water and sewage disposal facilities must be available and may be required. 
(10)  Existing railroads and private utilities, including a telephone service: May continue to be operated and maintained in residential and commercial districts but no new railroad or utility structure other than usual poles, wires and underground utilities shall be established in such a district without a special use permit. A masonry wall shall be required as a buffer if the structure is located within the front or side yard, or adjacent to a residential use or zone. 
(11)  Personal wireless service facility. The applicable conditions for a personal wireless service facility include but are not limited to: 
a.  Maximum height of pole or tower structure of 80 feet within commercial zones or within 200 feet of an existing residential structure; 
b.  Maximum height of pole or tower structure of 120 feet within industrial zones for measuring distance purposes, the leasehold interest area boundary or compound area boundary, whichever is greater shall be utilized; 
c.  Only one pole or tower structure-allowed per lot or tract within a commercial or industrial zone; 
d.  The applicant shall attempt to locate the proposed facility on an existing structure, or base station, as per subsections k-m of this section. If collocation of the proposed wireless facility is not possible (as per subsections k-m of this section) then the applicant for a personal wireless service facility must submit at least two alternatives designs for antenna and supporting structure, pole or tower design (including the equipment shelter, as per subsection h, below) that is treated with an architectural material (e.g., "stealth" design) so as to conform to the predominant architectural environment in the area of the facility. Such "stealth" personal wireless service facility shall blend into its proposed surroundings such as a tree, flag pole or other feature, to be approved. When a tree-type stealth design is used, one live and growing tree of the same variety or species one-half the height of the proposed tower shall be planted at the time of installation; 
e.  Minimum spacing between poles and tower structures within commercial or industrial zones of 1,000 feet measured in a direct line of another tower; 
f.  Minimum setback of one-half the street right-of-way from front property line, ten feet from side yard and ten feet from rear, unless greater requirements as noted on subdivision plat; 
g.  A masonry wall shall be required as a buffer if pole or tower structure is located within the front or side yard, or adjacent to a residential use or zone; 
h.  The transmission equipment structure installed at the base of the proposed tower shall be not greater than 180 square feet and constructed to conform to the predominant architectural environment; 
i.  A landscaped buffer area to soften the visual impact shall commence along the perimeter of the lease area or the property line. At least one row of shrubs shall be installed as well as trees as appropriate shall be included. Materials shall be of a variety which can be expected to grow to form a continuous hedge at least six feet in height within two years of planting; 
j.  The pole or tower structure will be constructed or installed with the capabilities of locating thereon additional personal wireless service facilities when tower or pole is greater than 80 feet in height. The applicant agrees to cooperate with other personal wireless service facility providers in collocating additional facilities on permitted support structures; 
k.  A permittee shall exercise good faith in collocating with other providers and sharing the permitted structure, provided such shared use does not give rise to a substantial technical level impairment of the ability to provide the permitted use (i.e., a significant interference in broadcast or reception capabilities as opposed to a competitive conflict or financial burden). Such good faith shall include sharing technical information to evaluate the feasibility of co-location. In the event a dispute arises as to whether a permittee has exercised good faith in accommodation other users, the city may require a third party technical study at the expense of either or both the applicant and permittee; 
l.  All conditional use applicants shall demonstrate good-faith, reasonable efforts in developing a collocation alternative for their proposed personal wireless service facility site, which efforts shall be documented to the city and shall include, but not be limited to, providing technical details sufficient to determine co-locations efforts. If the applicant asserts that co-location is not possible, the applicant must provide, in addition to the foregoing, an affidavit in a form provided by the city stating that all efforts to collocate the personal wireless facility at an existing facility have been exhausted and that there is no possibility of co-location on the existing towers; 
m.  Failure to comply with the collocation requirements of this section may result in the denial of a permit request or revocation of an existing permit; 
n.  If any applicant provides false or misleading information on their application, or in the application process to obtain a permit for a personal wireless facility, then their application may be denied or revoked at the expense of the applicant or the permittee; 
o.  If property is leased, term of conditional use permit shall be co-terminus with that term of lease of property; 
p.  Construction of tower and equipment facilities shall meet applicable building codes and wind loads; 
q.  Notwithstanding the above conditions, to the extent an applicant is fully qualified as an eligible facilities request under Section 6409, in the event of a conflict between the above conditions in this subsection and those criteria and conditions in section 138-1.A., above, and the 2014 Infrastructure Order, then section 138-1.A., and the 2014 Infrastructure Order control, subject to the city reservation of rights, as set forth in the preface to section 138-1.A. 
(12)  Transit terminal facilities. Applicable conditions for transit terminal facilities include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Transit terminal facility shall be provided access by a street classified as an arterial or major collector with a minimum pavement width of 50 feet; 
b.  Driveways used for transit vehicle ingress and egress shall have a minimum radius of 20 feet unless a greater radius is required as determined by the city engineer; 
c.  Traffic control devices may be required as determined by the city engineer; 
d.  A traffic impact analysis may be required by the city engineer to evaluate needed traffic control and highway capacity improvements; 
e.  Transit vehicle routes to the terminal facility shall not traverse residential streets with a pavement width less than 44 feet unless designated as a public transit route; 
f.  Transit vehicles shall not use public right-of-way for loading and unloading or layover parking unless a bus turnout lane is provided. Transit vehicle layover parking shall not utilize or obstruct required off-street parking spaces. Transit vehicle loading and unloading shall be restricted to bus bays or bus turnout lanes; 
g.  Twelve parking spaces shall be provided for each bus bay; 
h.  Transit terminal facility shall be accessed by a minimum of two public transit routes with appropriate onsite loading and unloading facilities; 
i.  Canopies shall be provided for each bus bay to shelter passengers accessing transit vehicles; 
j.  A minimum of 400 square feet of air conditioned passenger waiting and ticketing area shall be required for each bus bay; 
k.  A minimum of two male and female bathroom fixtures shall be provided for each bus bay; 
l.  Separate parking and loading areas shall be provided for automobiles and transit vehicles; 
m.  Transit vehicle loading areas shall not require passengers to cross driveways or parking areas; 
n.  A taxi queuing area shall be provided to accommodate a minimum of three taxi spaces. Additional taxi queuing area may be required as determined by the city engineer; 
o.  Onsite maintenance of transit vehicles shall be limited to interior cleaning and non-mechanical repair; 
p.  A buffer shall be required along a property line adjacent to a residential use or zone. 
(b)  No form of pollution shall emanate beyond the immediate property line of the permitted use. 
(c)  The planning and zoning commission may impose additional reasonable restrictions or conditions to carry out the spirit and intent of this section and to mitigate adverse effects of the proposed use. These requirements may include, but are not limited to, increased open space, loading and parking requirements, suitable landscaping, and additional improvements such as curbing and sidewalks. 
(Code 1966, § 32-56; Ord. No. 1996-8, § II, 1-22-96; Ord. No. 1996-70, § II, 11-18-96; Ord. No. 1997-78, § I, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 1999-69, § 2, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-84, § 2, 11-26-01; Ord. No. 2003-29, §§ 1, 2, 4-14-03; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 1, 4-10-06; Ord. No. 2015-38, § IV, 5-11-15; Ord. No. 2018-50, § II, 7-9-18) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; food establishments, § 54-26 et seq.; day care centers, group day care and registered family homes, § 54-66 et seq.; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 78; manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, ch. 122; supplementary district regulations, § 138-346 et seq.; off-street parking and loading requirements, § 138-391 et seq. 
Secs. 138-119-138-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISTRICTS[18] 
Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Cross reference- Regulation of on-premises signs by zoning district, § 130-106; planned unit developments, § 134-136 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 138-141. - Purposes. 
    The purpose of the use districts described in this article is to group together into districts those uses that are reasonably compatible with one another according to their normal characteristics of operation, so as to: 
(1)  Permit, in connection with these uses, those customary and necessary accessory activities which are incidental to the principal use; 
(2)  Permit certain other uses which may be established in some situations and subject to specific conditions so that such special uses will also be compatible with the uses allowed as a matter of right; 
(3)  Promote orderly, timely, economical growth and recognize current land use conditions; 
(4)  Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for development to meet the present and future growth needs of the city, with allowance for a diversity of sites; 
(5)  Protect use areas, as far as possible, against heavy and unnecessary through traffic; 
(6)  Protect use areas against pollution, environmental hazards and other objectionable influences; 
(7)  Protect use areas against congestion, as far as possible, by managing the density of population in and around them; by providing for proper parking spaces; and by providing open areas for rest and recreation and to break the monotony of continuous building bulk, thus providing a more desirable environment; 
(8)  Provide for privacy and access of light and air to windows, as far as possible, through controls over the spacing and height of buildings and other structures; 
(9)  Promote the most appropriate use of land and direction of building development which is not in conflict with the adopted policies of the city; to promote stability of development; to protect the character of the districts; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect the city's tax base; 
(10)  Promote the most efficient use of city facilities and services; 
(11)  Protect against fire and explosions and other safety hazards; 
(12)  Accommodate use activities and operations whose external physical effects are restricted to the area of the district, and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts; and 
(13)  Provide for fire protection and access by fire equipment and vehicles. 
(Code 1966, § 32-31) 
Sec. 138-142. - District regulations. 
    All property within the city shall be located within one of the districts described in this article, and shall meet and conform to all requirements of such districts and shall meet the performance standards set forth in the environmental standards, chapter 46 of this Code, adopted by the board of commissioners of the city. Except where indicated otherwise, the uses permitted in each district shall be limited to those specifically enumerated for such district. 
(Code 1966, § 32-32) 
Sec. 138-143. - Newly annexed land. 
(a)  Proposed annexations. The planning and zoning commission shall hold a hearing on all proposed annexation, and shall, at the same time, hold a hearing upon the zoning that is to be given to the area or tract to be annexed, and make a recommendation on these matters to the board of commissioners so that the board of commissioners can act on the matter of annexation and zoning at the same time. 
(b)  Subsequent to annexation, the new land shall be zoned by the board of commissioners for a land use not in conflict with the adopted policy of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 32-33) 
Cross reference- Annexation of property, § 2-311 et seq.; annexation ordinances, app. B. 
Sec. 138-144. - Accessory use conditions. 
    Any use may be established as an accessory use to any permitted principal use in any district provided that such accessory use: 
(1)  Is customarily incident to and maintained and operated as a part of the principal use, as determined by the director of planning; 
(2)  Is not hazardous to and does not impair the use or enjoyment of nearby property in greater degree than the principal use with which it is associated, as determined by the director of planning; 
(3)  Does not add to levels of noise, odor, vibration and lighting, or degrees of traffic congestion, dust or pollutants, in a greater amount than that customarily created by the principal use, as determined by the director of planning; and 
(4)  Is not located within the minimum exterior yard restriction of the use district. 
(Code 1966, § 32-34) 
Sec. 138-145. - Establishment of districts and map. 
    The city is hereby divided into districts, as shown on the official zoning map. The districts and their boundaries shall be as shown upon the map referred hereto and made a part of this chapter, such map being designated the "official zoning map." Such map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be a part of this chapter. If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall: 
(1)  Be entered on the map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the board of commissioners; 
(2)  Include the date of official action and a brief description of the nature of the change; and 
(3)  Be signed by the mayor and attested to by the city secretary. No amendment to this chapter which involves matters portrayed on the official zoning map shall become effective until after such change and entry have been made on such map. 
(Code 1966, § 32-28) 
Editor's note- The zoning map can be found on file in the office of the city secretary. 
Sec. 138-146. - Boundaries, official zoning map. 
    The location and boundaries of the districts established in this article are shown upon the official zoning map, which is hereby adopted and incorporated into and made a part of this chapter. All districts, areas, notations, references and other information shown upon the official zoning map are hereby made a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 32-29) 
Sec. 138-147. - Determination of boundaries. 
    In determining the location of zoning district boundaries on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, alleys, street or highway right-of-way lines, or extensions of such lines, such lines shall be construed to be boundary lines of the district. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines of rights-of-way of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale on the zoning map. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are shown on undivided property, the location shall be determined by the scale shown on the map unless dimensions are given on the map or in the provisions of this chapter governing the zone. 
(4)  Where physical features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered within the text of this article, the director of planning shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(Code 1966, § 32-30) 
Sec. 138-148. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  An official zoning map of the city shall be kept in the city hall at a location which is open and available to the public. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the planning director to keep the official zoning map and the current copies thereof as provided in this article, by entering on such maps any changes which the board of commissioners may from time to time order by amendments to this chapter and zoning map. 
(c)  The city secretary shall affix a certificate identifying the map as the official zoning map of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 32-3) 
Sec. 138-149. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate, participate or acquiesce in the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect or alter any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan required to be submitted and approved thereunder shall for each and every violation or noncompliance be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 32-7) 
Sec. 138-150. - Other remedies. 
    The penalty provided in section 138-149 should not be construed as exclusive, and the city hereby provides that any other remedy available to it in the enforcement of this chapter, in law or in equity, is not intended to be, and is not, foreclosed by the provision of such penalty. 
(Code 1966, § 32-8) 
Sec. 138-151. - Enumerated. 
    The following are the use districts for the city: 
A-O Agricultural and Open Space District 
R-1 Single-Family Residential District 
R-2 Duplex-Fourplex Residential District 
R-3A Multifamily Residential District 
R-3C Condominium Residential District 
R-3T Townhouse Residential District 
R-4 Mobile Home and Modular Home District 
C-1 Office Building District 
C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District 
C-3 General Business District 
C-4 Commercial Industrial District 
I-1 Light Industrial District 
I-2 Heavy Industrial District 
(Code 1966, § 32-35) 
Secs. 138-152-138-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - A-O AGRICULTURAL AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Cross reference- Exemption from the restrictions on keeping hogs and regulations regarding livestock for areas zoned agricultural open space, § 14-12; beekeeping regulations and restrictions, § 14-111 et seq.; signs permitted in the agricultural zoning districts, § 130-111. 

Sec. 138-161. - Purpose. 
    The A-O agricultural and open space district is designed to promote orderly, timely, economical growth and to recognize current land use conditions. It is a reserved area in which the future growth of the city might occur. It is the intent of this district that agricultural land be held in that use for as long as is practical and reasonable. 
(Code 1966, § 32-36(1)) 
Sec. 138-162. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted in the A-O agricultural and open space districts are as follows: 
(1)  Farming, ranching, related activities and accessory uses. 
(2)  One single-family dwelling or one mobile home on parcels of five acres or more. 
(3)  Maids' quarters. 
(4)  Portable buildings or storage buildings used as an accessory to the primary use and not for living quarters. 
(5)  Signs in accordance with applicable ordinances. 
(Code 1966, § 32-36(2); Ord. No. 1996-8, § III, 1-22-96) 
Sec. 138-163. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit permitted in the A-O agricultural and open space district are as follows: 
(1)  Institutional uses. 
(2)  Home occupations that meet applicable conditions in section 138-118(a)(1), (b) and (c). 
(3)  Guesthouses that meet applicable conditions in section 138-118(a)(5), (b) and (c). 
(4)  A mobile home used in conjunction with a use in section 138-162(1). 
(5)  Broadcast towers and personal wireless service facilities. 
(6)  Outdoor commercial recreation, excluding drive-in theaters. 
(7)  Extraction activities. 
(8)  Dog kennels which are: 
a.  Located a minimum of 300 feet from the nearest residence; and 
b.  On parcels of five acres or more. 
(9)  Facilities for railroads or those utilities holding a franchise with the city. 
(10)  Nurseries. 
(11)  Parking facilities associated with uses permitted within R3-A, R3-C, C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning districts that meet applicable conditions in section 138-118(a)(6), (b) and (c). 
(12)  Airports and accessory or related uses, including private landing strips, for general aviation purposes and crop dusting. 
(Code 1966, § 32-36(3); Ord. No. 1996-8, § III, 1-22-96; Ord. No. 1996-70, § III, 11-18-96) 
Cross reference- Conditional use permits, § 138-111 et seq. 
Sec. 138-164. - Prohibited uses. 
    The uses prohibited in the A-O agricultural and open space district are as follows: 
(1)  Any building erected or land used for other than one or more of the uses specified in this division. 
(2)  Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard dimensions; and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in section 138-356. 
(Code 1966, § 32-36(4)) 
Secs. 138-165-138-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Cross reference- Signs permitted in residential zones, § 130-108. 

Sec. 138-176. - Purpose. 
    The R-1 single-family residential district is established for the following purposes: 
(1)  To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for residential development to meet the present and future housing needs of the city, with allowance for a diversity of sites. 
(2)  To protect residential areas against pollution, environmental hazards and other objectionable influences. 
(3)  To protect residential areas, as far as possible, against heavy and through traffic. 
(4)  To protect residential areas against congestion, as far as possible, by managing the density of population in and around them; by providing for off-street parking spaces; and by providing open areas for rest and recreation and to break the monotony of continuous building bulk, thus providing a more desirable environment for urban living. 
(5)  To provide for privacy and access of light and air to windows, as far as possible, through controls over the spacing and height of buildings and other structures. 
(6)  To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development not in conflict with the adopted policies of the city; to promote stability of residential development; to protect the character of the district; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect the city's tax base. 
(7)  To promote the most efficient use of city facilities and services. 
(Code 1966, § 32-37(1)) 
Sec. 138-177. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted in the R-1 single-family residential district are as follows: 
(1)  One single-family dwelling per lot, and accessory uses. 
(2)  Maids' quarters. 
(3)  Public and private directional signs, official signs, political signs or real estate signs. 
(4)  Portable buildings or storage buildings used as an accessory to the residential use and not for living quarters. 
(5)  Parking facilities associated with uses permitted within R-1, R-2 or R3-T zoning districts that meet applicable conditions in section 138-118(a)(6), (b) and (c). 
(Code 1966, § 32-37(2); Ord. No. 1996-8, § IV, 1-22-96) 
Sec. 138-178. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit permitted in the R-1 single-family residential districts are as follows: 
(1)  Associated recreation. 
(2)  Guesthouses that meet applicable conditions in section 138-118(a)(5), (b) and (c). 
(3)  Home occupations that meet applicable conditions in section 138-118(a)(1), (b) and (c). 
(4)  Institutional uses. 
(5)  Parking facilities associated with uses permitted within R3-A, R3-C, C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning districts that meet applicable conditions in section 138-118(a)(6), (b) and (c). 
(6)  Planned unit developments, excluding industrial uses. 
(7)  Railroad facilities or utilities holding a franchise with the city. 
(Code 1966, § 32-37(3); Ord. No. 1996-8, § IV, 1-22-96) 
Cross reference- Conditional use permits, § 138-111 et seq. 
Sec. 138-179. - Prohibited uses. 
    The uses prohibited in the R-1 single-family residential district are as follows: 
(1)  Any building erected or land used for other than one or more of the uses specified in this division. 
(2)  On- and off-premises signs, portable signs except for exempt political signs, animated or illuminated signs. 
(3)  Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard dimensions; and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in section 138-356. 
(4)  Nameplates. 
(5)  Broadcast towers and personal wireless service facilities. 
(6)  Parking of any road tractor, semi-trailer or truck, as such terms are defined in section 102-201 of this Code of Ordinances, except as may be allowed by section 102-202. This prohibition is applicable to any new or existing single family residence notwithstanding section 138-86(1) regarding the date of the subdivision in which the residence is located, the date of annexation of the property on which the residence is located, or the fact that it was not per se unlawful to park or allow the proscribed vehicle to be parked on the property prior to the date this prohibition was adopted by the city commission. In the prosecution of any violation of this subsection there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the owner and/or occupant of the property where the proscribed vehicle is parked either parked the vehicle or allowed the vehicle to be parked there. 
(Code 1966, § 32-37(4); Ord. No. 1996-70, § IV, 11-18-96; Ord. No. 2004-15, § 6, 2-9-04; Ord. No. 2007-16, § 1, 2-26-07) 
Secs. 138-180-138-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - R-2 DUPLEX-FOURPLEX RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Cross reference- Signs permitted in residential zones, § 130-108. 

Sec. 138-191. - Purpose. 
    The R-2 duplex-fourplex residential district is established to provide adequate space and site diversification for the following purposes: 
(1)  To provide adequate space and site diversification for medium-density residential development where adequate streets and other community facilities are available for present and future needs. 
(2)  To protect residential areas against pollution, environmental hazards and other objectionable influences. 
(3)  To protect residential areas, as far as possible, against heavy traffic. 
(4)  To manage the density of population and protect against congestion by providing for off-street parking spaces and by requiring the provision of open space in residential areas in order to open areas for rest and recreation and to break the monotony of continuous building bulk, thus providing a more desirable environment for urban living. 
(5)  To provide for privacy and access of light and air to windows, as far as possible, through controls over the spacing and height of buildings and other structures. 
(6)  To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development, not in conflict with the adopted policies of the city; to promote stability of development; to protect the character of the district; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect the city's tax base. 
(7)  To promote the most efficient use of city facilities and services. 
(Code 1966, § 32-38(1)) 
Sec. 138-192. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted in the R-2 duplex-fourplex residential districts are as follows: 
(1)  All uses listed as permitted uses in the R-1 single-family residential district. 
(2)  Duplexes-fourplexes. 
(3)  Duplex-fourplex townhouses. 
(4)  Duplex-fourplex condominiums. 
(5)  Parking facilities associated with uses permitted within R-1, R-2, R3-T, R3-A or R3-C zoning districts that meet applicable conditions in section 138-118(a)(6), (b) and (c). 
(6)  All signs permitted in the R-1 single-family residential district, and nameplates. 
(Code 1966, § 32-38(2)) 
Sec. 138-193. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit permitted in the R-2 duplex-fourplex residential districts are as follows: All uses listed as conditional uses in the R-1 single-family residential district. 
(Code 1966, § 32-38(3)) 
Cross reference- Conditional use permits, § 138-111 et seq. 
Sec. 138-194. - Prohibited uses. 
    The uses prohibited in the R-2 duplex-fourplex residential districts are as follows: 
(1)  Any building erected or land used for other than one or more of the uses specified in this division. 
(2)  On- and off-premises signs, portable signs except for exempt political signs, animated or illuminated signs. 
(3)  Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side or rear yard dimensions; and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in section 138-356. 
(4)  Broadcast towers and personal wireless service facilities. 
(5)  Parking of any road tractor, semi-trailer or truck, as such terms are defined in section 102-201 of this Code of Ordinances, except as may be allowed by section 102-202. This prohibition is applicable to any new or existing duplex-fourplex residence notwithstanding section 138-86(1) regarding the date of the subdivision in which the residence is located, the date of annexation of the property on which the residence is located, or the fact that it was not per se unlawful to park or allow the proscribed vehicle to be parked on the property prior to the date this prohibition was adopted by the city commission. In the prosecution of any violation of this subsection there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the owner and/or occupant of the property where the proscribed vehicle is parked either parked the vehicle or allowed the vehicle to be parked there. 
(Code 1966, § 32-38(4); Ord. No. 1996-70, § V, 11-18-96; Ord. No. 2004-15, § 7, 2-9-04; Ord. No. 2007-16, § 2, 2-26-07) 
Secs. 138-195-138-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - R-3 MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Cross reference- Signs permitted in residential zones, § 130-108. 

Sec. 138-206. - Purpose. 
    The R-3 multifamily residential district is established for the following purposes: 
(1)  To provide adequate space and site diversification for high density residential development in which adequate streets and other community facilities are available for present and future needs. 
(2)  To protect residential areas against pollution, environmental hazards and other objectionable influences. 
(3)  To protect residential areas, as far as possible, against heavy traffic. 
(4)  To manage the density of population and protect against congestion by providing for off-street parking spaces and by requiring the provision of open space in residential areas in order to open areas for rest and recreation and to break the monotony of continuous building bulk, thus providing a more desirable environment for urban living. 
(5)  To provide for privacy and access of light and air to windows, as far as possible, through controls over the spacing and height of buildings and other structures. 
(6)  To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development, not in conflict with the adopted policies of the city; to promote stability of development; to protect the character of the district; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect the city's tax base. 
(7)  To promote the most efficient use of city facilities and services. 
(Code 1966, § 32-39(1)) 
Sec. 138-207. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted in the R-3 multifamily residential districts comprising the R-3A apartment residential, R-3C condominium residential and R-3T townhouse residential districts, are as follows: 
(1)  R3-A apartment residential district permitted uses: 
a.  All uses listed as permitted uses in the R-2 duplex-fourplex residential district. 
b.  Apartment buildings with five or more units. 
c.  Storage buildings not used for living quarters and accessory to the residential use. 
(2)  R3-C condominium residential district permitted uses: 
a.  All uses listed as permitted uses in the R-2 duplex-fourplex residential district. 
b.  Condominium buildings with five or more units. 
c.  Storage buildings not used for living quarters and accessory to the residential use. 
(3)  R3-T townhouse residential district permitted uses: 
a.  All uses listed as permitted uses in the R-2 duplex-fourplex residential district. 
b.  Townhouse buildings with five or more attached townhouses. 
c.  Storage buildings not used for living quarters and accessory to the residential use. 
(Code 1966, § 32-39(2)) 
Sec. 138-208. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit permitted in the R-3 multifamily residential districts comprising the R-3A apartment residential, R-3C condominium residential and R-3T townhouse residential districts are as follows: 
(1)  All uses listed as conditional uses in the R-1 single-family residential district. 
(2)  Boardinghouses, excluding R3-T districts. 
(Code 1966, § 32-39(3); Ord. No. 1996-8, § V, 1-22-96) 
Cross reference- Conditional use permits, § 138-111 et seq. 
Sec. 138-209. - Prohibited uses. 
    The uses prohibited in the R-3 multifamily residential districts, comprising the R-3A apartment residential, R-3C condominium residential and R-3T townhouse residential districts are as follows: 
(1)  Any building erected or land used for other than one or more of the uses specified in this division. 
(2)  On- and off-premises signs, portable signs except for exempt political signs, animated or illuminated signs. 
(3)  Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard dimensions; and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in section 138-356. 
(4)  Broadcast towers and personal wireless service facilities. 
(5)  Parking of any road tractor, semi-trailer or truck, as such terms are defined in section 102-201 of this Code of Ordinances, except as may be allowed by section 102-202. This prohibition is applicable to any new or existing multifamily residence notwithstanding section 138-86(1) regarding the date of the subdivision in which the residence is located, the date of annexation of the property on which the residence is located, or the fact that it was not per se unlawful to park or allow the proscribed vehicle to be parked on the property prior to the date this prohibition was adopted by the city commission. In the prosecution of any violation of this subsection there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the owner and/or occupant of the property where the proscribed vehicle is parked either parked the vehicle or allowed the vehicle to be parked there. 
(Code 1966, § 32-39(4); Ord. No. 1996-70, § VI, 11-18-96; Ord. No. 2004-15, § 8, 2-9-04; Ord. No. 2007-16, § 3, 2-26-07) 
Sec. 138-210. - Site plan required. 
(a)  Any owner, builder or developer of a multiple-family, condominium or townhouse dwelling complex of five units or more on a single lot or parcel, or five single-family attached units, shall submit to the planning department for review a site and building plan for the proposed development. 
(1)  Location of all structures proposed and existing on the subject property and on adjoining property; 
(2)  Landscaping and/or fencing of yards and setback areas and proposed changes; 
(3)  Design of ingress and egress; 
(4)  Off-street parking and loading facilities; 
(5)  Heights of all structures; 
(6)  Proposed uses; and 
(7)  Location and types of all signs, including lighting and heights. 
(b)  The purpose of the site plan review is to: 
(1)  Ensure compliance with this chapter, while allowing for design flexibility; 
(2)  Assist in the orderly and harmonious development of the city; 
(3)  Protect adjacent uses from obstructions to light, air and visibility; 
(4)  Provide protection from fire; 
(5)  Avoid undue concentrations of population and overcrowding of land; and 
(6)  Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, drainage and other public requirements. 
(Code 1966, § 32-39(5); Ord. No. 2017-07, § I, 1-23-17) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; planning, § 126-26 et seq.; conditional use permit site plan requirements, § 138-114. 
Secs. 138-211-138-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - R-4 MOBILE HOME AND MODULAR HOME DISTRICT[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Cross reference- Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, ch. 122. 

Sec. 138-221. - Purpose. 
    The R-4 mobile home and modular home district is established for the following purposes: 
(1)  To provide adequate space and site diversification for residential purposes designed to accommodate the peculiarities and design criteria of mobile homes and modular homes; 
(2)  To protect against pollution, environmental hazards and other objectionable influences; 
(3)  To provide adequate provisions for vehicular and pedestrian circulation; 
(4)  To promote housing densities appropriate to and compatible with existing and proposed public support facilities; 
(5)  To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development; to promote stability of development; to protect the character of the district; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect the city's tax base. 
(Code 1966, § 32-40(1)) 
Sec. 138-222. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted in the R-4 mobile home and modular home districts are as follows: 
(1)  One mobile home or modular home per lot or park space approved for a mobile home or modular home. 
(2)  One recreational vehicle per lot or park space approved for a recreational vehicle. 
(3)  One single-family dwelling per lot in compliance with R-1 single-family residential district requirements in section 138-176 et seq. 
(4)  One portable building or storage building not used for living quarters and accessory to the residential use. 
(5)  Accessory buildings to mobile home/recreational vehicle parks or subdivisions. 
(6)  Associated recreation to mobile home/recreational vehicle parks or subdivisions. 
(7)  Commercial facilities designed primarily for the occupants of mobile home/recreational vehicle parks or subdivisions. 
(8)  On-premises signs, including illuminated, portable, or animated signs, on lots approved for recreational or commercial facilities in accordance with adopted city ordinances. 
(9)  All signs permitted in R-2 duplex-fourplex residential districts. 
(Code 1966, § 32-40(2)) 
Sec. 138-223. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit permitted in the R-4 mobile home and modular home district are all the uses listed as conditional uses in the R-1 single-family residential district, excluding associated recreation. 
(Code 1966, § 32-40(3); Ord. No. 1996-8, § VI, 1-22-96) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; conditional use permits, § 138-111 et seq. 
Sec. 138-224. - Prohibited uses. 
    The uses prohibited in the R-4 mobile home and modular home districts are as follows: 
(1)  Any building or land used for other than one or more of the uses specified in this division. 
(2)  No more than one mobile home or recreational vehicle may occupy any approved space. 
(3)  Off-premises signs. 
(4)  Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard dimensions; and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum heights, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in section 138-356. 
(5)  Broadcast towers and personal wireless service facilities. 
(6)  Parking of any road tractor, semi-trailer or truck, as such terms are defined in section 102-201 of this Code of Ordinances, except as may be allowed by section 102-202. This prohibition is applicable to any new or existing mobile home and modular home residence notwithstanding section 138-86(1) regarding the date of the subdivision in which the residence is located, the date of annexation of the property on which the residence is located, or the fact that it was not per se unlawful to park or allow the proscribed vehicle to be parked on the property prior to the date this prohibition was adopted by the city commission. In the prosecution of any violation of this subsection there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the owner and/or occupant of the property where the proscribed vehicle is parked either parked the vehicle or allowed the vehicle to be parked there. 
(Code 1966, § 32-40(4); Ord. No. 1996-70, § VII, 11-18-96; Ord. No. 2007-16, § 4, 2-26-07) 
Sec. 138-225. - Development requirements. 
(a)  A development designed as a mobile home, modular home or recreational vehicle park shall meet all requirements of the mobile home and recreational vehicle park provisions in chapter 122 of this Code and any applicable sections of the subdivision provisions in chapter 134 of this Code. The facility designed for such development shall be for the explicit purpose of renting or leasing of mobile home sites and shall not be construed to permit the sale of such lots. 
(b)  A development designed as a mobile home, modular home or recreational vehicle subdivision shall meet all requirements of the subdivision provisions in chapter 134 of this Code and any applicable sections of the mobile home and recreational vehicle park provisions in chapter 122 of this Code. Such subdivision shall have as its major purpose the sales and conveyance of property rights and ownership of individual lots to consumers. 
(c)  At no time may an existing mobile home, modular home or recreational vehicle park be converted to a mobile home, modular home or recreational vehicle subdivision without first meeting all the requirements of the subdivision provisions in chapter 134 of this Code and receiving approval by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1966, § 32-40(5)) 
Sec. 138-226. - Section 138-118(2) not applicable to this division. 
    Section 138-118(2) of this chapter shall not apply to mobile or modular homes in the R-4 mobile home and modular home district. 
(Code 1966, § 32-40(6)) 
Secs. 138-227-138-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - C-1 OFFICE BUILDING DISTRICT[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Cross reference- Signs permitted in the neighborhood commercial and office zoning districts, § 130-109. 

Sec. 138-236. - Purpose. 
    The C-1 office building district is established for the following purposes: 
(1)  To accommodate office uses, office sales uses and certain personal services; 
(2)  To protect against fire and explosions, pollution and other environmental hazards; 
(3)  To protect, as far as possible, against congestion; 
(4)  To promote the most desirable uses of land and the direction of building development in accord with the adopted growth management policy of the city; 
(5)  To promote stability of office building developments; to strengthen the economic base of the city; to protect the character of the district and adjacent districts; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect the city's tax base; and 
(6)  To promote the most efficient use of city facilities and services. 
(Code 1966, § 32-41(1)) 
Sec. 138-237. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted in the C-1 office building districts are as follows: 
(1)  Office buildings for professional services including executive, administrative, legal, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting, real estate, insurance, and other similar or related uses. 
(2)  Office buildings for medical services, including clinics, outpatient clinics, offices of doctors, dentists, osteopaths and other similar or related uses. 
(3)  Office buildings for financial services, including banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, loan companies and similar or related uses. 
(4)  Personal services such as beauty parlors, barbershops, day care centers, nursing homes, funeral homes and other similar or related uses. 
(5)  Accessory uses customarily related to a use permitted in subsections (1) through (4) of this section, such as a pharmacy, medical supply, or optical company within a medical office complex; or cafeteria or restaurant within a professional office complex for the convenience of the occupants and clients. 
(6)  Parking facilities associated with uses permitted within any residential, C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning districts. 
(7)  On-premises signs, illuminated or animated, in accordance with adopted city ordinances. 
(8)  Any sign permitted in R-4 mobile home and modular home district. 
(Code 1966, § 32-41(2)) 
Sec. 138-238. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit permitted in the C-1 office building districts are as follows: 
(1)  Guesthouses that meet applicable conditions in section 138-118(a)(5), (b) and (c). 
(2)  Home occupations that meet applicable conditions in section 138-118(a)(1), (b) and (c). 
(3)  Institutional uses. 
(4)  Mobile home for security or office purposes that meets applicable conditions in section 138-118(a)(2), (b) and (c). 
(5)  One single-family dwelling per lot and accessory uses in compliance with R-1 single-family residential district requirements in section 138-176 et seq. 
(6)  Parking facilities associated with uses permitted within C-4, I-1 or I-2 zoning districts that meet applicable conditions in section 138-118(a)(6), (b) and (c). 
(7)  Planned unit developments, excluding industrial uses. 
(8)  Portable buildings larger than 120 square feet as an accessory use. 
(9)  Railroad facilities or utilities holding a franchise with the city. 
(10)  Personal wireless service facilities. 
(Code 1966, § 32-41(3); Ord. No. 1996-8, § VII, 1-22-96; Ord. No. 1996-70, § VIII, 11-18-96) 
Cross reference- Conditional use permits, § 138-111 et seq. 
Sec. 138-239. - Prohibited uses. 
    The uses prohibited in the C-1 office building district are as follows: 
(1)  Any building erected or land used for other than one or more of the uses specified in this division. 
(2)  Off-premises signs. 
(3)  Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard dimensions; and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in section 138-356. 
(Code 1966, § 32-41(4)) 
Sec. 138-240. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Off-street parking requirements for buildings permitted in the C-1 office building district shall be in compliance with the off-street parking and loading provisions in article VII of this chapter, with the following additions: 
(1)  The parking provided must be adequate to meet not only employee needs of the occupant, but also the needs of his customers or clients. 
(2)  When, in the opinion of the city, the provisions of the off-street parking and loading regulations set out in article VII of this chapter are not adequate, such additional requirements as may be necessary may be required. 
(b)  Entrances and exits to parking areas on corner lots shall be at least 25 feet from the intersection of the street right-of-way or 20 feet back of the curb return radius, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Any site that has parking for less than 75 cars will be allowed only one entrance and exit into a public street, except where the site has double frontage. 
(Code 1966, § 32-41(5)) 
Secs. 138-241-138-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - C-2 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Cross reference- Signs permitted in the neighborhood commercial and office zoning districts, § 130-109. 

Sec. 138-251. - Purpose. 
    The C-2 neighborhood commercial district is established for the following purposes: 
(1)  To provide sufficient space and off-street parking in appropriate locations in proximity to residential areas, for commercial development catering to the convenience shopping and service needs of the occupants of nearby residences. 
(2)  To provide appropriate space for off-street parking to control congestion, and to encourage commercial development to concentrate to the mutual advantage of both consumers and merchants. 
(3)  To protect local commercial development against fire, explosions, pollution and environmental hazards. 
(4)  To promote the most desirable uses of land and the direction of building development in accordance with the adopted growth management policy of the city; to promote stability of commercial development; to strengthen the economic base of the city; to protect the character of the district; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect the city's tax base. 
(5)  To promote the most efficient use of city facilities and services. 
(Code 1966, § 32-42(1)) 
Sec. 138-252. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted in the C-2 neighborhood commercial districts are as follows: 
(1)  Retail businesses that sell products on the premises to consumers primarily from adjacent residential areas, such as convenience stores, neighborhood meat or produce markets, bakeries or tortillerias, ice cream stores, florists and gift stores, pharmacies, books/newspapers/magazines, and video/tape/record stores and similar uses. 
(2)  Personal services which perform services on the premises such as repair shops (watches, radios, TV, shoes, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors or barbershops, photographic studios, day care centers, and similar uses but not including automotive parts or repair services. 
(3)  Laundromats, laundry/drycleaning pickup stations, and laundry/dry cleaning establishments dealing directly with consumers. 
(4)  Loan companies, insurance and real estate offices. 
(5)  Medical offices for general practice physicians, dentists, chiropractors, and other similar nonspecialized medical professionals. 
(6)  Parking facilities associated with uses permitted within any residential, C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning districts. 
(7)  On-premises signs, including those that are animated or illuminated. 
(8)  All signs permitted in C-1 office building district. 
(Code 1966, § 32-42(2)) 
Sec. 138-253. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit permitted in the C-2 neighborhood commercial districts are as follows: 
(1)  All conditional uses listed in the C-1 office building district. 
(2)  Gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold. 
(3)  Personal wireless service facilities. 
(Code 1966, § 32-42(3); Ord. No. 1996-70, § IX, 11-18-96) 
Cross reference- Conditional use permits, § 138-111 et seq. 
Sec. 138-254. - Prohibited uses. 
    The uses prohibited in the C-2 neighborhood commercial districts are as follows: 
(1)  Any building erected or land used for other than one or more of the uses specified in this division. 
(2)  Off-premises signs. 
(3)  Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard dimensions; and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in section 138-356. 
(4)  Laundry/drycleaning plants servicing off-premises pickup stations. 
(Code 1966, § 32-42(5)) 
Sec. 138-255. - Business establishments. 
    All business establishments in the C-2 neighborhood commercial districts shall be retail service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail prices on premises where produced. 
(Code 1966, § 32-42(4)(a)) 
Sec. 138-256. - Type of building facility permitted. 
    All businesses servicing or processing in the C-2 neighborhood commercial districts shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, except for off-street parking or loading, excluding drive-in businesses or gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold. 
(Code 1966, § 32-42(4)(b)) 
Sec. 138-257. - Gasoline service stations and retail outlets-Generally. 
    Gasoline service stations or retail outlets in the C-2 neighborhood commercial districts, where gasoline products are sold at retail prices, are limited in their activity to the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories only, and incidental service. Repair work, steam cleaning or undercoating, vehicle body repair, painting, tire recapping, engine rebuilding, auto dismantling, upholstery, auto glasswork and such other activities whose external effects could adversely extend beyond the property line are not permitted. 
(Code 1966, § 32-42(4)(c)) 
Sec. 138-258. - Same-Location of curb cuts restricted. 
    The curb cut, or ingress and egress to gasoline service stations, retail outlets for gasoline products and/or drive-in businesses in the C-2 neighborhood commercial districts shall not be permitted at locations where it will tend to create traffic hazards in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than 25 feet from any street intersection, measured from the right-of-way. 
(Code 1966, § 32-42(4)(d)) 
Sec. 138-259. - Same-Front yard setbacks, etc. 
    A front yard setback of 60 feet from the right-of-way of any existing or proposed street shall be maintained by gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold in the C-2 neighborhood commercial districts unless otherwise approved by the planning and zoning commission. Gas pumps and canopies may be placed within the setback not less than nine feet from the property line, or ten feet from the curb, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1966, § 32-42(4)(e)) 
Sec. 138-260. - Same-Lighting; buffer requirement. 
    In the C-2 neighborhood commercial district, all lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. A six-foot-high, completely obscuring wall shall be provided by all gasoline service stations, retail outlets where gasoline products are sold, or drive-in businesses, when abutting or adjacent to districts zoned for any residential use. 
(Code 1966, § 32-42(4)(f), (g)) 
Sec. 138-261. - Same-Minimum lot area. 
    The minimum lot area for a gas service station or a retail outlet where gasoline products are sold in the C-2 neighborhood commercial districts should be 13,000 square feet and so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required to wait, except that gasoline service stations intended solely for the purpose of selling gasoline, oil and minor accessories and having no facilities for repair or servicing automobiles may be permitted on lots of less than 13,000 square feet subject to all other provisions required in this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 32-42(4)(h)) 
Sec. 138-262. - Veterinary hospitals or clinics. 
    Veterinary hospitals or clinics in the C-2 neighborhood commercial districts are subject to the limitation that all activities be conducted within a totally enclosed building with no open air impoundment and no external effects such as noise or odor which could adversely extend beyond the property lines. 
(Code 1966, § 32-42(4)(i)) 
Secs. 138-263-138-266. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8.5. - C-3L LIGHT COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1999-07, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 1999, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as §§ 138-267-138-270. Said provisions have been codified as div. 8.5 at the discretion of the editor. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 138-267. - Purpose. 
    The C-3L light commercial district is established for the following purposes: 
(1)  To allow commercial uses within the areas of transition from residential to commercial that would provide additional business opportunities and protect neighborhoods from commercial establishments attracting high-traffic volumes. 
(2)  To provide sufficient space and off-street parking in appropriate locations in proximity to residential areas, for light commercial development catering to the shopping and service needs of shoppers. 
(3)  To provide appropriate space for off-street parking to control congestion, and to encourage light commercial development to concentrate to the mutual advantage of both consumers and merchants. 
(4)  To protect light commercial development against fire, explosions, pollution and environmental hazards. 
(5)  To promote the most desirable uses of land and the direction of building development in accordance with the adopted growth management policy of the city; to promote stability of commercial development; to strengthen the economic base of the city; to protect the character of the district; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect the city's tax base. 
(6)  To promote the most efficient use of city facilities and services. 
(Ord. No. 1999-07, § 1, 1-25-99) 
Sec. 138-268. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted in the C-3L light commercial districts are as follows: 
(1)  All uses listed as permitted uses in the C-1 office building district. 
(2)  All uses listed as permitted uses in the C-2 neighborhood commercial district, excluding gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold. 
(3)  Retail businesses that sell products such as: candy, nuts and confectioneries, bakeries or tortillerias, ice cream stores, specialized food products, apparel and accessories, computer hardware and software, records, tape and compact diskettes, musical instruments, drug and proprietary goods, household furniture and electronics, miscellaneous shopping goods (sic 594), products from miscellaneous retail stores (sic 599) and similar or related uses. 
(4)  Restaurants which do not derive more than 25 percent of the gross income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(5)  On-premise signs, including those that are animated or illuminated. 
(6)  All signs permitted in the C-1 office building district. 
(7)  Household goods warehousing and storage in individually rented storage units. 
(Ord. No. 1999-07, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 2003-83, § 1, 11-10-03) 
Sec. 138-269. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit permitted in the C-3L light commercial districts are as follows: 
(1)  All conditional uses listed in the C-2 neighborhood commercial district except gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold. 
(Ord. No. 1999-07, § 1, 1-25-99) 
Sec. 138-270. - Prohibited uses. 
    The uses prohibited in the C-3L light commercial districts are as follows: 
(1)  Any building erected or land used for other than one or more of the uses specified in this division. 
(2)  Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard dimensions; and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in section 138-356. 
(Ord. No. 1999-07, § 1, 1-25-99) 
Secs. 138-271-138-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - C-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT[27] 

Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
Cross reference- Signs permitted in the commercial and industrial zoning districts, § 130-110. 

Sec. 138-276. - Purpose. 
    The C-3 general business district is established for the following purposes: 
(1)  To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations with a variety of site choices, for development requiring a higher density of commercial establishments, generally characterized by an integrated or planned cluster of establishments served by a common parking area and/or generating large volumes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(2)  To protect against fire and explosions, pollution and other environmental hazards. 
(3)  To protect, as far as possible, commercial centers against congestion. 
(4)  To promote the most desirable uses of land and the direction of building development in accordance with the adopted growth management policy of the city. 
(5)  To promote stability of commercial development; to strengthen the economic base of the city; to protect the character of the district and its uses; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect the city's tax base. 
(6)  To promote the most efficient use of city facilities and services. 
(Code 1966, § 32-43(1)) 
Sec. 138-277. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted in the C-3 general business districts are as follows: 
(1)  All uses listed as permitted uses in C-1 and C-2 zoning districts. 
(2)  Any retail businesses, personal services or business services except the following: lumberyard or contractor yards, farm equipment or other heavy equipment sales or service, farm products warehousing and storage or stockyards, general warehousing and storage. Household goods warehousing and storage in individually rented storage units is permitted. 
(3)  Hospitals. 
(4)  Hotels, motels. 
(5)  Restaurants, eating places. 
(6)  Printing, publishing and allied products manufacturing. 
(7)  Rail and motor vehicle transportation passenger terminals. 
(8)  Telephone, telegraph, television, radio or similar media stations, centers, studios, but not including public microwave, radio and television towers. 
(9)  Any wholesale trade or wholesale trade accessory to any permitted retail operation except the following: raw cotton, grain, hide, skins and raw furs, tobacco, wool, mohair, livestock, commercial or industrial machinery or supplies, metals and minerals, petroleum bulk stations and terminals, scrap or junk waste materials. 
(10)  Signs in accordance with adopted ordinances. 
(11)  Automotive repair as an accessory use to a permitted retail use, such as retail sale of automobiles or retail sale of automobile parts. 
(Code 1966, § 32-43(2)) 
Sec. 138-278. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit permitted in the C-3 general business districts are as follows: 
(1)  All conditional uses listed in C-1 office building district. 
(2)  Gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold. 
(3)  Planned shopping centers. 
(4)  Bars and nightclubs in accordance with applicable adopted ordinances and section 138-118(a)(4), (b) and (c). 
(5)  Automotive repair and service as a primary use, including auto paint and body work as a primary use subject to required conditions listed in section 138-281. 
(6)  Outdoor flea markets or farmers' markets. 
(7)  Personal wireless service facilities. 
(8)  Transit terminal facility. 
(Code 1966, § 32-43(3); Ord. No. 1996-70, § X, 11-18-96; Ord. No. 1998-82, § 3, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 1999-69, § 3, 8-9-99) 
Cross reference- Conditional use permits, § 138-111 et seq. 
Sec. 138-279. - Prohibited uses. 
    The uses prohibited in the C-3 general business districts are as follows: 
(1)  Any building erected or land used for other than one or more of the uses specified in this division. 
(2)  Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard dimensions; and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in section 138-356. 
(Code 1966, § 32-43(6)) 
Sec. 138-280. - Special conditions for gasoline service stations, drive-in businesses and veterinary hospitals. 
    Gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold, drive-in businesses, and veterinary hospitals in the C-3 general business districts shall be subject to the same limitations as set forth in sections 138-258 through 138-262. 
(Code 1966, § 32-43(4)) 
Sec. 138-281. - Special conditions for automotive repair as a primary use. 
    The following conditions are required for automotive repair as a primary use in the C-3 general business districts: 
(1)  Such establishments shall be located on a lot or tract of land of sufficient size to accommodate the proposed use. In no case shall the building site be less than 10,000 square feet. 
(2)  All service, repair, maintenance, painting, and other work shall take place within an enclosed area. 
(3)  There shall be no outside storage of materials. 
(4)  The building where the proposed work is to take place shall be at least 100 feet from the nearest residence. 
(5)  A six-foot opaque fence buffering the proposed use from any residential use or residentially zoned area may be required. 
(6)  All new buildings and all conversions of existing buildings to such uses shall meet current building code and fire code requirements in terms of separation of high hazard uses from other occupancy use classifications, etc. 
(Code 1966, § 32-43(5)) 
Secs. 138-282-138-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - C-4 COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[28] 

Footnotes: 
--- (28) --- 
Cross reference- Signs permitted in the commercial and industrial zoning districts, § 130-110. 

Sec. 138-291. - Purpose. 
    The C-4 commercial-industrial district is established for the following purposes: 
(1)  To provide sufficient space for the development of commercial establishments which would involve influences that would be objectionable in the C-3 general business district due to noise from heavy service operations, large volumes of truck traffic or some similar objection. 
(2)  To protect against fire and explosions, pollution and other environmental hazards. 
(3)  To protect, as far as possible, against congestion. 
(4)  To promote the most desirable uses of land and the direction of building development in accordance with the adopted growth management policy of the city. 
(5)  To promote stability of commercial-industrial development; to strengthen the economic base of the city; to protect the city's tax base. 
(6)  To promote the most efficient use of city facilities and services. 
(Code 1966, § 32-44(1)) 
Sec. 138-292. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted in the C-4 commercial-industrial districts are as follows: 
(1)  All uses listed as permitted in the C-3 general business district. 
(2)  Automotive repair and service as a primary use, including auto paint and body work as a primary use. 
(3)  Lumberyards or contractor yards, farm equipment or other heavy equipment sales and service, farm products warehousing and storage, general warehousing and storage. 
(4)  Motor vehicle transportation freight terminals. 
(5)  Any wholesale trade or wholesale trade accessory use to any permitted retail operation including the following: raw cotton, grain, hide, skins and raw furs, tobacco, wool, mohair, livestock, commercial or industrial machinery or supplies, metals and minerals, petroleum bulk stations and terminals, scrap or junk waste materials. 
(6)  Those uses of a commercial retail or wholesale nature requiring large outdoor loading areas, generating heavy truck or rail traffic and requiring access to major transportation channels and/or creating influences not acceptable in the C-3 general business district. 
(7)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses, including the residence for night watchmen or caretakers employed on the premises. 
(8)  Signs in accordance with chapter 130. 
(Code 1966, § 32-44(2)) 
Sec. 138-293. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit permitted in the C-4 commercial-industrial districts are as follows: 
(1)  All conditional uses listed in the C-3 general business district. 
(2)  Gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold. 
(3)  Bars and nightclubs in accordance with applicable adopted ordinances and section 138-118(4). 
(4)  Personal wireless service facilities. 
(Code 1966, § 32-44(3); Ord. No. 1996-70, § XI, 11-18-96) 
Cross reference- Conditional use permits, § 138-111 et seq. 
Sec. 138-294. - Prohibited uses. 
    The uses prohibited in the C-4 commercial-industrial districts are as follows: 
(1)  Any building erected or land used for other than one or more of the uses specified in this division. 
(2)  Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard dimensions; and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in section 138-356. 
(Code 1966, § 32-44(5)) 
Sec. 138-295. - Gasoline service stations, drive-in businesses and veterinary hospitals. 
    Gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold, drive-in businesses, and veterinary hospitals in the C-4 commercial-industrial districts shall be subject to the same limitations as set forth in sections 138-258 through 138-262. 
(Code 1966, § 32-44(4)) 
Secs. 138-296-138-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[29] 

Footnotes: 
--- (29) --- 
Cross reference- Signs permitted in the commercial and industrial zoning districts, § 130-110. 

Sec. 138-306. - Purpose. 
    The I-1 light industrial district is established for the following purposes: 
(1)  To accommodate wholesale and warehouse activities and industrial operations whose external physical effects are restricted to the area of the districts and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. 
(2)  To permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly and/or treatment of finished or semifinished products from previously prepared material as long as such use has no adverse external effects such as noise or odor which extend beyond the property lines of the site. 
(3)  To protect against fire and explosions, pollution and other environmental hazards. 
(4)  To protect, as far as possible, against congestion. 
(5)  To promote the most desirable uses of land and the direction of building development in accordance with the adopted growth management policy of the city. 
(6)  To promote stability of industrial development; to strengthen the economic base of the city; to protect the character of the district; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect the city's tax base. 
(7)  To promote the most efficient use of city facilities and services. 
(Code 1966, § 32-45(1)) 
Sec. 138-307. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted in the I-1 light industrial districts are as follows: 
(1)  Any of the following uses when the manufacturing, compounding or processing or reprocessing is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building and provided that the portion of the land used for open storage facilities for materials or equipment used in the manufacturing, compounding or processing shall be totally obscured by a wall on those sides abutting R-1 through R-4, C-1 and C-2 zoning districts: 
a.  The manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery. 
b.  The manufacturing, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheet metal, wood or wood byproducts (excluding saw and planing mills), and yarns. 
c.  The manufacture of pottery and figurine or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
d.  Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and metal or rubber stamps, or other small molded rubber products. 
e.  Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs. 
f.  Laboratories, experimental, film or testing. 
g.  Manufacture and repair of electric or neon signs, sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like. 
h.  Tool, die, gauge and machine shops. 
i.  All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards and other related uses. 
j.  Any use listed as permitted in C-4 commercial-industrial district. 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses. 
(3)  Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character to those principal uses permitted subject to any and all provisions of ordinances relating to the use of property within the city. 
(Code 1966, § 32-45(2)) 
Sec. 138-308. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit permitted in the I-1 light industrial districts are as follows: 
(1)  All conditional uses listed in C-4 commercial-industrial district excluding bars and nightclubs. 
(2)  Gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold. 
(3)  Planned industrial parks. 
(4)  Personal wireless service facilities. 
(Code 1966, § 32-45(3); Ord. No. 1996-70, § XII, 11-18-96) 
Cross reference- Conditional use permits, § 138-111 et seq. 
Sec. 138-309. - Prohibited uses. 
    The uses prohibited in the I-1 light industrial districts are as follows: 
(1)  Any building erected or land used for other than one or more of the uses specified in this division. 
(2)  Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard dimensions; and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in section 138-356. 
(Code 1966, § 32-45(5)) 
Sec. 138-310. - Special conditions for gasoline service stations, drive-in businesses and veterinary hospitals. 
    Gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold, drive-in businesses and veterinary hospitals shall be subject to the same limitations as set forth in sections 138-258 through 138-262. 
(Code 1966, § 32-45(4)) 
Secs. 138-311-138-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[30] 

Footnotes: 
--- (30) --- 
Cross reference- Signs permitted in the commercial and industrial zoning districts, § 130-110. 

Sec. 138-321. - Purpose. 
    The I-2 heavy industrial district is established for the following purposes: 
(1)  To accommodate industrial operations whose external physical effects are restricted to the area of the districts and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. 
(2)  To permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly and/or treatment of raw materials or finished or semifinished products. 
(3)  To protect against fire and explosions, pollution and other environmental hazards. 
(4)  To protect, as far as possible, against congestion. 
(5)  To promote the most desirable uses of land and direction of building development in accordance with the adopted growth management policy of the city. 
(6)  To promote stability of industrial development; to protect the character of the district; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect the city's tax base. 
(7)  To promote the most efficient use of city facilities and services. 
(Code 1966, § 32-46(1)) 
Sec. 138-322. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted in the I-2 heavy industrial districts are as follows: 
(1)  All uses listed as permitted in the I-1 light industrial district, provided that the manufacturing, compounding or processing or reprocessing is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building and that the portion of land used for open storage facilities for materials or equipment used in the manufacturing, compounding or processing shall be totally obscured by a wall on those sides abutting R-1 through R-4, C-1 and C-2 zoning districts. 
(2)  Any use not previously listed in this article, subject to any and all provisions of all ordinances relating to the use of property within the city. 
(Code 1966, § 32-46(2)) 
Sec. 138-323. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit permitted in the I-2 heavy industrial districts are all the conditional uses listed in the I-1 light industrial district. 
(Code 1966, § 32-46(3)) 
Cross reference- Conditional use permit, § 138-111 et seq. 
Sec. 138-324. - Prohibited uses. 
    The uses prohibited in I-2 heavy industrial districts are as follows: 
(1)  Those uses which, in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission and/or board of commissioners, would be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the citizens of the city or to adjacent development. 
(2)  Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard dimensions; and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in section 138-356. 
(Code 1966, § 32-46(5)) 
Sec. 138-325. - Special conditions for gasoline service stations, drive-in businesses and veterinary hospitals. 
    Gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold, drive-in businesses and veterinary hospitals shall be subject to the same limitations as set forth in sections 138-258 through 138-262. 
(Code 1966, § 32-46(4)) 
Secs. 138-326-138-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - HEART OF THE CITY OVERLAY DISTRICTS[31] 

Footnotes: 
--- (31) --- 
Editor's note- Maps A and B referenced in this Division 13 are not set out herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city. 

Sec. 138-331. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bar means an establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold, including any cabaret, dancehall, discotheque, disco, music venue, nightclub or restaurant or other establishment where more than 49 percent of the gross income is derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    BYOB or BYO means "bring your own bottle", "bring your own beer", "bring your own beverage", or "bring your own booze". 
    Cabaret, dancehall, discotheque, disco, music venue or nightclub means an establishment the primary activity of which is the provision musical entertainment and/or permit dancing by its patrons to live or recorded music. 
    Central Business District means the area of the city lying between U.S. Business 83 and Houston Avenue, from Tenth Street to Bicentennial Boulevard. 
    Entertainment or cultural establishment means any of a variety of venues that provide an ongoing activity or business to which the public is invited or allowed to watch, listen, or participate, to divert or amuse quests or patrons, including, but not limited to. 
(1)  Presentations by single or multiple performers, such as comedians, musical song or dance acts, plays, concerts, demonstrations of talent, shows, reviews, hypnotists, pantomimes, or any other similar activity which may be attended by members of the public. 
(2)  Cabarets, dancehalls, discotheques, discos, music venues, nightclubs, restaurants, bars, and schools of dance. 
    Heart of the City means that area of the City of McAllen from Hackberry Avenue to Expressway 83 and from Bicentennial Boulevard to 10th Street. 
    Retail establishment means an establishment the primary purpose of which is the sale of goods, products or materials directly to a consumer, including personal service establishments but not a bar or restaurant. 
    Residential permit means the permit that may be issued by the director of planning to a property owner pursuant to the provisions of this division to allow a residential use above a commercial establishment. 
    Special permit means the permit that may be issued by the director of planning to an establishment pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2005-95, § 1, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 2008-30, § 2, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 2016-38, § I, 5-23-16) 
Sec. 138-332. - Heart of the City Overlay Districts established; sunset; permit application and fee. 
(a)  The overlay districts established in this division supersede, modify and/or supplement any conflicting requirements and limitations of article V ("Districts") otherwise applicable to any underlying base district. All of the article V requirements and limitations of any underlying base district that do not conflict with those of the overlay district shall continue to apply. In the event of any conflict between the overlay district requirements or limitations and those of article V, the overlay district requirements or limitations shall prevail. 
(b)  Any establishment that as of the effective date of this division is located or seeks to locate within an overlay district established by this division may apply for any special permit available to it. Any such application must be filed by or with the written consent of the property owner, and shall be filed with the director of planning, together with an application a fee of $100.00. All such applications shall be reviewed, considered and acted upon by the director of planning. A special permit shall be issued to the establishment specified in the application, will not run with the land, will not be transferable and will be subject to revocation as provided in this division. 
(c)  The denial or revocation of a special permit may be subject to reconsideration under section 138-337, and may be appealed to the board of commissioners pursuant to section 138-338. 
(d)  In the event the board of commissioners repeals this division then, except as provided in subsection (e) hereof, the overlay districts established hereunder shall dissolve and no special or residential permits shall be issued or renewed. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, any permit issued under this division shall be valid through its expiration date even if it extends beyond any repeal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-95, § 1, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 2008-30, § 2, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 2016-38, § I, 5-23-16) 
Sec. 138-333. - Entertainment and Cultural Overlay District; location; special permits. 
(a)  An Entertainment and Cultural Overlay District ("ECOD") is hereby established within the City of McAllen encompassing all of Blocks and Lots of the McAllen Addition Subdivision as follows: all of Blocks 1, 2, 5, 9, 24, 25, 41, and 57; Lots 5 through 14 out of Block 4, Lots 6 through 12 out of Block 10; Lots 6 and 7 out of Block 11; Lots 11, 12 and 13 out of Block 12; Lots 6, 7 and 8 out of Block 13, Lot 1 and the South 22 feet of Lot 2 and Lot 4 out of Block 40, and Lots 1, 3, 4, 5 out of Block 56 as well as Lots 7 through 12 each out of Blocks 23, 26, 39, 42, and 55 of the same subdivision, as shown in Map A. 
(b)  The ECOD shall be indicated on the zoning map with the base district symbol followed by a slash and the ECOD district symbol (i.e., ("C-3/ECOD")). 
(c)  BYOB prohibited: A patron, customer, or guest of a bar, restaurant, entertainment or cultural establishment, or other establishment in the ECOD may not bring wine, malt alcoholic beverages (beer), distilled beverages or other beverages produced through distillation into such establishments. 
(d)  ECOD special permits may be issued to entertainment or cultural establishments within the boundaries of the ECOD, for a period of three years, subject to the following requirements and limitations: 
(1)  The following establishments may not operate within the ECOD without a special permit: 
a.  Any entertainment or cultural establishment seeking to locate within the ECOD; and 
b.  Any entertainment or cultural establishment located within the ECOD on the effective date of this division that applies to the building official for a building permit or a miscellaneous inspection. 
The provisions of this section are intended to also apply, without limitation, to any bar, cocktail lounge, tavern, saloon or cantina, and to any nightclub, discotheque, disco or dancehall located in the ECOD after its conditional use permit expires. 
(2)  Any bar, cocktail lounge, tavern, saloon or cantina, and any nightclub, discotheque, disco or dancehall that is issued an ECOD special permit does not require a conditional use permit and is exempted from the minimum distance requirements of chapter 6 ("Alcoholic Beverages"), section 6-2 and of subsection 138-118(a)(4) of the McAllen Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  A special permittee shall make necessary and reasonable efforts to discourage criminal activity and vandalism, both on the site and on adjacent properties. Such measures may include the provision of adequate and sufficient lighting, the elimination of dark areas, and the hiring of security personnel. 
a.  Lighting must be provided at each entrance and exit as well as at the rear of the establishment if adjacent to the alley or on a corner lot. 
b.  A special permittee holding a mixed beverage late hours permit is required to provide security personnel based on the occupancy count provided by the chief building official. There shall be one security personnel per every 75 patrons plus one supervising security personnel for every five security personnel required. All security personnel must be properly identifiable. 
c.  The installation of security cameras will be required at each entrance and exit to the establishment plus one additional camera for every 500 square feet of floor area. Security cameras must have a minimum retention load of 30 recording days. Dummy cameras are prohibited and signs should be posted that the establishment is under video surveillance. At the City's request the special permittee shall assist the municipality in obtaining authorization from the property owner to place additional video cameras on the exterior of the building. 
d.  Outdoor amplified music may not exceed 85 decibels as measured at 300 feet from the property line of the business, as read from a calibrated sound level meter utilizing the A-level weighting scale and the slow meter. 
e.  Establishments selling alcoholic beverages with a mixed beverage late hours permit (midnight to 2 a.m.) shall: 
1.  Enforce the use of age-verification device(s) and supporting tracking software; 
2.  Mark all occupants that are under the age of 21 years with UV ink (or other City of McAllen approved system) and track the same using blacklight devices throughout the business; and 
3.  Provide reports related to occupants under the age of 21 years as may be requested by city staff at any time. 
(4)  A special permittee shall make necessary and reasonable provisions to keep litter to a minimum, and to keep it from blowing onto or being deposited on adjacent streets and properties. 
(5)  A special permit applicant shall submit for approval a plan describing the efforts that will be made and the measures that will be implemented to accomplish the aims of subsections (3) and (4), above. The applicant may amend the proposed plan. If the director of planning is satisfied that the proposed plan, as presented or as amended, reasonably addresses the above aims, it shall be approved, and compliance with the plan shall be made a condition for approval of the special permit. 
(6)  A special permittee shall restrict the number of persons within its premises to those allowed by the director of planning at the time of special permit issuance. In determining an establishment's occupancy limit the director of planning shall take into account the recommendations and requirements of the fire marshal and the building official, and such limit shall not exceed the maximum number that may otherwise be provided for in the City Code of Ordinances. 
(7)  The director of planning may impose additional requirements or limitations as may be appropriate and reasonable to carry out the purposes of the ECOD and to mitigate any adverse effects that could be generated by the proposed use. 
(8)  An ECOD special permittee, no later than 60 days prior to its expiration, may apply for renewal of its special permit. Special permit renewals shall be processed as an original application. 
(9)  Any change in ownership of an establishment shall cause the special permit to expire, and require a miscellaneous inspection by the building official. It shall be a condition of a special permit that the permittee notify the director of planning in writing of any change in ownership, and further notify any prospective new owner in writing of the requirement to apply for a special permit in order to qualify for the special treatment of subsection (c) hereof, and for the issuance of residential permits under section 138-335. 
(Ord. No. 2005-95, § 1, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 2008-30, § 2, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 2016-38, § I, 5-23-16; Ord. No. 2016-54, § I, 8-22-16) 
Sec. 138-334. - Downtown Retail Overlay District; location. 
(a)  A "Downtown Retail Overlay District" ("DROD") is hereby established within the City of McAllen to include the Masso Condos Subdivision and that area of the McAllen Addition Subdivision encompassing all of Lots 1 through 5 out of Block 10; Lots 1 through 5 and 8 through 12 out of Block 11; Lots 1 through 10 and 14 through 18 out of Block 12; Lots 1 through 5 and 9 through 18 out of Block 13; Lots 1 through 12 out of Block 21, and Lots 1 through 6 each out of Blocks 23, 26, 39, 42, and 55; also, all of Blocks 14, 19, 20, 22, 27, 28, 29, 30, 35, 36, 37, 38, 43, 44, 45, 46, 51, 52, 53, 54, 59 and 60, as shown in Map B. 
(b)  The DROD shall be indicated on the zoning map with the base district symbol followed by a slash and the DROD district symbol (i.e., ("C-3/ DROD")). 
(Ord. No. 2005-95, § 1, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 2008-30, § 2, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 2016-38, § I, 5-23-16) 
Sec. 138-335. - Residential uses permitted in Commercial Overlay Districts. 
    Residential uses not otherwise permitted in the base district underlying an overlay district, either as of right or conditionally, shall be allowed upon the issuance of a residential permit by the director of planning, with the following conditions, requirements and limitations: 
(1)  A residential permit application may be filed with the director of planning only by the property owner, together with an application a fee of $100.00. A residential permit shall be issued to the property owner for life of the use, conditioned on compliance with all the requirements and limitations hereunder, and will be subject to termination or revocation as provided in this division. 
(2)  Each residential unit requires its own residential permit. 
(3)  The off-street parking requirements of section 138-336 shall apply. 
(4)  No residential uses will be allowed on the first floor of a building. 
(5)  No residential uses will be allowed on any floor above the first when the floor also has a non-residential use. However, property owners or first-floor establishment owners residing in a floor above the first floor may also use part of that floor as an office. 
(6)  Abandonment of a permitted residential use will be cause for revocation of the residential permit. Abandonment shall be presumed whenever any part of the space subject to the residential permit is converted to a non-residential use, except as specifically allowed by the provisions of this division. 
(7)  A violation of any requirement or limitation shall be cause for revocation of the residential permit by the director of planning. 
(8)  Inspections shall be allowed as provided in section 138-337. 
(9)  The denial or revocation of a residential permit may be subject to reconsideration under section 138-337, and may be appealed to the zoning board of adjustments and appeals pursuant to section 138-338. 
(Ord. No. 2005-95, § 1, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 2008-30, § 2, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 2016-38, § I, 5-23-16) 
Sec. 138-336. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    Retail establishments in the DROD, special permittees in the ECOD, and residential permittees that do not comply with the city's off-street parking ordinance by providing the required minimum number of parking spaces shall in lieu of such compliance pay the applicable fee appearing in the table that follows. Payment of said fee shall be a condition, respectively, for: (i) the issuance of a building permit or the finaling of a miscellaneous inspection by the building official; (ii) the issuance of a special permit; and (iii) the issuance of a residential permit. However, no additional fee shall be required whenever the same permittee applies to the building official for a building permit or a miscellaneous inspection within one year of being issued a special permit or a residential permit. In all cases the applicable fee shall be based on the square footage of any space for which the building official issues a building permit or conducts a miscellaneous inspection: 
Gross Square Footage Fee Less than 2,500 sq. ft. $1,000.00 2,501-5,000 sq. ft. $1,500.00 5,001-10,000 sq. ft. $2,000.00 10,001-15,000 sq. ft. $2,500.00 15,001-20,000 sq. ft. $3,000.00 Over 20,000 sq. ft. $3,500.00  
    All such fees shall be deposited into the downtown development fund established by the city for the exclusive purpose of alleviating the parking needs and improvements of the Heart of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2005-95, § 1, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 2006-47, § 1, 5-8-06; Ord. No. 2016-38, § I, 5-23-16) 
Sec. 138-337. - Enforcement; notice of revocation; reconsideration. 
(a)  The provisions of this division shall be administered and enforced by the director of planning, and there shall be the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspection of buildings or premises necessary to carry out the duties in the enforcement of this division. 
(b)  Whenever there is reason to believe that any permittee is in violation of any permit condition, requirement or limitation, a notice of violation shall be issued to the permittee, addressed to the last known address as reflected in the department's files or the city's tax records, advising that on the basis of the violation being alleged the permit shall be revoked as of the tenth calendar day following the date on the said notice. 
(c)  A permittee whose permit is being revoked may, by the tenth day after the date on the notice and not thereafter, submit anything to the director of planning for reconsideration of the revocation. The director of planning may agree to meet with the permittee to discuss such reconsideration. In the event of such submission or meeting the revocation will not be effective until the tenth day following the director of planning's written determination on the reconsideration. In the event the director of planning fails to respond to a request for reconsideration within ten days of submission, a denial of such request shall be presumed and considered a final action. 
(Ord. No. 2005-95, § 1, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 2016-38, § I, 5-23-16) 
Sec. 138-338. - Appeals. 
    Any permit applicant whose application is denied, any permittee whose permit is terminated or revoked, and any such person who is aggrieved by any decision of the director of planning may, within ten days of such final action and not thereafter, appeal in writing to the zoning board of adjustments and appeals pursuant to section 138-43, setting forth that such action is in error, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of such error. 
(Ord. No. 2005-95, § 1, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 2008-30, § 2, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 2016-38, § I, 5-23-16) 
Sec. 138-339. - Penalty for violations. 
    Any person violating any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined an amount as prescribed in section 1-14. Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction under this section shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-95, § 1, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 2016-38, § I, 5-23-16) 
Sec. 138-340. - Board of commissioners to consider chapter 380 agreements. 
    The board of commissioners may enter into chapter 380 economic development agreements with enterprises locating in the Heart of the City provided that: 
(1)  The enterprise shall locate within the Central Business District; 
(2)  The enterprise shall first apply with the Heart of the City of McAllen Redevelopment Corporation, Inc., and receives its positive recommendation; 
(3)  The commissioners find that entering into a 380 agreement will serve the long-term economic interests of the city and promote the development purposes and goals of the Heart of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2007-72, § 1, 9-10-07; Ord. No. 2016-38, § I, 5-23-16) 
DIVISION 14. - DESIGN DISTRICT 

Sec. 138-341. - Overlay Design District established. 
(a)  An Overlay Design District ("design district") is hereby established within the City of McAllen encompassing all land within the territorial limits of the City of McAllen with the exception of Lots 1-6, Block 6, North McAllen Townsite, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to the plat or map thereof recorded in Volume "Z", Page 40, deed records of Hidalgo County, Texas and Lots 7-12, Block 5, North McAllen Townsite, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to the plat or map thereof recorded in Volume "Z", Page 40, deed records of Hidalgo County, Texas. 
(b)  The overlay district established in this division supersedes, modifies and/or supplements any conflicting requirements and limitations of article V ("districts") otherwise applicable to any underlying base district. All of the article V requirements and limitations of any underlying base district that do not conflict with those of the overlay district shall continue to apply. In the event of any conflict between the overlay district requirements or limitations and those of article V, the overlay district requirements or limitations shall prevail. However, in the event of any conflict between the overlay design district requirements or limitations and those of article VIII ("historical preservation"), the article VIII requirements or limitations shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45, § I, 8-14-17) 
Sec. 138-342. - Design manual fully incorporated. 
    The "Design Manual for the Installation of Network Nodes and Node Support Poles Pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov. Code Chapter 284" is fully incorporated by reference herein as if fully set forth and applies to the entirety of the design district. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45, § I, 8-14-17) 
Secs. 138-343-138-345. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS[32] 
Footnotes: 
--- (32) --- 
Cross reference- Regulations regarding proximity of alcoholic beverage establishment to church, school or hospital, § 6-2; keeping hogs in the city prohibited, § 14-2; keeping of poisonous or dangerous animals prohibited, § 14-3; housing code, § 22-241 et seq.; unsafe building abatement standards and procedure, § 22-271; water wells, § 106-101 et seq.; landscaping, § 110-26; conditions for specific conditional uses, § 138-118. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 138-346-138-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICT 

Table of Height and Yard Requirements 
District Minimum Lot Area Front Each/Total 
Side Rear Maximum Height Minimum Lot Width Maximum Building 
Coverage Maximum Number of Dwelling Units per Gross Acre Minimum Parking 
 A-O 
Agricultural open space 5 acres 50 1 20 1, 2 20 1 25 1, 9 165' - 0.2 2 per d.u. R-1  
Single-family 5,000  25 6/12 2 10 25 9 50 - 8 2 per d.u. R-2 
Duplex 5,600  20 6/12 2, 3 10 2 25 9 50 - 16 See 
footnote 
no. 6 R-2 Triplex 6,700  20 6/12 2, 3 10 2 25 9 50 - 20 R-2 Quadplex 7,800  20 6/12 2, 3 10 2 25 9 50 - 22 R-3A and R-3C 7,000 12 See 
footnote 
no. 6 R-3 Apartments and condominiums 800 20 6/12 2, 3 10 2 25 9 50 - 54/29 13 R-3T 5 
Townhouses 2,000  10 2 0 2, 10 0 2, 10 25 9 20 - 20 R-4 
Mobile home See mobile home parks, chapter 122, article II, and subdivisions, chapter 134. C-1 
Office building None 4 See footnote no. 11 N/A See off-street 
parking, 
article VII of 
this chapter C-2 
Neighborhood commercial None 4 See footnote no. 11 N/A C-3L 
Light commercial None 4 See footnote no. 11 N/A C-3 
General business None 4 See footnote no. 11 N/A C-4 
Commercial-industrial None 4 See footnote no. 11 N/A I-1 
Light industrial - See footnote no. 11 N/A I-2 
Heavy industrial None 4 See footnote no. 11 N/A  
    Footnotes: 
1.  Minimum lot area: The gross area of the lot includes internal sidewalks, recreation areas, floor space, parking area, open space and utility easements, but does not include any public right-of-way street easements or alley easements. 
2.  Entrances to a garage or enclosed carport shall be a minimum of 18 feet from streets or alleys in the A-O, R-1, R-2, R-3A, R-3C and R-3T districts unless otherwise specified by the planning and zoning commission. 
3.  R-3A and R-3C apartments and condominiums district: 
a.  Units on individual lots shall meet side yard requirements of six feet per side, with a total separation of 12 feet. 
b.  Side yard setbacks on corner lots shall be ten feet, except as provided in footnote no. 2. 
c.  Units on the same parcel shall be separated by at least 12 feet. 
4.  Where a minimum size is not specified, the intention of this chapter is that each lot shall be of sufficient size and dimension and with access to a public right-of-way and utilities for its intended use after complying with the requirements set forth in this chapter and other applicable ordinances and is compatible with those uses around it. 
5.  Unenclosed carports accessing and abutting an alley may be built up to the rear property line in the R-3A and R-3C zone districts. 
6.  See off-street parking and loading, article VII of this chapter. 
7.  Only one primary residential structure may be erected on an R-1, R-2 or R-3T zoning district lot; and only one single-family residential structure may be erected on an R-3A or R-3C zoning district lot. 
8.  The board of commissioners has the power to pass an ordinance establishing a setback line greater than in the above table where exceptional conditions so require. 
9.  Where a structure exceeds the 25-foot height maximum, it shall be set back one additional foot for each foot above 25 feet. 
10.  Where a townhouse is not separated from an adjacent structure by a firewall, the setback from each side lot line shall be six feet each side. Side yard setback on corner lots shall be ten feet, except as provided in footnote no. 2. 
11.  Standards and specifications: 
a.  Setback, area and height limitations in commercial areas (in general): 
(1)  The limitations on setbacks, area and height are intended to control all areas zoned and platted for commercial uses after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Recognizing the inherent problems affecting property in the central business district, these restrictions will not be applicable in that area. Parcels zoned and platted for commercial purposes existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that are 50 feet or less in width are also exempted from these restrictions. In those instances, reference will be made to the 1945 zoning ordinance as controlling these areas. 
(2)  All commercially and industrially zoned property that has frontage along U.S. Business 83 shall be exempted from the setback requirements set forth in this chapter, and shall be controlled by the 1945 zoning ordinance which is on file in the city secretary's office. The exemption from setbacks shall be tied to the zoning designation, regardless of the date that such zoning became or becomes effective. 
b.  Setback, area and height limitations in commercial areas (specific): 
(1)  A ten-foot side yard setback shall be required on corner lots. 
(2)  The minimum width of a building site shall be 50 feet of frontage on a public street. 
(3)  The minimum front yard setback shall be equal to one-half of the width of the street right-of-way which it faces or in line with the majority setback of existing structures on the block face, whichever is greater. In a C-1 zone district the front yard setback shall be one foot back of street right-of-way line for each two feet in height, or as specified above, if that distance is greater. 
(4)  Side yard setbacks from all lot lines shall be one foot back for each two feet in height including corner lots, except a building may be built to a lot line when not adjacent to a residential zone and where a firewall is provided between uses. 
(5)  Rear yard setbacks shall be five feet. 
(6)  The height of buildings may not exceed the depth of the front yard plus the width of the street right-of-way which it faces. In a C-1 or C-3L zone districts the maximum height shall not exceed two stories. 
12.  Seven thousand square feet represents the minimum lot area for any R-3 multifamily residential district use, exclusive of townhouse. Zero bedrooms, 800 square feet; three bedrooms, 1,500 square feet, represents the "minimum lot area/dwelling unit in square feet" permitted within this control category. To determine the permitted number of dwelling units in the R-3 multifamily residential district, divide the "minimum lot area per dwelling unit" for the type of unit desired (or the average for a variety) into the lot area for the parcel in question. The resulting quotient is the maximum number of dwelling units permitted, e.g.: 
80-foot by 120-foot lot = 9,600 square feet 9600 0 br. 800 square feet:      = 12      800 Maximum dwelling units on 9,600-square-foot lot = 12 efficiencies 9600 1 br.      = 9  1 br. 1000 9600 2 br.      = 7  2 br. 1250 9600 3 br.      = 6  3 br. 1500  
13.  Maximum density per gross acre in the R-3 multifamily residential district is expressed as 54/29 . The number 54 represents the maximum number of "0 bedroom, 800-square-foot dwelling units" permitted on a one-acre tract. The number 29 represents the maximum "3 bedroom, 1,500-square-foot dwelling units" permitted on a one-acre tract, e.g.: 
43,560        = 54    800 43,560        = 29  1,500  
14.  A lot of record or a lot within a recorded subdivision with an application date prior to November 8, 1999 shall comply with the table of height and yard requirements for single-family uses set forth in the 1979 Zoning Ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 32-57; Ord. No. 1994-72, § I, 10-10-94; Ord. No. 1999-07, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 1999-95, § 1, 11-9-99) 
Secs. 138-357-138-365. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOTS AND YARDS 

Sec. 138-366. - Setbacks. 
(a)  At the time of submission of any original or amended subdivision plat to the planning and zoning commission for approval, the planning and zoning commission shall have the power and authority to accept and approve any building setback lines projected on such plat or plats, even though such building setback lines may not be in compliance with the requirements set out in this chapter. 
(b)  Where setbacks have been established by the planning and zoning commission on a plat of record, those setbacks shall be enforced even though not in compliance with the restrictions set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  The ordinary projections of sills, eaves, cornices and ornamental features may extend to a distance not to exceed 24 inches into a required yard. 
(d)  Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers, and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into a required yard, may be permitted by the building official for a distance not to exceed five feet when these are so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation. 
(Code 1966, § 32-58(1)) 
Sec. 138-367. - Front yards. 
(a)  When 50 percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street on any one block is improved with buildings that have a front yard which is greater than the required front yard in the district, no new building shall project beyond the average front yard so established or the front yard setback set by this chapter. 
(b)  On lots having double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
(c)  In a residential district, no fence, structure or planting higher than three feet above the streetflow gutter line shall be maintained within 25 feet of the curb intersection. Palm trees or similar small trunk trees or vegetation may occupy this area provided that the foliage is continuously trimmed a minimum of eight feet above street grade. 
(d)  Filling station pumps and pump islands may be located within a required yard provided they are not less than 13 feet from any property line or 18 feet from the curb, whichever is greater, and not less than 100 feet from any residential district boundary. 
(Code 1966, § 32-58(2)) 
Sec. 138-368. - Side yards. 
(a)  On a corner lot in all districts, the width of the side yard along the street shall not be less than ten feet provided that the buildable width of such a lot of record shall not be reduced to less than 38 feet. This regulation shall not apply to those lots of record which have existing buildings prior to the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. However, should these buildings be removed, destroyed or in any way eliminated from the property, they shall thereafter comply with this chapter. Corner lots subdivided after the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be at least four feet wider than the minimum lot size in residential zones and ten feet wider in commercial zones. 
(b)  No accessory building shall project into the required yard along any street. 
(c)  Where dwelling units are erected above a commercial establishment, no side yard is required except when required for the commercial building on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district. 
(d)  A porte-cochere or canopy may project into a required side yard provided every part of such porte-cochere or canopy is unenclosed and not less than four feet from any side lot line or eight feet from a corner property line. 
(e)  For the purpose of side yard regulations, a multiple dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
(f)  Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is less than 50 feet in width, the required side yard may be reduced to ten percent of the width of the lot, provided that no side yard shall be less than 31/2 feet. 
(g)  Community buildings, museums, libraries and other permitted public buildings shall be located not less than 40 feet from any side lot line when located in an R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoning district. 
(Code 1966, § 32-58(3)) 
Sec. 138-369. - Rear yards. 
    An accessory building in a residential district shall not exceed 25 feet in height. An accessory building shall be no closer than five feet to the main building except where a firewall is provided. 
(Code 1966, § 32-58(4); Ord. No. 2017-08, § I, 1-23-17) 
Sec. 138-370. - Lot area per family. 
    Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived has less area or width than required by this chapter in the district in which it is located, and the owner of such lot does not own any other parcel or tract adjacent thereto, such lot may nonetheless be used for a one-family dwelling or for any nondwelling use permitted in the district in which it is located, as long as it meets all other requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 32-58(5)) 
Sec. 138-371. - Special exception for carports. 
(a)  The zoning board of adjustment may grant a special exception to the minimum setback requirements for a carport when, in the opinion of the board: 
(1)  There is no adequate vehicular access to an area behind the required front building line that would accommodate a parking space; and 
(2)  The carport will not have a detrimental impact on surrounding properties. 
(b)  In determining whether to grant this special exception, the board shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the requested special exception is compatible with the character of the neighborhood. 
(2)  Whether the value of surrounding properties will be adversely affected. 
(3)  The suitability of the size and location of the carport 
(4)  The materials to be used in construction of the carport 
(c)  Storage of items other than motor vehicles is prohibited in a carport for which a special exception has been granted under this subsection. 
(d)  If the zoning board of adjustmnet grants a special exception as provided in this section, the site plan and the minutes of the zoning board of adjustment meeting shall be officially recorded with Hidalgo County. 
(e)  Any special exception granted under this chapter is granted solely to the applicant and may not be transferred, sold, inherited, bequeathed, or devised. 
(f)  A new special exception shall be required upon any change or transfer in ownership of the underlying tract; a special exception granted to a previous applicant does not confer any right to any other individual or corporation to maintain the carport without approval from the zoning board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 2018-70, § I, 10-8-18) 
Secs. 138-372-138-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[33] 

Footnotes: 
--- (33) --- 
Cross reference- Requirements for conditional uses regarding parking facility, § 138-118. 

Sec. 138-391. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Central Business District (CBD) means the area of the city lying between U.S. Business 83, Houston Avenue, Tenth Street and 18th Street. 
    Loading space. One loading space is an area, the width and length of which shall exceed the dimensions of the type of vehicle to normally be parked in the space by a minimum of two feet, and no part of the area shall be closer than six feet from the back edge of the curb. 
    Maneuvering space means the space required for maneuvering vehicles into and out of parking spaces in such a manner as to preclude the backing of any vehicle into any street right-of-way. Such maneuvering space shall be no closer than six feet from the back edge of the curb. 
    Off-street parking space. One off-street parking space is an area, the width and length of which shall exceed the dimensions of the type of vehicle to normally be parked in the space by a minimum of two feet, and no part of the area shall be closer than six feet from the back edge of the curb. 
(Code 1966, § 191/2-2; Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, 8-28-02) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 138-392. - Penalties for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article within the corporate limits of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-14. Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction under this section shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief provided for violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 191/2-12) 
Sec. 138-393. - Required. 
    In all districts there shall be provided at the time any building or structure is erected or structurally altered, off-street parking and maneuvering spaces in accordance with the minimum requirements set out in this article, except as otherwise provided in section 138-396. All parking and maneuvering space shall be provided on private property unless otherwise stated in this article. When, in the opinion of the city, the provisions of this article are not adequate, such additional requirements as may be necessary and desirable may be required. 
(Code 1966, § 191/2-1; Ord. No. 2008-30, § 2, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 138-394. - Minimum requirements-No maneuvering space. 
    Minimum requirements for off-street parking and loading spaces when no maneuvering space is required are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family, mobile/modular home, townhouse and duplex: Two parking spaces per dwelling unit. One off-street parking for single-family uses shall be located beyond the front yard setback. Parking on landscape development areas required by section 110-48 is prohibited. 
(2)  Recreational vehicle space: One parking space per approved recreational vehicle unit space or lot. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of a single-family residence to park or allow a third party: 
a.  To park a vehicle in the front yard of such single-family residence; 
b.  To park a vehicle on the side yard of an interior lot; or 
c.  To park a vehicle in the side or rear yard of a corner lot; except on a parking space constructed or installed in accordance with city standards and specifications as promulgated by the planning director and city engineer jointly. 
This prohibition is applicable to any new or existing single-family residence notwithstanding subsection 138-86(1) regarding the date of the subdivision in which the residence is located, the date of annexation of the property on which the residence is located, or the fact that it was not unlawful to park or allow a vehicle to be parked in the front yard prior to the date this prohibition was adopted by the city commission. In the prosecution of any violation of this subsection there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the owner and/or occupant of the single-family residence either parked the vehicle or allowed the vehicle to be parked in the front yard. 
(Code 1966, § 191/2-3; Ord. No. 1999-95, § 2, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-83, § 1, 11-26-01; Ord. No. 2003-87, § 1, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 2004-40, § 1, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 2010-48, § I, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 138-395. - Same-Maneuvering space required. 
    The minimum requirements for off-street parking and loading spaces when maneuvering space is required are as follows: 
(1)  Triplex, fourplex, apartment/condominium buildings with five or more units: 
a.  1.5 parking spaces for each efficiency, studio apartment, and one bedroom living unit. 
b.  Two parking spaces for each two or more bedrooms living unit. 
(2)  Church or temple: One parking space for each four seats in the main auditorium. 
(3)  School, elementary or middle (public or private) 1.5 parking spaces for each classroom and administrative office. 
(4)  School, high school or college (public or private): Five parking spaces per classroom and 1.5 parking spaces for each administrative office. 
(5)  Hospital: Three parking spaces for each bed. 
(6)  Nursing or convalescent home: One parking space for each three beds, plus one space for each 300 square feet of outpatient floor area contained therein. 
(7)  Theater or auditorium, except school: One parking space for each three seats or bench seating area. 
(8)  Bingo hall, commercial sports arena, stadium, or gymnasium: One parking space for each 2.5 seats or seating spaces. 
(9)  Hotel, motel, boardinghouse and bed and breakfast: One parking space for each sleeping room or suite plus one space for each 200 square feet of commercial floor area contained therein. 
(10)  Dancehall, assembly, exhibition hall without fixed seats, club or lodge: One parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area used therefor. 
(11)  Commercial development 
a.  Four parking spaces for up to 400 square feet of floor area plus one parking space for each additional 400 square feet of floor area. 
b.  For retail home improvement stores, or buildings containing over 5,000 square feet, a separate parking plan may be submitted, such plan to specifically show the following: 
1.  Number of spaces, ratio of space to floor area, and dimensions. 
2.  Driveway locations and driveway sizes. 
3.  Onsite traffic control, i.e., directional driveways, traffic control islands, handling of merging traffic, and such other methods and devices to show that the parking area will effectively handle the volume of cars at peak parking periods. 
4.  A study showing that the public rights-of-way abutting the parking area and onto which the driveways will be emptying are capable of handling the added traffic loads imposed by the parking being provided. 
c.  Where a proposed commercial development located with[in] the central business district is required to have off-street parking in excess of the amount of land for parking purposes, a fee of $1,000.00 per space will be paid to the city in lieu of meeting the minimum parking requirements. 
(12)  Bowling alley: Five parking spaces for each alley. 
(13)  Mortuary or funeral home: One parking space for each 50 square feet of floor space in slumber room parlors or individual funeral service rooms. 
(14)  Restaurant, nightclub, cafe or similar recreation or amusement establishment: One parking space for each 75 square feet of floor area, or one space for each three seats, whichever is greater. 
(15)  Light industrial, research or testing laboratory, creamery, bottling plant or similar establishment: One parking space for each 500 square feet of enclosed floor area plus parking space to accommodate all trucks, trailers, and other vehicles in connection therewith. 
(16)  Heavy industry: One parking space for each 800 square feet of enclosed floor area plus parking space to accommodate all trucks, trailers, and other vehicles in connection therewith. 
(17)  Elderly housing or assisted living facility: One parking space per living unit. 
(18)  Group home or halfway house: One parking space for each four beds. 
(19)  General office or medical office: Four parking spaces for up to 200 square feet of floor area, plus one parking space for each additional 200 square feet of floor area. 
(20)  Warehouse or distribution center: One parking space for each 2,000 square feet of enclosed floor area, plus one parking space for each 200 square feet of office use, plus 0.5 additional trailer parking space for each accessible dock and/or overhead door and parking space to accommodate all trucks and other vehicles in connection therewith. 
(21)  Self-storage: A minimum of 3 parking spaces, one of which is to be accessible based upon Table 1 and consistent with the Texas Accessibility Standards of the Architectural Barriers Act Article 9102, Texas Civil Statutes, plus an additional parking space for each 250 square feet of office space should office space exceed 500 square feet. 
(Code 1966, § 191/2-4; Ord. No. 1998-84, § 1, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 2002-56, § 2, 8-28-02; Ord. No. 2019-11, § I, 2-25-19) 
Sec. 138-396. - Rules for computing parking requirements. 
    In the interpretation of the parking requirements set out in this article, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  "Floor area" shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use. 
(2)  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the largest whole. 
(3)  The parking space required for a use not specifically mentioned in this article shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature. 
(4)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, whenever a property is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase to ten percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such additional spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is enlarged to the extent of 50 percent or more in floor area used, such building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth in this article. 
Properties located within the central business district, or properties in compliance with a master plan or site plan approved prior to January 1, 1999, or conversion of commercial buildings existing prior to January 1, 1999 to office use where no addition is proposed, shall be controlled by the parking requirements in effect prior to the adoption of this section. 
(5)  In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required in this article shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
(6)  Where none of the foregoing rules are applicable to an existing fact situation, the method for computing the parking requirement shall be the one established by Traffic Engineering Theory & Practice, by Louis Pisnatro, published by Prentice Hall, or Parking in the City Center, published by Wilbur Smith & Associates, New Haven, Connecticut, or other parking data from acceptable publications. 
(7)  Accessible parking spaces shall be provided for parking areas based upon Table 1 and consistent with the Texas Accessibility Standards of the Architectural Barriers Act Article 9102, Texas Civil Statutes. 
Table 1 
Number of Parking Spaces in Parking Area Number of Accessible Parking Spaces 1 to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1,000 2% of total 1,001 and over 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000  
    One in every eight accessible parking spaces but not less than one shall be serviced by an access aisle eight feet wide minimum and shall be designated "van accessible" as specified in section 138-399(f). 
(Code 1966, § 191/2-5; Ord. No. 1998-84, § 2, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 1999-70, § 1, 8-9-99) 
Sec. 138-397. - Location of parking spaces for nonresidential uses. 
(a)  All parking spaces required in this article shall be located on the same property with the activity or establishment, except that where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change in use or enlargement or where such spaces are provided by the establishment or provided collectively and used jointly by two or more activities or establishments, the required spaces may be located not to exceed 300 feet from an institutional building served and not to exceed 500 feet from any other nonresidential building served. 
(b)  Not more than 50 percent of the parking spaces required for theaters, bowling alleys, dancehalls, nightclubs or cafes, and up to 100 percent of the parking spaces required for a church or school auditorium, may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not open, used or operated during the same hours; provided that written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed as specified below. 
(c)  In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same property with the activity or establishment, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for such purposes for a minimum period of five years shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city attorney, and shall be filed with the application for a building permit. 
(d)  Accessible parking spaces serving a particular building shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible entrance. In parking facilities that do not serve a particular building, accessible parking shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel to an accessible pedestrian entrance of the parking facility. In buildings with multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking, accessible parking spaces shall be dispersed and located closest to the accessible entrances. 
(Code 1966, § 191/2-6; Ord. No. 1999-70, § 2, 8-9-99) 
Sec. 138-398. - Loading space. 
    Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for commercial or industrial uses involving the receipt or distribution of materials or mer-chandise by vehicles shall provide off-street loading space in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  In C-1, C-2 or C-3 districts, one loading space for each 10,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area in the building. 
(2)  In C-4, I-1 or I-2 districts, one loading space for each 15,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area in the building. 
(3)  Minimum dimensions for loading space: 
a.  Ninety-degree angle loading space. Each 90-degree angle loading space shall not be less than 11 feet in width and 60 feet in length. Maneuvering space shall not be less than 65 feet. 
b.  Forty-five-degree angle loading space. Each 45-degree angle loading space shall not be less than 11 feet side perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than 60 feet in length when measured at right angle to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be not less than 30 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(Code 1966, § 191/2-7; Ord. No. 2002-56, § 3, 8-28-02) 
Sec. 138-399. - Minimum dimensions for off-street parking. 
(a)  Ninety-degree angle parking. Each 90-degree angle parking space shall not be less than nine feet in width and 18 feet in length. Maneuvering space shall be not less than 24 feet. 
(b)  Sixty-degree angle parking. Each 60-degree- angle parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than 20 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be not less than 16 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(c)  Forty-five-degree angle parking. Each 45-degree-angle parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than 181/2 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be not less than 12 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(d)  Off-street parking area adjacent to alley. When off-street parking facilities are located adjacent to a public alley, the width of such alley may be assumed to be a portion of the maneuvering space requirement. 
(e)  Extra parking areas to comply with minimum area requirements. When off-street parking facilities are provided in excess of the minimum amounts specified in this article, or when off-street parking facilities are provided, but not required by this article, such off-street parking facilities shall comply with the minimum requirements for parking and maneuvering space specified in this article. 
(f)  Accessible parking spaces. 
(1)  An access aisle not less than five feet in width for automobiles and eight feet in width for vans shall be required adjacent to designated accessible parking spaces, or otherwise conform with the Texas Accessibility Standards of the Architectural Barriers Act Article 9102, Texas Civil Statutes. An access route not less than three feet in width shall be provided from public transportation, accessible parking spaces, accessible passenger loading zones and public streets or sidewalks to the accessible building entrance. 
(2)  Each accessible parking space shall be designated as reserved by a vertically mounted or suspended sign at least 12 inches in width showing the symbol of accessibility. The required signage shall also include below the symbol for accessibility the words, "Class C Misdemeanor w/o Permit." Signage for van accessible spaces shall also display the words "Van Accessible" below the symbol for accessibility. 
(3)  Letters and numbers on signs shall have a width-to-height ratio between 3:5 and 1:1 and a stroke-width-to-height ratio between 1:5 and 1:10 using an upper case "X" for measurement. The characters and background of signs shall be eggshell, matte, or other non-glare finish. Characters and symbols shall contrast with their background - either light characters on a dark background or dark characters on a light background. 
(4)  Post mounted signs shall have a minimum mounting height of seven feet within pedestrian areas. Post mounted signs not within pedestrian areas or wall mounted signs shall have a minimum mounting height of five feet. Curb ramps with a minimum width of three feet and a maximum slope of 1:12 shall be provided wherever an accessible route crosses a curb. Maximum slope of 1:10 shall be provided for flared sides for curb ramps within accessible routes and for built-up curb ramps within parking areas. 
(Code 1966, § 191/2-8; Ord. No. 1999-70, § 3, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 2003-92, § 1, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 138-400. - Pavement, signage and lighting standards. 
(a)  All off-street parking, maneuvering and loading spaces, including industrial, commercial and residential parking lots, shall be paved according to city standards and specifications. The parking lanes must be clearly marked by white paint, buttons or other approved material. 
(b)  Pavement surface shall be maintained free of litter, debris, loose gravel, cracks and potholes. Pavement striping and markings shall be installed according to city standards and specifications. Pavement striping and markings shall be maintained free of fading, cracks, tears and gaps. Parking lot signage shall be installed according to city standards and specifications. Parking lot signage shall be maintained free of faded signs, bent or leaning poles, graffiti, damaged or missing signage. Parking lot lighting shall be installed according to city standards and specifications. Parking lot lighting shall be maintained free of bent or leaning poles, missing, broken or inoperable bulbs or fixtures. 
(Code 1966, § 191/2-9; Ord. No. 2010-48, § II, 8-9-10; Ord. No. 2014-50, § I, 9-22-14) 
Sec. 138-401. - Minimum ingress requirements for parking lots. 
(a)  Width of entrances and exits. 
(1)  One-way entrance and exit driveways shall be a minimum of 12 feet and a maximum of 25 feet wide at the property line. 
(2)  Two-way entrances and exits shall be a minimum of 25 feet and a maximum of 45 feet wide at the property line. Such two-way entrances and exits shall be divided by a center island which will start one foot inside the sidewalk, or at the right-of-way if no sidewalk or obvious walkway is present. The lane divider island shall be of rugged construction, firmly anchored in place, and be a minimum of eight feet in length and six inches high and painted yellow. 
(3)  The desirable curb return radii are between five and 20 feet. The width of driveway, street lengths, and traffic volumes must be considered when setting curb return radii so as to minimize hazards from entering and exiting traffic. 
(b)  Visibility obstructions. Obstructions to visibility at the intersection of exits and entrances with a public street or alley shall comply with the provisions of sections 94-1, 94-86 and 94-88 of this Code. 
(c)  Location requirements. Location of entrances and exits to parking areas shall be as near to the center of the block as practical so as to minimize traffic interference at the intersections. All entrances and exits must be clearly marked. The exact location of entrances and exits must be approved by the city on a plat layout diagram at the time of issuance of a building permit. Entrances on state highways must be approved by the city as well as by the state highway department. The city reserves the right to reduce the number of entrances where requirements of traffic safety demand. The cost of such reductions and entrances will be borne by the applicant. 
(d)  Number of access points. As a general guide, any parking area having a capacity of more than 75 spaces shall have more than one entrance and one exit and any parking area having a capacity of more than 150 spaces shall have entrances and exits on more than one public street or alley. The specific requirements for the number of entrances and exits will be determined by the nature of the establishment, anticipated traffic flow in and around the parking area, and the requirements of traffic safety. 
(Code 1966, § 191/2-10) 
Sec. 138-402. - Leasing of off-street parking spaces. 
    The city hereby authorizes the leasing of existing and any future off-street parking spaces to individuals or business establishments to be utilized by such lessees upon the terms and conditions as follows: 
(1)  The annual rental for such parking space shall be $120.00, payable annually in advance. This amount may be increased from time to time, but only on the permit anniversary and with authority of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Any person so leasing such space shall have the right at any time to park in any off-street parking space without the necessity of putting any money in the parking meter thereon located. However, the city does not guarantee that such space will be available. 
(3)  The city will issue a permit to the lessees of such spaces of a form and design to be prepared by the city, such permits to have thereon numbers from one to 12, consecutively, indicating the month of the year issued and requiring renewal or otherwise termination in the corresponding month of the following year. Permits shall be nontransferable. 
(4)  Each holder of a lease for such one-year period shall be issued a sticker of a kind and design to be prepared by the city, which shall be placed on the rear window behind the driver's side on the vehicle for which used and remain there during the rental year. 
(5)  In the event of the destruction of a vehicle on which such sticker is located to the extent that such vehicle is no longer used, or in the event of a transfer of title of such vehicle, such sticker shall be removed by the owner of the vehicle and returned to the city police department so that the police department may issue a new sticker for the remaining portion of the term for which it was paid and which shall be immediately placed on the owner's vehicle as indicated in this section. 
(6)  Owners or tenants required by this chapter to furnish off-street parking spaces in accordance with section 138-396, rules for computing parking requirements, may, in lieu thereof, purchase off-street parking permits in an amount equivalent to the required parking of this article, provided that the following are assured: 
a.  When additional off-street parking space is required by this chapter in the central business district, at least 25 percent of the off-street parking space required in section 138-395 must be provided onsite. The remaining 75 percent may be provided through the lease arrangement explained in this section or through the $1,000.00 per space provision of section 138-395(13)c. 
b.  On existing buildings where enlargement or change of use is contemplated that does not directly create a need for additional parking, such as warehouse or storage facilities, no additional parking will be required for such enlargement or change, except where the enlargement is greater than ten percent of existing floor area or where the change in use requires an increase in existing parking. Any enlargement of less than ten percent of existing floor space and thus requiring no additional parking shall be permitted only once, and the right to such enlargement without providing additional parking is noncumulative. 
c.  To alleviate undue hardships from the strict application of the terms of this section, as amended, persons aggrieved may appeal the decision of the enforcing official within ten days of the decision directly to the zoning board of adjustment. A hearing on the merits of the complaint after due notice to all parties involved will be held at the earliest possible date. 
(7)  Each lessee at the time of receiving a permit will be furnished with a copy of this section. 
(8)  The city reserves the right at any time to cancel and terminate any permit issued as authorized by this section, conditioned, however, that the city will refund to the purchaser or lessee the proportionate value of the unused term thereof. 
(9)  The city reserves the right based on its best judgment related to the use and anticipated use under this section of off-street parking spaces to limit the total number of permits that may be granted for such existing spaces and, when the total available number is reached, to terminate any further leases unless as a result thereof additional off-street parking space is acquired by the city. 
(10)  The city shall maintain a continuing record of all permits issued by name, address of purchaser, and serial number. 
(Code 1966, § 191/2-13) 
Secs. 138-403-138-409. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION[34] 

Footnotes: 
--- (34) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-35, § I, adopted June 27, 2011, deleted the former Art. VIII, §§ 138-410-138-421, and enacted a new Art. VIII as set out herein. The former Art. VIII. pertained to historical preservation and derived from Ord. No. 2001-82, § 1, 11-26-01; Ord. No. 2004-75, §§ 1, 2, 9-27-04. 

Sec. 138-410. - Purpose. 
    The Board of Commissioners of the City of McAllen hereby declares that as a matter of public policy the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of landmarks or districts of historical and cultural importance and significance is necessary to promote the economic, cultural, educational and general welfare of the public. It is also recognized by the board of commissioners that the buildings and structures of the City of McAllen represent the unique confluence of time and place that shaped the identity of generations of citizens, collectively and individually, and produced significant historic, architectural, and cultural resources that constitute the City of McAllen heritage. This article is intended to: 
(a)  Protect and enhance the landmarks and districts which represent distinctive elements of McAllen's historic, architectural, and cultural heritage; 
(b)  Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past; 
(c)  Protect and enhance McAllen's attractiveness to visitors and the support and stimulus to the economy thereby provided; 
(d)  Insure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development of the City of McAllen; 
(e)  Promote economic prosperity and welfare of the community by encouraging the most appropriate use of such historic buildings and structures within the city; and 
(f)  Encourage stabilization, restoration and improvements of such buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2011-35, § I, 6-27-11) 
Sec. 138-411. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    Appurtenance means a feature in or of a parcel of land or a site, or a building, structure or object, or a related group of any of these. The term includes, but is not limited to, buildings, structures, objects, sites, landscaping, walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, paving, sidewalks, shutters, awnings and signs. 
    Architectural feature means the architectural elements embodying style, design, general arrangements and components of all of the outer surfaces of any improvements, including, but not limited to, the kind, color and texture of the building materials and the style and type of all windows, doors, lights, signs and other fixtures appurtenant to a structure. 
    Building means any structure designed to be built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind. The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
    Capable of yielding a reasonable return means the ability of an investment property, under reasonable, efficient and prudent management, of earning an annual rate of return greater than or equal to six percent. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a permit issued pursuant to section 138-416 evidencing approval of the particular work it specifies. 
    Commission means the Board of Commissioners of the City of McAllen. 
    Comparable building or structure means a newly constructed building or structure located either: 
(1)  In or within 300 feet of a historic district or a contributing resource identified in a city historic resource survey; or 
(2)  In or within 200 feet of another comparable building or structure, that has been built in keeping with standards and procedures promulgated by the City of McAllen, in a style congruent with a period of the neighborhood of 50 or more years prior to application. 
    Conservation means all the processes of looking after a historic resource so as to retain its historical, architectural or cultural significance. 
    Contributing resource means a historic resource, located within the boundaries of a historic district, that has been determined to add to the characteristics depicted in subsection 138-414(b)(3) on the basis of which the district was designated, including, without limitation, historic associations, architectural qualities, or archaeological values. 
    Council means the McAllen Historic Preservation Council. 
    Demolition alteration means the demolition of a feature or a portion of a historic resource. 
    Exterior means visible from any street. 
    Heritage property means a historic resource so designated by the city upon a finding that it meets the criteria of subsection 138-414(c)(3)b. hereof. 
    Historic district means a geographic area so designated by the city upon a finding that it meets the criteria of subsection 138-414(b)(3) hereof. 
    Historic resource means any site, structure, object or artifact, or any of their features, which the city has determined has local, regional, statewide or national historical, architectural or cultural significance, and the land necessary for access to and use of the same. 
    In-kind means, with reference to replacement of deteriorated features with new features, such replacement as matches the material, composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities of the original feature. 
    Landmark property means a historic resource so designated by the city upon a finding that it meets the criteria of subsection 138-414(c)(3)a. hereof. 
    Maintain means to perform ordinary repairs and maintenance, as necessary. 
    Non-contributing resource means a resource located within the boundaries of a historic district, that has been determined not to add to the characteristics depicted in subsection 138-414(b)(3) on the basis of which the district was designated, including, without limitation, because it is not 50 years or older, or it has been significantly altered. 
    Ordinary repairs and maintenance means work done in order: 
(1)  To correct any deterioration, decay of, or damage to a historic resource or any part thereof in order to restore same as nearly as practical to its condition prior to such deterioration, decay or damage, or 
(2)  To prevent any deterioration, decay of, or damage to a resource or any part thereof in order to maintain it as nearly as practical in good condition, and 
(3)  Which work does not constitute a change in design, material, or outward appearance. 
    Overlay zone means a set of requirements that is described in the ordinance text, is mapped, and is imposed in addition to those of the underlying zoning district. 
    P&Z means the City of McAllen Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    Preservation means the stabilization of a historic resource, its materials or features in their present condition to prevent future deterioration. 
    Nominated district and nominated property mean, respectively, a district, property or resource that, after review, is considered by the council to be historically significant and qualified for designation, respectively, as a historic district, a landmark or heritage property, or as a historic resource, and which is nominated by the council as a candidate for such historic designation. 
    Rehabilitation means the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural values. 
    Restoration means the act or process of accurately depicting the form, features and character of a historic resource as it appeared at a particular period of time. Sensitive upgrading of mechanical, electrical and plumbing systems and other code-required work to make the historic resource functional is appropriate. 
    Structure means anything constructed, erected or artificially built up; or composed of parts and joined together in a definite manner. 
(Ord. No. 2011-35, § I, 6-27-11) 
Sec. 138-412. - McAllen Historic Preservation Council; historic preservation officer. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board to be known as the McAllen Historic Preservation Council consisting of seven members appointed by the board of commissioners each having a known and demonstrated interest, competence or knowledge in historic preservation within the City of McAllen. The council shall include at a minimum one member each that qualifies as: 
(1)  Architect licensed to practice in Texas; 
(2)  Historian; 
(3)  Licensed real estate broker or appraiser; 
(4)  Building contractor; and 
(5)  Owner of historic or landmark property. 
(b)  Whenever a vacancy shall arise whereby there is a loss of representation in the council of at least one of the aforementioned qualified members, a new member shall be appointed to restore that representation. 
(1)  A quorum shall consist of four members. 
(2)  Members shall serve for a term of two years in staggered terms according to Chapter 2, Article III, Boards, Committees and Commissions of this Code. 
(3)  The chairperson and vice-chairperson of the council shall be elected by and from members of the board. 
(4)  The chairperson and vice chairperson of the council shall be elected annually as provided in section 2-79 of this Code. 
(c)  The planning director shall appoint a qualified city staff person who has a known and demonstrated interest, competence or knowledge in historic preservation within the City of McAllen, to serve as historic preservation officer ("HPO"). The HPO shall administer this article, perform the duties and responsibilities as prescribed under this article, and advise the council on matters submitted to it. The HPO is responsible for coordinating the city's preservation activities with those of state and federal agencies and with local, state, and national nonprofit preservation organizations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-35, § I, 6-27-11) 
Sec. 138-413. - Functions of the council. 
(a)  The council shall have the following powers and it shall be its duty to: 
(1)  Prepare rules and procedures as necessary to carry out the business of the council. 
(2)  Recommend criteria for the designation of historic, architectural, and cultural landmarks and the delineation of historic districts, which may be adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Conducts surveys, and maintains an inventory of significant historic, architectural, and cultural landmarks and all properties located in historic districts within the city. 
(4)  Create committees from among its members and delegate to those committees responsibilities to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(5)  Maintain written minutes which record all actions taken by the council and reasons for taking such actions. 
(6)  Recommend to the commission that the city publicly recognize the owners of landmark or heritage properties or of properties within historic districts by means of certificates, proclamations, plaques or markers. 
(7)  Increase public awareness of the value of historic, cultural and architectural preservation by developing and participating in public education programs. 
(8)  Make recommendations to the city commission concerning the utilization of federal, state, local or private funds and/or tax incentives to promote the preservation or rehabilitation of landmark and heritage properties and historic districts within the city. 
(9)  Act upon applications for certificates of appropriateness that are required under this article or that are voluntarily applied for by property owners. 
(10)  Prepare specific design guidelines for the review of landmark and heritage properties and historic districts. 
(11)  Recommend the acquisition of landmark and heritage properties by the city government where their preservation is essential to the purpose of this article and where private preservation is not feasible. 
(b)  Meetings. The council shall meet once a month if necessary at a regularly scheduled time. Special meetings may be called upon request of the chairperson or vice chairperson, or upon written request of four members, or upon notice from the chief building official or the HPO that a matter requires the consideration of the council. All meetings shall have advance notice posted in accordance with Texas Open Meetings Act, codified at V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code ch. 551, as the same may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2011-35, § I, 6-27-11) 
Sec. 138-414. - Designation of historic districts, landmark properties, and heritage properties; withdrawal of designation. 
(a)  Purposes. The intent of historic district designation is to recognize areas of the city of historical and cultural importance because of the presence therein of significant historic, architectural, or cultural resources; to foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past; to encourage stabilization, restoration, and improvements of such resources and their values; to allow for a design review process, and to serve as a basis for preservation incentive programs. The provisions in this article pertaining to the designation of landmark and heritage properties constitute a part of the comprehensive plan of the City of McAllen. 
(b)  Designation of historic districts. 
(1)  Zoning designation. The commission may, from time to time, upon recommendation of council, designate certain areas in the City of McAllen as historic districts, and define, amend or eliminate the boundaries of same. Such districts shall bear the word "historic" in their zoning designation. Such designation shall be an overlay zone, in addition to any other zoning district designation established in the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Official zoning map. The commission shall cause the designation to be recorded by the city secretary in the Records of Hidalgo County, the Hidalgo County Appraisal District, and the tax records of the City of McAllen. The official zoning map for the City of McAllen shall indicate the designated historic district with the suffix "HD". 
(3)  Criteria. In making the designation of a historic district, the commission shall affirmatively find the area has one or more of the following characteristics: 
a.  Possess significance in history, architecture, archeology, and culture; 
b.  Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of local, regional, state, or national history; 
c.  Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; 
d.  Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction; 
e.  Represents the work of a renowned master designer, builder or craftsman; 
f.  Represents an established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood; 
g.  The majority of the resources within the district is 50 years old or older and considered contributing historically as it retains its structural and architectural integrity, and 
(4)  Procedure to establish a historic district. In designating a historic district, the following steps must be followed: 
a.  A petition signed by the owners of a majority of the land within the proposed district requesting its designation as a historic district must be filed with the council as an attachment to an application to consider the designation of a historic district. The application shall be in the form and be filed in the manner required by the council. 
b.  Once the application is submitted and processed, the council shall conduct a public hearing at which the owner, interested parties, and/or technical experts may present testimony or documentary evidence which will become part of a record regarding the historic, architectural or cultural importance of the proposed historic district. The HPO shall make a presentation at the scheduled hearing and render a recommendation to the council. The council shall ascertain the historic nature of the proposed district and determine whether it meets the designation criteria. The council shall then forward a report and recommendation to the P&Z to accept, modify, or reject the district as proposed. Prior to the hearing written notices shall be sent as provided in subsection 138-57(3), and official signs shall be posted as provided in section 138-57(4), with the words, "NOTICE OF HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION," the number and location of which signs shall be determined by the council. 
c.  Once the P&Z receives the council's report and recommendation, it shall give notice, conduct a public hearing. The HPO shall make a presentation at the scheduled hearing and render the council's recommendation to the P&Z. The P&Z shall ascertain the historic nature of the proposed district and determine whether it meets the designation criteria. After the hearing the P&Z shall forward the council's and its own report and recommendation to the commission to accept, modify, or reject the proposed district. Prior to the hearing written notices shall be sent and official signs shall be posted in the same manner as for the council's hearings, with the number and location of said signs determined by the P&Z. 
d.  After receiving the council's and P&Z's reports and recommendations the commission shall conduct a public hearing and take action to accept, modify, or reject the proposed district. Prior to the hearing notice shall be given by publication as provided in section 138-58. At the hearing the HPO shall make a presentation and render the council's and the P&Z's recommendations. 
e.  Nominated districts. The council may, without a petition, when brought to its attention or on its own motion, consider, propose and act to recommend designation of a nominated historic district. In such a case the council's approved motion to do so will substitute for the petition referred to at subsection (b)(4)a., above. All relevant procedures outlined in subsection (b)(4), hereinabove, shall be followed. However, no recommendation may be forwarded to the P&Z unless the council's recommendation is supported by a two-thirds majority vote. 
(5)  Maintaining districts. In order to qualify for any special funding or tax incentives, designated historic district must maintain the characteristics depicted in subsection 138-414(b)(3) on the basis of which it was designated, and follow all relevant guidelines established by the City of McAllen including performing ordinary repairs and maintenance as necessary. 
(c)  Designation of historic properties. 
(1)  Zoning designation. The commission may, from time to time, designate certain historic resources in the City of McAllen as landmark or heritage properties. Such properties shall bear the word "historic" in their zoning designation. Such designation shall be an overlay zone, in addition to any other zoning district designation established in the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Official zoning map. Upon designation of property as a heritage or landmark property, the commission shall cause the designation to be recorded in the Official Public Records of Real Property of Hidalgo County, the tax records of the City of McAllen and the Hidalgo County Appraisal District. The official zoning map for the City of McAllen shall indicate a designated landmark property with the suffix "LP," and a designated heritage property with the suffix "HP". 
(3)  Criteria. A property qualifies for designation as a landmark or heritage property if it is a historic resource, including a building or structure that complies with all the applicable requirements of this article and meets any of the following criteria for the specific designation: 
a.  For landmark property designation, the property is at least 50 years old, has been restored, rehabilitated, or preserved in accordance with the applicable United States Secretary of the Interior's Standards, and any design guidelines adopted by the city, and: 
i.  Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of historical construction or architecture; 
ii.  Is associated with the lives of persons significant to our past; 
iii.  Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or 
iv.  Has yielded information important in the prehistory or history of McAllen, the region, or the nation. 
b.  For heritage property designation, the property is: 
i.  At least 50 years old but does not qualify for or is not designated a landmark property and, in keeping with standards and procedures promulgated by the City of McAllen, has had all of the facade facing any street it abuts substantially restored, rehabilitated, or preserved; or 
ii.  Is less than 50 years old and has been substantially restored, rehabilitated, or preserved in keeping with standards and procedures promulgated by the City of McAllen; or 
iii.  Is a comparable building or structure, as that term is defined in this article. 
(4)  Procedure to designate historic properties. In designating a landmark or heritage property, the following steps must be followed: 
a.  A property owner shall submit an application to the council in order to be considered for designation as a landmark or heritage property. The application shall be in the form and be filed in the manner required by the council. 
b.  Once the application is submitted and processed, the council shall conduct a public hearing whereas the owner, interested parties, and/or technical experts may present testimony or documentary evidence which will become part of a record regarding the historic, architectural or cultural importance of the proposed property. Written notices shall be sent in a manner similar to that provided in subsection 138-57(3), and official signs shall be posted as is provided in subsection 138-57(4), with the words, "NOTICE OF HISTORIC PROPERTY DESIGNATION," with the number and location of said signs determined by the council. At the hearing the HPO shall make a presentation and make a recommendation to the council. Following the hearing and deliberation, the council shall forward a recommendation to the P&Z. 
c.  Upon submission by the council, the P&Z shall give notice and conduct its hearing on the proposed designation. Written notices shall be sent and official signs shall be posted in the same manner as for the council's hearings, with the number and location of said signs determined by the P&Z. At the hearing the HPO shall make present the council's recommendation. Following the hearing and deliberation, the P&Z shall forward a recommendation to the commission. 
d.  Upon receipt of a recommendation from the P&Z, the commission shall give notice, hold a public hearing and make its determination. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication as provided in section 138-58. At the hearing the HPO shall make a presentation and render the council's and the P&Z's recommendations. 
e.  Nominated historic properties. The council may, without a petition, when brought to its attention or on its own motion, consider, propose and act to recommend designation of nominated historic properties. In such a case the council's approved motion to do so will substitute for the property owner's application referred to at subsection (c)(4)a, above. All relevant procedures outlined in subsection (c)(4), hereinabove, shall be followed. However, no recommendation may be forwarded to the P&Z unless the council's recommendation is supported by a two-thirds majority vote. 
(5)  Maintaining historic properties. In order to qualify for any special funding or tax incentives, landmark and heritage properties, and contributing resources in historic districts must maintain the characteristics on the basis of which they were designated, must be properly maintained, and follow all relevant guidelines established by the City of McAllen. 
(d)  Withdrawal of designation. Whenever it shall come to the council's attention that a designated historic district has failed to maintain the characteristics depicted in subsection 138-414(b)(3) on the basis of which it was designated, or that a designated landmark of heritage property has failed to maintain the criteria specified in subsection 138-414(c)(3), or that either such a district or property has failed to follow any relevant guidelines established by the City of McAllen, the council may entertain a motion to recommend withdrawal of such designation. Such withdrawal of designation shall render the affected properties ineligible for any tax relief, pursuant [to] section 98-72 of this Code. 
(1)  Procedure to withdraw designation. The affected landmark or heritage property owner and all property owners of the affected historic district shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing by certified mail sent at least ten business days before the meeting to the owner's address of record. 
(2)  Written notices shall be sent in a manner similar to that provided in subsection 138-57(3), and official signs shall be posted as is provided in subsection 138-57(4), with the words, "NOTICE OF HEARING TO WITHDRAW HISTORIC DESIGNATION," with the number and location of said signs determined by the council. 
(3)  The HPO shall make a presentation at the scheduled hearing and render a recommendation to the council. The owner or owner's agent or representative shall attend the council's scheduled hearing. In the event the owner or owner's agent or representative fails to be present at the hearing the council shall table the item. At any subsequent meeting and regardless of the absence of the owner or owner's agent or representative, the council may take action. 
(4)  The council shall forward a recommendation to the P&Z for withdrawal of designation if it finds that: 
a.  A designated historic district has failed to maintain the characteristics depicted in subsection 138-414(b)(3) on the basis of which it was designated; or 
b.  A designated landmark of heritage property has failed to maintain the criteria specified in subsection 138-414(c)(3); or 
c.  Either such a district or property has failed to follow any relevant guidelines established by the City of McAllen. 
(5)  Once P&Z receives the council's recommendation it shall cause written notices to be sent in a manner similar to that provided in subsection 138-57(3), and official signs shall be posted as is provided in subsection 138-57(4), with the words, "NOTICE OF HEARING TO WITHDRAW HISTORIC DESIGNATION," with the number and location of said signs determined by the council. P&Z shall conduct a public hearing during which the HPO shall make a presentation and render the council's recommendation. Following the hearing the P&Z shall deliberate and forward a recommendation to the commission. 
(6)  After the commission receives the P&Z's recommendation it shall provide notice by publication as provided in section 138-58, conduct a public hearing during which the HPO shall make a presentation and render the council's and P&Z's recommendations, and take action on the recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-35, § I, 6-27-11) 
Sec. 138-415. - Certificate of appropriateness required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(a)  Carry out or allow any construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, rehabilitation, installation, or relocation of any portion of or any exterior feature of any contributing property in a designated historic district, or of any landmark or heritage property, or of any state or federally designated historic resource, or 
(b)  Construct or install any new structure within a designated historic district or in a designated historic landmark or heritage property, or in any state or federally designated historic resource, 
until after an application for a certificate of appropriateness of such work has been approved by the council. Additionally, a building or demolition permit may not be granted for any contributing property within a historic district or in a designated historic landmark or heritage property, unless the council issues a certificate of appropriateness. Neither shall anyone carry out or allow any material change in the light fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving, or other exterior elements visible from any street, which affects the appearance and cohesiveness of any contributing property in a designated historic district, or of any landmark or heritage property, or of any state or federally designated historic resource, unless the council issues a certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  A certificate of appropriateness shall be required prior to beginning any work in any historic resource, including work claimed to be ordinary repair or maintenance. No building permit shall be issued for property that requires a certificate of appropriateness unless and until the HPO certifies to the building official that such a certificate of appropriateness has been granted, advising as to any conditions attached to such a certificate. 
(2)  A review of the plans or proposed work shall be undertaken by the HPO for submission of a recommendation to the council, or by the council directly, after the property owner files a completed application. 
(3)  Decisions of the council and by the HPO shall be in writing and shall state the findings of the council. 
(4)  A certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for 12 months and shall expire thereafter. 
(5)  An applicant may resubmit an application for a certificate of appropriateness after 12 months from the date of a denial. 
(6)  Certificates of appropriateness may be issued for distinct and separate phases of an ongoing project. 
(Ord. No. 2011-35, § I, 6-27-11) 
Sec. 138-416. - Certificate of appropriateness; application and procedure. 
(a)  Application. The applicant shall submit to the HPO an application in writing for a certificate of appropriateness which includes data and information as required by the HPO, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Name of applicant and property owner. 
(2)  Mailing address of applicant and permanent address of property owner. 
(3)  Legal description and location of property to be altered or repaired. 
(4)  A detailed description of the nature of the proposed external repair, demolition alterations or additions to be performed. 
(5)  A description of the structure and/or site and a narrative as to how the proposed change will be in character with its architectural and historical aspect on the basis of which it was designated and, if in a historic district, as to how the proposed change will impact upon the district. 
(6)  Any circumstances or conditions concerning the property which may affect compliance with this article. 
(7)  The intended and desired starting and completion date of the repair, demolition alterations or additions to be made. 
(8)  Any drawings or photographs which would explain the proposed repair, demolition alterations or additions. 
(9)  Samples of the colors which will be used on the structure, and of the materials to be used or applied on, or that may affect the exterior. 
(10)  Building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical and/or other permit applications. 
(b)  Fees. A nonrefundable administrative fee of $100.00 will be assessed to the applicant reflecting the cost to the city for processing the application. The application will not be deemed complete, nor will it be processed until such fee is paid in full. Separate permit fees shall apply for any construction or demolition. If the application is approved, all applicable building permits shall be obtained and all required fees paid prior to commencement of any work. 
(c)  Ordinary repair, demolition alterations or additions. If the HPO, guided by the adopted design guidelines, and where applicable, criteria established by the Secretary of the Interior, determines that the application involves ordinary repair or maintenance, change, restoration, color or removal of any exterior architectural feature of a historic resource which does not involve significant change in the architectural or historic value, style, general design or appearance, such officer may tentatively approve the application, on condition that the applicant shall use only the gentlest means possible, and shall forward a copy of the approved application to the chairperson of the council or to the vice chairperson of the council, if the chairperson is not available. The chairperson or vice chairperson of the council shall, within five business days after receipt of the tentative approval, either approve the HPO's decision or call a meeting of the council to consider the application, which meeting shall be held no later than ten business days after receipt of the tentative approval. If the council officer does not take any action within five business days, or if a meeting is called and no action is taken to overturn the tentative approval, such tentative approval shall be deemed an approval by the council. The HPO shall report all applications approved under this subsection to the council at its next meeting following approval. 
(d)  Significant repair, demolition alterations or additions. If the HPO determines that the application involves a repair, demolition alteration, addition, change, restoration, or removal of an external architectural feature of a historic resource which involves a significant change in the architectural or historic value, style, general design, or appearance or for any other reason does not desire to act under the subsection above and is within a historic district or is a designated landmark or heritage property, he/she shall refer the application to the council and schedule the matter for the next available meeting of the council to consider a certificate of appropriateness. 
(e)  Procedure. For all applications other than those approved by the HPO, the council shall hold a public hearing to consider the application within 60 calendar days after the receipt of a completed application. 
(1)  The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of the meeting by regular mail sent at least five business days before the meeting to the address on the application. 
(2)  Written notices shall be sent in a manner similar to that provided in subsection 138-57(3), and official signs shall be posted as is provided in section 138-57(4), with the words, "NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS," with the number and location of said signs determined by the council. 
(3)  The HPO shall make a presentation at the scheduled hearing and render a recommendation to the council. The applicant or his/her agent, or representative, shall attend the council's scheduled hearing to consider the application, otherwise the council shall not take action, and the application will be deemed to be incomplete. Applicant's or his/her agent's or representative's failure to attend a second scheduled hearing shall be treated for all purposes as a withdrawal of the application. 
(4)  The council shall make its determination and forward notice of the same to the HPO within 60 calendar days after receipt of a completed application unless the council schedules additional hearings, after the first is timely held, in which case the determination and notification shall be extended. 
(f)  The council may approve an application and condition such approval upon applicant's compliance with such revisions, stipulations or requirements as the council may find appropriate. 
(g)  No building permit applications shall be accepted nor shall any such permit be issued, and no work shall be performed until after approval of a certificate of appropriateness, and not until five business days have elapsed from its transmission to the building official by the HPO, with any advice as to conditions which may have been attached to such a certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2011-35, § I, 6-27-11) 
Sec. 138-417. - Criteria for review of certificate of appropriateness. 
    In determining the recommendation and action on an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the HPO and the council shall review and decide the appropriateness of the proposed repair, demolition alterations or additions, and its compliance with any applicable City of McAllen Design Guidelines for designated local landmark and heritage properties, and the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties and Guidelines for Preservation, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction. 
(Ord. No. 2011-35, § I, 6-27-11) 
Sec. 138-418. - Reserved. 
Sec. 138-419. - Economic hardship waiver procedure; appeals. 
(a)  Within ten calendar days of receipt of written notification from the council of the denial of a certificate of appropriateness to demolish a resource or any part of it, an aggrieved applicant may file an economic hardship waiver application with the HPO. Within 60 calendar days of applicant's receipt of the denial notice, a waiver applicant must have a complete application on file, including all required documentation and exhibits, including, without limitation: 
(1)  Appraisal of property by a licenses real estate appraiser; 
(2)  Estimated costs for appropriate rehabilitation prepared by a licensed architect or engineer with experience in historic preservation; 
(3)  Documentation of consideration of alternative uses for the property, and 
(4)  Documentation of public advertisement to solicit a buyer willing to appropriately rehabilitate their property. 
(b)  No building permit or demolition permit shall be issued unless the council makes a finding that hardship exists and approves a waiver. 
(c)  Applicants for economic hardship waivers must prove with adequate and sufficient documentary and other evidence, that: 
(1)  The owner cannot make reasonable beneficial use of or, for income-producing properties, the property is not capable of yielding a reasonable return, regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable return possible; 
(2)  Reasonable efforts to find a party interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed; and 
(3)  The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a purchaser, which would render it capable of yielding a reasonable return. 
(d)  The applicant shall consult in good faith with the council, local preservation groups and interested parties in a diligent effort to seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the property. 
(e)  The council shall hold a public hearing on the hardship waiver application no later than the second regular council meeting from the date the completed application is received by the HPO. The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of the meeting by regular mail sent at least five business days before the meeting to the address on the application. Written notices shall be sent in a manner similar to that provided in subsection 138-57(3), and official signs shall be posted as is provided in subsection 138-57(4), with the words, "NOTICE OF HARDSHIP APPLICATION FOR WAIVER OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS," with the number and location of said signs determined by the council. Following the hearing the council shall decide whether to grant or deny the hardship application. In the event the council does not act within 120 calendar days of the receipt of the application, the hardship application shall be deemed approved and a certificate of appropriateness granted. 
(f)  A written notice of the council's decision, stating the reasons for granting or denying the hardship application, shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail within five business days after it is rendered. 
(g)  An applicant dissatisfied with any action of the council relating to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness or a waiver of same that is aggrieved by any such decision of the council may present to the board of commissioners a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is unjust, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of injustice. Such petition shall be presented to the board of commissioners within five business days after the final decision of the council, and not thereafter. The commission shall give notice, follow publication procedure, hold hearings, and make its decision in the same manner as provided in the zoning ordinance of the city for zoning amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2011-35, § I, 6-27-11) 
Sec. 138-420. - Demolition by neglect or without a certificate of appropriateness; penalties. 
(a)  No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a landmark or heritage property or included within a historic district shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would, in the judgment of the council, produce a detrimental effect upon the historic character of the district or property. Such property shall be subject to the withdrawal of its designation pursuant to subsection 138-414(d), penalties and disqualification pursuant to sections 98-72 and 98-73 of this Code, and ineligibility for any tax relief granted under chapter 98, division 3 of this Code. 
Examples of such deterioration include: 
(1)  Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports. 
(2)  Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members. 
(3)  Deterioration of exterior chimneys. 
(4)  Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar. 
(5)  Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, or foundations, including broken windows or doors. 
(6)  Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition which could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for the public safety. 
(b)  A person found guilty of demolition of a designated property by neglect or without a required certificate of appropriateness shall be fined at least $500.00 but not more than $5,000.00 per violation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-35, § I, 6-27-11) 
Sec. 138-421. - Penalties. 
(a)  The board may revoke classification designators for failure by the property owner(s) within the historic district or of a designated landmark or heritage property to maintain the structure at the prescribed levels. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate, participate or acquiesce in the violation of any provision of this [article] or who shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect or alter any historic resource in violation of any detailed statement or plan required to be submitted and approved thereunder shall for each and every violation or noncompliance be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed in section 1-14 of this Code. 
(c)  The city attorney's office is hereby authorized to file an appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions hereof by cause in equity or by any other remedy available by law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-35, § I, 6-27-11) 
APPENDIX A - AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS[1] 
ORDER 
of the 
JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD OF THE CITY OF McALLEN AND THE COUNTY OF HIDALGO, TEXAS, ADOPTING AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The airport zoning regulations are included in this appendix as adopted by the city-county joint airport zoning board on July 28, 1969, effectively superseding its previous order of May 10, 1963. The original arrangement and section numbers, catchlines and subcatchlines have been retained. However, catchlines were added, where appropriate, to facilitate indexing and reference. Amendments to the airport zoning regulations are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original regulations. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference- Substantial evidence rule in effect in appeals from decisions or orders of city officers or employees, § 2-196; aviation, ch. 18; McAllen-Miller International Airport, § 18-26 et seq.; airport board, § 18-36 et seq.; comprehensive plan, § 126-26 et seq.; zoning, ch. 138. 
State Law reference- Airport zoning regulations generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.001 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Authority for, scope and purpose of provisions; short title. 
    This order amends and replaces in its entirety the order of the joint airport zoning board of the City of McAllen and Hidalgo County, Texas, adopting airport zoning regulations adopted on May 10, 1963. 
    This order is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 241.001 through 241.044 and 241.901 through 241.903, as amended. It is hereby found that an airport hazard endangers the lives and property of users of Miller International Airport of McAllen and of occupants of land or to property in its vicinity, and also, if of the obstruction type, in effect reduces the size of the area available for the landing, taking off and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of Miller International Airport of McAllen and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared: 
(1)  That the creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public nuisance and an injury to the region served by Miller International Airport; 
(2)  That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety and general welfare, that the creation or establishment of airport hazards be prevented; and 
(3)  That the prevention of these hazards should be accomplished to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without compensation. 
    It is further declared that both the prevention of the creation or establishment of airport hazards and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation, or marking and lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for which political subdivisions may raise and expend public funds and require land or interests in land. 
    This order shall be known and may be cited as "Miller International Airport of McAllen Zoning Order." 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this order, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  Airport means Miller International Airport of McAllen. 
(2)  Airport elevation means the established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area. 
(3)  Airport hazard means any structure, tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport. 
(4)  Airport reference point means the point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated. 
(5)  Board of adjustment means a board consisting of five members appointed by the board of commissioners as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 241.032 and 241.033 or the zoning board of adjustment and appeals. 
(6)  Height: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this order and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
(7)  Instrument runway means a runway equipped or to be equipped with a precision electronic navigation aid or landing aid or other air navigation facilities suitable to permit the landing of aircraft by an instrument approach under restricted visibility conditions. 
(8)  Landing area means the area of the airport used for the landing, taking off or taxiing of aircraft. 
(9)  Nonconforming use means any preexisting structure, tree, natural growth or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this order, or an amendment thereto. 
(10)  Noninstrument runway means a runway other than an instrument runway. 
(11)  Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or body politic, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian, or other representative. 
(12)  Runway means the paved surface of an airport landing strip. 
(13)  Structure means an object constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks and overhead transmission lines. 
(14)  Tree means any object of natural growth. 
Sec. 3. - Zones. 
    In order to carry out the provisions of this order, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying within the instrument approach zones, noninstrument approach zones, transition zones, horizontal zone and conical zone. Such areas and zones are shown on Miller International Airport of McAllen zoning map consisting of one sheet, prepared by Fabian and Nelson, Inc., and dated February 7, 1969, which is recorded in Volume _____, pages _____, Map Records, Hidalgo County, Texas to which reference is here made for all purposes and which map is made a part hereof. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Instrument approach zone: An instrument approach zone is established at each end of the instrument runway for instrument landings and takeoffs. The instrument approach zones shall have a width of 1,000 feet at a distance of 200 feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a distance 50,200 feet beyond each end of the runway. 
(2)  Noninstrument approach zone: A noninstrument approach zone is established at each end of all noninstrument runways for noninstrument landings and takeoffs. The noninstrument approach zone shall have a width 250 feet at a distance of 200 feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 2,250 feet at a distance of 10,200 feet beyond each end of the runway, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(3)  Transition zones: Transition zones are hereby established adjacent to each instrument and noninstrument runway and approach zone indicated on the zoning map. Transition zones symmetrically located on either side of runways have variable widths as shown on the zoning map. Transition zones extend outward from a line 125 feet on either side of the centerline of the noninstrument runway, for the length of such runway plus 200 feet on each end; and 500 feet on either side of the centerline of the instrument runway, for the length of such runway plus 200 feet on each end, and are parallel and level with such runway centerlines. The transition zones along such runways slope upward and outward one foot vertically for each seven feet horizontally to the point where they intersect the surface of the horizontal zone. Further, transition zones are established adjacent to both instrument and noninstrument approach zones for the entire length of the approach zones. These transition zones have variable widths, as shown on the zoning map. Such transition zones flare symmetrically with either side of the runway approach zones from the base of such zones and slope upward and outward at the rate of one foot vertically for each seven feet horizontally to the points where they intersect the surfaces of the horizontal and conical zones. Additionally, transition zones are established adjacent to the instrument approach zone where it projects through and beyond the limits of the conical zone, extending a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the instrument approach zones at right angles to the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(4)  Horizontal zone: A horizontal zone is hereby established as the area within a circle with its center at the airport reference point and having a radius of 11,500 feet. The horizontal zone does not include the instrument and noninstrument approach zones and the transition zones. 
(5)  Conical zone: A conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a distance of 7,000 feet. The conical zone does not include the instrument approach zones and transition zones. 
Sec. 4. - Height limitations. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this order, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in any zone created by this order to a height in excess of the height limit herein established for such zone. Such height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Instrument approach zone: One foot in height for each 50 feet in horizontal distance beginning at a point 200 feet from and at the centerline elevation of the end of the instrument runway and extending to a distance of 10,200 feet from the end of the runway; thence one foot in height for each 40 feet in horizontal distance to a point 50,200 feet from the end of the runway; 
(2)  Noninstrument approach zones: One foot in height for each 20 feet in horizontal distance beginning at a point 200 feet from and at the centerline elevation of the end of the noninstrument runway and extending to a point 10,200 feet from the end of the runway; 
(3)  Transition zones: One foot in height for each seven feet in horizontal distance beginning at any point 125 feet normal to and at the elevation of the centerline of noninstrument runways, extending 200 feet beyond each end thereof, and 500 feet normal to and at the elevation of the centerline of the instrument runway, extending 200 feet beyond each end thereof, extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is 107 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits of one foot vertical height for each seven feet horizontal distance measured from the edges of all approach zones for the entire length of the approach zones and extending upward and outward to the points where they intersect the horizontal or conical surfaces. 
Further, where the instrument approach zone projects through and beyond the conical zone, a height limit of one foot for each seven feet of horizontal distance shall be maintained beginning at the edge of the instrument approach zone and extending a distance of 5,000 feet from the edge of the instrument approach zone measured normal to the centerline of the runway extended; 
(4)  Horizontal zone: One hundred fifty feet above the airport elevation or a height of 257 feet above mean sea level; 
(5)  Conical zone: One foot in height for each 20 feet of horizontal distance beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone, extending to a height of 500 feet above the airport elevation; and 
(6)  Excepted height limitations: Nothing in this order shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to 35 feet above the surface of the land. Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitations shall prevail. 
Sec. 5. - Use restrictions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this order, no use may be made of land within any zone established by this order in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or otherwise endanger the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft. 
Sec. 6. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this order shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this order or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this order and [which] is diligently prosecuted. 
(b)  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the building inspector [building official] to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the City of McAllen. 
Sec. 7. - Permits. 
(a)  Future uses. Except as specifically provided in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. 
(1)  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and the conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when because of terrain, land contour or topographic features such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zone. 
(2)  In the areas lying within the limits of the instrument and noninstrument approach zones but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runways, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such instrument or noninstrument approach zone. 
(3)  In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones. 
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this order except as set forth in section 4. 
(b)  Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date of this order, or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the building inspector [building official] determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(d)  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this order, may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from such regulations. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but will do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this order. 
(e)  Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this order and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the City of McAllen, at its own expense, to install, operate and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard. 
Sec. 8. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the building inspector [building official] to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the building inspector [building official] upon a form furnished by him. Applications required by this order to be submitted to the building inspector [building official] shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by him. Applications for action by the board of adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the building inspector [building official]. 
Sec. 9. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building inspector [building official] in the enforcement of this order; 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this order upon which such board of adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass; 
(3)  To hear and decide specific variances. 
(b)  The airport board of adjustment shall be the same as and consist of the same members as the City of McAllen zoning board of adjustments and appeals, subject to same terms, tenure and regulations as apply to the said members of the City of McAllen zoning board of adjustments and appeals. 
(c)  The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this order. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board of adjustment may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the building inspector [building official] and shall be a public record. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming or modifying any order, requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this order. 
(e)  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building inspector [building official] or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this order, or to effect any variation in this order. 
Cross reference- Zoning board of adjustment, § 138-41 et seq. 
Sec. 10. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the building inspector [building official] made in his administration of this order may appeal to the board of adjustment. 
(b)  All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the building inspector [building official] a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. Building inspector [building official] shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building inspector [building official] certified to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the building inspector [building official] and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this order, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
Sec. 11. - Judicial review. 
    Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment, may appeal to the district court as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 241.041 through 241.043 and amendments. 
Sec. 12. - Penalties. 
    Each violation of this order, or of any regulation, order or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00 and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 13. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this order, and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
Sec. 14. - Severability. 
    If any of the provisions of this order or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not effect other provisions or applications of the order which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this order are declared to be severable. 
Sec. 15. - Effective date. 
    WHEREAS, the immediate operation of the provisions of this order is necessary for the preservation of the public health, public safety, and general welfare, this order shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage by the joint airport zoning board of the City of McAllen and Hidalgo County, Texas. 
    READ, CONSIDERED, APPROVED AND PASSED this 28th day of July, 1969. 
APPENDIX B - LISTING OF ANNEXATION AND DISANNEXATION ORDINANCES[1] 
    This appendix contains a chronological listing of all ordinances passed by the board of commissioners which made annexations to the city since the city limits were completely described in the city's Charter January 31, 1927. Disannexation ordinances were added to this listing beginning with Ord. No. 1995-43. 
November 3, 1927 
November 27, 1939 
March 6, 1940 
April 18, 1945 
June 20, 1945 
July 5, 1945 
December 31, 1945 
April 2, 1947 
September 2, 1947 
December 1, 1947 
March 1, 1948 
September 7, 1948 
April 18, 1949 
November 28, 1950 
December 12, 1950 
February 5, 1951 
January 7, 1952 
October 17, 1955 
August 6, 1956 
December 17, 1956 
March 18, 1957 
July 1, 1957 
August 19, 1957 
March 3, 1958 
July 7, 1958 
October 6, 1958 
February 16, 1959 
August 31, 1959 
February 29, 1960 
June 19, 1961 
August 7, 1961 
October 2, 1961 
November 20, 1961 
March 6, 1962 
April 17, 1962 
May 7, 1962 
August 6, 1962 
August 20, 1962 
September 17, 1962 
December 3, 1962 
January 18, 1963 
April 1, 1963 
May 20, 1963 
July 15, 1963 
August 19, 1963 
February 17, 1964 
July 6, 1964 
February 15, 1965 
  
Ord. No.    Date 1967-6 February 23, 1967 1967-13 April 3, 1967 1967-26 October 30, 1967 1968-7 March 18, 1968 1968-9 April 12, 1968 1968-12 May 6, 1968 1968-16 June 3, 1968 1968-28 September 3, 1968 1968-36 November 4, 1968 1968-36 November 18, 1968 1969-4 February 7, 1969 1969-11 April 21, 1969 1969-16 May 19, 1969 1969-19 July 21, 1969 1969-21 August 4, 1969 1970-1 January 19, 1970 1970-10 May 4, 1970 1970-20 July 6, 1970 1970-31 October 5, 1970 1971-8 April 5, 1971 1971-25 July 6, 1971 1971-31 August 2, 1971 1971-47 October 25, 1971 1971-48 November 1, 1971 1971-64 December 20, 1971 1972-1 January 3, 1972 1972-2 January 3, 1972 1972-6 February 7, 1972 1972-13 March 20, 1972 1972-18 April 17, 1972 1972-23 May 1, 1972 1972-25 May 1, 1972 1972-40 July 5, 1972 1972-48 September 5, 1972 1972-56 September 11, 1972 1972-57 September 18, 1972 1972-60 December 29, 1972 1973-24 June 4, 1973 1973-29 June 18, 1973 1973-34 August 20, 1973 1973-37 September 4, 1973 1973-61 December 17, 1973 1974-47 July 15, 1974 1974-70 December 16, 1974 1975-32 June 12, 1975 1976-21 April 5, 1976 1976-26 May 3, 1976 1976-45 July 19, 1976 1976-51 August 16, 1976 1976-65 October 4, 1976 1976-67 November 1, 1976 1977-15 March 7, 1977 1977-19 April 4, 1977 1977-22 April 18, 1977 1977-31 June 8, 1977 1977-37 July 5, 1977 1977-46 August 15, 1977 1977-53 September 19, 1977 1977-73 November 21, 1977 1977-75 December 5, 1977 1978-12 March 13, 1978 1978-18 April 17, 1978 1979-15 February 19, 1979 1979-16 February 19, 1979 1979-28 April 16, 1979 1979-29 April 16, 1979 1980-01 January 7, 1980 1980-21 February 18, 1980 1980-48 July 16, 1980 1981-36 April 4, 1981 1981-39 May 4, 1981 June 15, 1981 1982-25 May 3, 1982 1982-32 May 17, 1982 1982-37 June 21, 1982 1982-43 July 12, 1982 1982-49 August 16, 1982 1982-68 November 15, 1982 1983-46 July 18, 1983 1983-67 October 17, 1983 1984-15 April 2, 1984 1984-16 March 19, 1984 1984-22 March 19, 1984 1984-82 October 15, 1984 1985-03 January 7, 1985 1985-36 August 5, 1985 1986-52 October 6, 1986 1987-26 May 18, 1987 1988-12 May 23, 1988 1989-22 June 12, 1989 1989-54 November 13, 1989 1990-15 May 14, 1990 1991-24 May 28, 1991 1992-10 February 10, 1992 1992-85 December 31, 1992 1993-85 November 22, 1993 1994-15 April 25, 1994 1994-70 October 24, 1994 1995-25 May 22, 1995 1995-43(Disannex.) August 28, 1995 1995-65 October 9, 1995 1996-26A March 25, 1996 1997-60(Disannex.) July 28, 1997 1997-63(ETJ boundary) July 28, 1997 1997-73(Disannex.) August 25, 1997 1997-77 September 8, 1997 1997-80(Disannex.) September 8, 1997 1997-89(Disannex.) September 22, 1997 1997-109(Disannex.) November 24, 1997 1998-03 February 23, 1998 1998-36 March 23, 1998 1998-46 May 11, 1998 1998-75 August 10, 1998 1998-100 October 26, 1998 1998-109 November 9, 1998 1998-111 November 23, 1998 1999-11 February 8, 1999 1999-21(Disannex.) February 22, 1999 1999-34 March 9, 1999 2000-10(Disannex.) Feb. 15, 2000 2000-11(Disannex.) Feb. 15, 2000 2000-33(Disannex.) April 10, 2000 2000-93 December 11, 2000 2001-03 January 8, 2001 2001-23(Disannex.) March 19, 2001 2001-60 August 27, 2001 2001-89 December 11, 2001 2002-11 February 12, 2002 2002-18 March 11, 2002 2003-01 January 13, 2003 2003-02 January 13, 2003 2003-37 May 29, 2003 2003-76 October 27, 2003 2003-80 November 10, 2003 2003-90 December 8, 2003 2003-91 December 8, 2003 2004-05 January 12, 2004 2004-62 August 12, 2004 2004-73 September 27, 2004 2004-83 October 25, 2004 2005-25 April 11, 2005 2005-26 April 11, 2005 2005-27 April 11, 2005 2005-28 April 11, 2005 2005-36 April 25, 2005 2005-37 April 25, 2005 2005-68 September 12, 2005 2006-08 January 25, 2006 2006-19 February 28, 2006 2006-20 February 28, 2006 2006-30 March 14, 2006 2006-39 April 13, 2006 2006-51 May 12, 2006 2007-39 May 14, 2007 2008-09 February 22, 2008 2008-36 June 23, 2008 2008-50 August 11, 2008 2012-33 May 29, 2012 2012-39 August 13, 2012 2012-73 October 22, 2012 2013-94 November 11, 2013 2014-48 November 10, 2014 2014-65 December 22, 2014 2014-67 January 12, 2015 2014-74 December 22, 2014 2015-22 March 23, 2015 2015-32 April 27, 2015 2015-33 June 22, 2015 2015-34 April 27, 2015 2015-49 June 8, 2015 2015-50 June 8, 2015 2015-53 June 22, 2015 2015-55 July 13, 2015 2015-59 July 27, 2015 2015-66 July 27, 2015 2015-76 September 14, 2015 2015-77 September 14, 2015 2015-84 November 23, 2015 2015-96 November 23, 2015 2015-104 December 14, 2015 2015-110 December 14, 2015 2016-21 June 27, 2016 2016-70 December 12, 2016 2017-15 March 27, 2017 2017-40 July 24, 2017 2017-59 November 27, 2017 2017-60 November 27, 2017 2017-61 November 27, 2017 2017-66 October 23, 2017 2017-67 November 27, 2017 2017-68 November 27, 2017 2017-69 November 27, 2017 2017-77 November 27, 2017  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is a list of the annexation and disannexation ordinances of the city by ordinance number. 
Charter reference- City boundaries, art. 1, § 2; extending city limits on petition, art. 1, § 3; extending limits by commission action, art. 1, § 4. 
Cross reference- Annexation of property, § 2-311 et seq.; city limits, § 2-318; zoning regarding newly annexed land, § 138-143. 

APPENDIX C - CLOSURE OF STREETS[1] 
    This appendix contains a chronological listing of all ordinances passed by the board of commissioners pertaining to closure or vacation of streets, alleys, easements or other public ways within the city. 
Date Street, alley, etc. November 25, 1919 Portion of Texas Ave., Blk. 21, Hammonds Add. October 18, 1920 S. 19th St. (presently Ash Ave.), North McAllen Add. October 6, 1930 Alley in Lot 1, Blk. 1, Palm Heights Add. February 6, 1936 Portion of 11th Ave. January 20, 1937 Portion of Ash Ave., South of Casa de Palmas Hotel, North McAllen Add. February 17, 1943 Portion of Beech Ave. between Blks. 22 & 27, Hammonds Add. March 22, 1944 Portion of Ash Ave., between 15th & 16th Sts., North McAllen Add. August 23, 1944 Portion of 19th St. between Beech Ave. & U.S. 83, Hammonds Add. August 18, 1947 Portion of alley between 6th and 7th Sts., Blk. 7, Kehm Subdv. February 2, 1948 Alley in Blk. 30, Hammonds Add. May 17, 1948 Portion of Beaumont Ave. & 11th St., McAllen Add. February 7, 1955 Alley in Betty Rose Subdv. February 7, 1958 Alley in Highland Subdv., La Vista & 9th St. October 6, 1958 Alley in Broadway Terrace Subdv. December 15, 1958 Portion of S. 25th St. in College Add. July 9, 1959 Portion of S. 20th St. between Balboa and Azteca Ave., Colonia Hermosa #2; Azteca Ave. at 20th St. July 9, 1959 Fresno Ave. at 8th St., Waldron Subdv. May 2, 1960 21st St., corner of Azteca Ave.; 20th St. between Cortez & Balboa; alley parallel to Azteca on 20th St., all in Colonia Hermosa #2 Subdv. February 4, 1963 Dallas Ave., east of McColl Rd., J.P. King's Subdv. February 18, 1963 Alley between Austin Ave. & U.S. 83, Kehm Subdv. January 4, 1965 Portion of street between S. 241/2 & 25th Sts., parallel with Maple Ave., Bougainvillea Terrace Subdv. June 7, 1965 Utility easement at 2nd St. & U.S. 83, Hackberry Realty Co. January 17, 1966 
(Ord. No. 1996-1) Portion of South Seventeenth Street between Newport Avenue and U.S. 83 Expressway, and being that part of said South Seventeenth Street between Blocks one and two, three and four, Colonia Guadalupe Subdivision, McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, except for alley intersections and Oakland Avenue intersections. February 7, 1966 
(Ord. No. 1966-6) Portion of Ithaca Ave. between Blocks 2 and 3 of Fairfield Place Subdivision. Utility easements in Blocks 2 and 3 of Fairfield Place Subdivision. August 1, 1966 
(Ord. No. 1966-23) Portion of North 11th Street, adjacent to and North and West of Lots 4, 5, 6, Palms Community Center, Amended Map. Portion of North 11th Street, adjacent to and West of Lots 1, 2, Palms Community Center, Amended Map. June 19, 1967 
(Ord. No. 1967-16) Part of Portland Avenue and a part of Garza Street. April 12, 1968 
(Ord. No. 1968-10) West 25 feet of Lot 6, Clydesdale Acres Subdivision. August 19, 1968 
(Ord. No. 1968-24) Portion of South Tenth Street, also known as State Highway No. 336, South of South Line Extended of Bales Road. May 4, 1970 
(Ord. No. 1970-11) West portion of Hermosa and Colonia Avenues, a portion of Bolivar Street, a portion of South 21st Street and Azteca Avenue, and a portion of Balboa Avenue. June 1, 1970 
(Ord. No. 1970-15) Part of an alley south of and adjacent to Lots 1 and 2, Block 3, Highland Center Subdivision. August 3, 1970 
(Ord. No. 1970-24) Utility easements in portions of Section 7, Hidalgo Canal Company's Subdivision of Porciones. Alley north of and adjacent to Lots 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, Funville Subdivision. Alley east of and adjacent to Lot 6, Funville Subdivision. Alley lying between Lots 1 and 2, Funville Subdivision from north line of Savannah Ave. to north line of subdivision. Alley and alley easement as described in Vol. 1, pages 566 and 567, Deed Records of Hidalgo County. August 17, 1970 
(Ord. No. 1970-25) Part of Wichita Avenue. November 2, 1970 
(Ord. No. 1970-34) Part of alley south of and adjacent to Lots 3 and 4, Block 3, Highland Center Subdivision. December 7, 1970 
(Ord. No. 1970-36) Part of Bolivar Street lying between Hermosa Avenue and Colonial Avenue. Portion of Colonial Avenue. Portion of Hermosa Avenue. December 7, 1970 
(Ord. No. 1970-37) Alley between South 21st Street and South 22nd Street and Austin Avenue and Beaumont Avenue. February 1, 1971 
(Ord. No. 1971-4) Ithaca Avenue between Lots 7, 8, 9 and 10, and 3, 5 and 6 in Virginia Terrace No. Four. Alley between Lots 7, 8, 9 and 10, and Lots 15, 16, 17 and 18, Virginia Terrace No. Four. August 2, 1971 
(Ord. No. 1971-32) Alley between Blocks 2 and 3 of Whitewing Addition Unit Number One. December 6, 1971 
(Ord. No. 1971-60) Alley south of and adjacent to Lots 1 to 7 and north of Lot 8, Whalen Acres Subdivision. February 7, 1972 
(Ord. No. 1972-10) Ash Avenue between North 15th Street and North Main Street. August 21, 1972 
(Ord. No. 1972-45) Ithaca Avenue between Blocks 1 and 4 of Fairfield Place Subdivision. June 4, 1973 
(Ord. No. 1973-25) Alley in J.W. Brown Subdivision, south of Lots 9 and 15 and north of Lots 21, 22, Block 1. February 4, 1974 
(Ord. No. 1974-5) Alley between Lots 12, 13 and 14, Kendlewood Heights #1 Subdivision. July 3, 1974 
(Ord. No. 1974-46) Alley south of Lots 1, 2 and 3 and north of Lots 14, 15 and 16, lying between said lots in Block 34, Hammond's Addition. November 4, 1974 
(Ord. No. 1974-64) Utility easements in Blocks 1 and 4 of Fairfield Place Subdivision. December 16, 1974 
(Ord. No. 1974-74) South Sixth Street between Houston Avenue and Jackson Avenue. October 6, 1975 
(Ord. No. 1975-53) Street between Lot 8, Block 3 and Lot 1, Block 5, Cathay Courts Subdivision, which street connects with Cynthia Avenue on the west and dead ends on its eastern terminus. November 17, 1975 
(Ord. No. 1975-65) West 20 feet of the 40-foot street or alley dedication immediately east of and adjacent to Lot 1, Block 1, Fern Heights Subdivision, said west half of said alley or street having a north-south distance of 105 feet south of Fern Avenue. March 1, 1976 
(Ord. No. 1976-15) Portion of Ash Avenue adjacent to Lot 11, Eureka Park Subdivision, between North Ware Road and North 39th Street. July 18, 1977 
(Ord. No. 1977-41) Portion of Eighth Street being the 25 feet adjacent to Lot 1, Block 8, Ramona Park Subdivision. March 6, 1978 
(Ord. No. 1978-11) Part of Nolana Avenue, being the north and south ten feet of a 40-foot street easement between 22nd and 23rd Streets. September 5, 1978 
(Ord. No. 1978-41) Part of Ithaca Avenue between Blocks 1 and 4, of Fairfield Place Subdivision. October 16, 1978 
(Ord. No. 1978-60) Part of an alley which is a five-foot strip of land being the north five feet of the 30-foot alley lying south of and adjacent to Lot 140, Los Alegres Subdivision, Unit No. 2. March 3, 1980 
(Ord. No. 1980-27) Portion of South 91/2 Street adjacent and parallel to Lots 2, 3 and 4 of the Subdivision of Lot 4 and the south six feet of Lot 3, Stewart's Addition. July 21, 1980 
(Ord. No. 1980-55) Portion of Lot 19 of the Fern Terrace Subdivision. Portion of Lot 20 of the Fern Terrace Subdivision. Portion of Lot 12 of the Fern Terrace Subdivision. Portion of Lot 13 of the Fern Terrace Subdivision. April 20, 1981 
(Ord. No. 1981-37) A 0.133-acre tract of land better known as a 20-foot temporary alley easement with a 20-foot by 20-foot corner clip as shown in the Amended Plat of Espensen Industrial Park Subdivision. August 3, 1981 
(Ord. No. 1981-59) A 0.4647-acre tract of land, known as "J" Street, lying between Dallas Avenue and Fresno Avenue in Young's Subdivision. A 0.107-acre tract of land being the north ten feet of Fresno Avenue between (K) Center Street and a ten-foot alley west of Young's Subdivision. A 0.2297-acre tract of land being a 20-foot-wide alley between Dallas Avenue and Fresno Avenue in Block 4 of Young's Subdivision. April 19, 1982 
(Ord. No. 1982-20) The alleys and/or utility easements in Blocks F and 8 of the original townsite, except South 17th Street (South Guerra Street). May 3, 1982 
(Ord. No. 1982-24) A 17.4-foot alley and any utility easements lying therein, situated south of Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4, and north of Lot 10, all in Block 5, Kehm's Addition. A 17-foot alley and any utility easements lying therein, situated east of Lots 7 and 8 and west of Lots 9 and 10, all in Block 5, Kehm's Addition. August 2, 1982 
(Ord. No. 1982-46) The alley and/or utility easement located between Lots 1 through 7, inclusive, and Lots 12 through 18, inclusive, of Kendlewood Heights No. 3. October 18, 1982 
(Ord. No. 1982-60) Alleys and/or utility easements located in Blocks 40 and 41, Hammond's Addition, as shown in Volume 17, Page 188, Book of Deeds, Hidalgo County. June 20, 1983 
(Ord. No. 1983-41) A 0.24-acre tract of land out of Lots 21 and 22, Block 1, C.E. Hammond's Subdivision of Porciones 61, 62, 63 and 64, known as Old Nolana Avenue, between 23rd and 22nd Streets in Nolana West Subdivision. September 12, 1983 
(Ord. No. 1983-54) The alleys and/or utility easements located in Exhibit "A," attached to said ordinance, being a ten-foot utility easement of the north and west sides of Lot 3 of McAllen Methodist Hospital Subdivision, containing 0.1764 acre, more or less. October 17, 1983 
(Ord. No. 1983-66) The utility easement over the east seven feet of the west 15 feet of Lots 1 through 10, Harvey Terrace Subdivision Unit #1. December 19, 1983 
(Ord. No. 1983-79) Portion of the alley located in Lots 7 and 8, Betty-Rose Subdivision (vacated and abandoned for alley purposes only; city retains utility line easement). August 20, 1984 
(Ord. No. 1984-63) A 40-foot by 200-foot street right-of-way lying north of Lots 31 through 95, inclusive, Country Club Terrace Subdivision. January 7, 1985 
(Ord. No. 1985-02) A 60-foot right-of-way containing 1.314 acres out of the Church of the Good Shepherd Subdivision. April 15, 1985 
(Ord. No. 1985-23) A portion of a right-of-way containing 0.16 acre adjacent to Country Club Acres Subdivision Lot 11. July 1, 1985 
(Ord. No. 1985-35) A portion of the alley located between the 1100 block of Gumwood Street and the 1100 block of Hackberry Street. August 5, 1985 
(Ord. No. 1985-41) An easement located at the rear of Lot 62, Redbud Subdivision Unit No. 3. August 5, 1985 
(Ord. No. 1985-42) An easement located on the west side of Lot 19, Country Club Terrace Subdivision Phase I. October 7, 1985 
(Ord. No. 1985-63) An alley located between the 800 block of Ash Street and the 800 block of Beech Street, being the north 100 block of such alley October 7, 1985 
(Ord. No. 1985-64) An alley located between the 800 block of Ash Street and the 800 block of Beech Street. December 2, 1985 
(Ord. No. 1985-82) An alley lying between E. Jasmine Avenue and E. Hackberry Avenue. October 6, 1986 
(Ord. No. 1986-54) Toronto Avenue, where it intersects with South Second Street. October 6, 1986 
(Ord. No. 1986-55, repealed by Ord. No. 1986-61) An alley located behind Toronto Avenue, between South Second Street and the right-of-way for Fifth Street, Los Alegres Subdivision, Unit II (vacated and abandoned for alley purposes only; city retains utility line easement). December 9, 1986 
(Ord. No. 1986-61) Repealed Ord. No. 1986-55; opened the alley behind Toronto Avenue between Second Street and the right-of-way for Fifth Street, Los Alegres Subdivision, Unit II, for alley purposes. November 3, 1986 
(Ord. No. 1986-62) East 15.28 feet of the alley south of Lot 8 and north of Lot 21, J.W. Brown Subdivision, Hidalgo County, for alley purposes only. December 1, 1986 
(Ord. No. 1986-67) Right-of-way and utility easement located across from Form-O-Uth Subdivision at 29th Street and Ithaca Avenue. February 16, 1987 
(Ord. No. 1987-09) Part of utility easement located on south side of Lot 17, Block 5, Regency Park Estates Subdivision, Unit No. 1, at North 33rd Street between Swallow Avenue and Thunderbird Avenue. March 23, 1987 
(Ord. No. 1987-20) Utility easement located on east side of Lots 1 through 18, Gardenia Terrace Subdivision, Unit No. 18. July 6, 1987 
(Ord. No. 1987-36) Alley located on east side of Country Club Terrace Subdivision, for right-of-way purposes only. November 2, 1987 
(Ord. No. 1987-54) Alley easement located immediately east of the north 65.0 feet of Lot 1, J.P. King Subdivision. April 25, 1988 
(Ord. No. 1988-14) Portion of utility easement located at rear of Lots 16 and 17 of Redbud Subdivision No. 2 and Lots 55 through 65 of Redbud Subdivision No. 3. July 11, 1988 
(Ord. No. 1988-26) Portion of utility easement located at rear of Lots 7 through 15 of Redbud Subdivision No. 2. August 8, 1988 
(Ord. No. 1988-30) Portion of Bulldog Drive from Bicentennial Boulevard to 23rd Street. February 13, 1989 
(Ord. No. 1989-13) Ten-foot utility easement located on west boundary line of Lots 33-40 of The Village Subdivision. December 11, 1989 
(Ord. No. 1989-61) Ten-foot alley easement located east of and adjacent to Lot 1, Alta Loma Subdivision. December 11, 1989 
(Ord. No. 1989-62) North one foot of 15-foot utility easement crossing in part the rear of Lot 73, Fairway Grande Village Unit No. 2. October 22, 1990 
(Ord. No. 1990-57) West five feet of ten-foot utility easement located on east side of Lots 6, 7, 8, and 9, Trigo Subdivision. November 12, 1990 
(Ord. No. 1990-60) Twenty-foot alley easement located on Block 39, Hammond Addition. December 10, 1990 
(Ord. No. 1990-66) Fifty-foot road right-of-way at Lot 4, Block 12, Steele and Pershing Subdivision, subject to retention of 13-foot utility easement. March 11, 1991 
(Ord. No. 1991-19A) Alley easement located adjacent to Lot 121, La Lomita Irrigation & Construction Company Subdivision. April 22, 1991 
(Ord. No. 1991-27) Alley easement located adjacent to Lots 18, 19, 20 and 21, Gartmans Subdivision. April 22, 1991 
(Ord. No. 1991-28) Twenty-foot drainage easement located on Lot 1, Smith Center Subdivision. April 22, 1991 
(Ord. No. 1991-29) Alley easement located on Lot 9, Block 46, Town of North McAllen, from Beech Street to Cedar Avenue and from 12th Street to Broadway Avenue. April 22, 1991 
(Ord. No. 1991-30) Utility easement located approximately 140 feet north of Savannah Avenue running west of proposed South Sixth Street. May 28, 1991 
(Ord. No. 1991-35) Twenty-foot alley located adjacent to Lots 14-24 and Lots 47-50, Betty-Rose Subdivision. May 28, 1991 
(Ord. No. 1991-36) Utility easement located on Lot 147, Gardenia Terrace No. 12. June 24, 1991 
(Ord. No. 1991-44) Lift station easement located on Lot 1, Idela Park Subdivision Unit No. 3. June 24, 1991 
(Ord. No. 1991-48) Utility easement located through Lot 2-D, McAllen Southwest Industrial District Unit No. 4 Subdivision. August 26, 1991 
(Ord. No. 1991-60) West five feet of the east 15 feet of Lots 12, 13, and 14, Willow Trace Subdivision. October 14, 1991 
(Ord. No. 1991-77) Twenty-foot alley easement located between Lots 3-14, Block 32, Hammond's Addition. March 9, 1992 
(Ord. No. 1992-22) Ten-foot utility easement located across east 1/2 of Lot 10, Southeast 1/4 of Section 7, Hidalgo Canal Subdivision. April 27, 1992 
(Ord. No. 1992-44) Ten-foot utility easement located at rear of Lot 182, Gardenia Terrace Subdivision No. 13. July 13, 1992 
(Ord. No. 1992-60) Alley right-of-way and utility easement located east of and adjacent to Lots 13 through 24, McAllen Southwest Industrial Subdivision Unit No. 1. February 22, 1993 
(Ord. No. 1993-17) Fifteen-foot utility easement located on Lot 4, Block 1, T.H.E. Enterprise Subdivision. June 14, 1993 
(Ord. No. 1993-46) Sixty-foot right-of-way easement located on Lots 21 and 22, Block 1, C.E. Hammonds Sub- division of Porciones 61, 62, 63 and 64, Hidalgo County, Texas, McAllen, Texas. November 22, 1993 
(Ord. No. 1993-86) Thirty-foot dedicated street adjacent to Lots 1-10, Block 1, J.W. Brown Subdivision; Block 1, Young's Subdivision; Lot 11A, J.W. Brown Subdivision. February 14, 1994 
(Ord. No. 1994-7) Alley right-of-way located along the north and east side of Kerria Plaza Subdivision. February 14, 1994 
(Ord. No. 1994-8) Twenty-foot alley along the south and west boundary of the Village Green Amended Subdivision August 8, 1994 
(Ord. No. 1994-55) Ten-foot easement along the west side of Lot 16, Block 9, College Heights Subdivision November 14, 1994 
(Ord. No. 1994-78) A 40-foot easement located between Bicentennial and Chicago and Bicentennial and Dallas December 14, 1994 
(Ord. No. 1994-88) A 40-foot easement located between Bicentennial and Chicago and Bicentennial and Dallas January 9, 1995 
(Ord. No. 1995-3) The east five-foot of a ten-foot side of Lot 9A, Hollenbeck Subdivision located at 808 Uvalde Avenue June 12, 1995 
(Ord. No. 1995-30) Twenty-four-foot utility easement located on Lot 2B, Southwest Industrial District Unit No. 4 (amended map) June 12, 1995 
(Ord. No. 1995-31) Dedicated road right-of-way (original Beech Avenue between 22nd and 23rd Street) August 14, 1995 
(Ord. No. 1995-41) Ten-foot utility easement located on Lot 1, Block 1, Pendergras Subdivision October 23, 1995 
(Ord. No. 1995-58) Twenty-foot alley between lots 5, 6 and 8, Northway Park Subdivision November 13, 1995 
(Ord. No. 1995-62) Ivy Avenue between 11th Street and 12th Street August 12, 1996 
(Ord. No. 1996-52) The east 15 feet of Lot 11, Citrus City Lake Subdivision Unit No. 1, Hidalgo County, Texas August 26, 1996 
(Ord. No. 1996-58) A portion of First Street which lies in front of Lots 1-10, Block 1, Zapata Subdivision, and the alley being the north 250 feet of a 15-foot alley on the east side of Country Club Estates January 13, 1997 
(Ord. No. 1997-7) Fifteen-foot alley located immediately adjacent to the west side Lots 11 and 12, Block 1, Zapata Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas February 5, 1997 
(Ord. No. 1997-13) Twenty-foot utility easement on the north and east side of Kerria Plaza Subdivision April 15, 1997 
(Ord. No. 1997-26) Twenty-foot alley out of the west 192.42 feet of Lot 2, Texical Subdivision Unit No. 1, Hidalgo County, Texas April 28, 1997 
(Ord. No. 1997-29) North 30 feet of Lot 1 Amalia Sanchez Subdivision being a resubdivision out of Lots 39 and 42, Section 9, Hidalgo Canal Company's Subdivision April 28, 1997 
(Ord. No. 1997-30) Twenty-foot alley adjacent to Lots 47, 48 and 49, Margaret Estates Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas June 9, 1997 
(Ord. No. 1997-43) Street right-of-way located in the 3300 block of South 2nd Street Loop June 24, 1997 
(Ord. No. 1997-49) "L" shaped alley located adjacent to 1713 Quebec Avenue and 1700 block Expressway 83 August 25, 1997 
(Ord. No. 1997-74) Beaumont Avenue between Lot 19, Block 1, and Lot 12, Block 2, J.W. Brown Subdivision, and Chicago Avenue between Lot 7, Block 2, and Lot 12, Block 3, J.W. Brown Subdivision; and "L" Street from Beaumont Avenue to Dallas Avenue on the east side of Blocks 2 and 3, J.W. Brown Subdivision September 22, 1997 
(Ord. No. 1997-82) North 20 feet out of Lots 47 and 48, John H. Shary Subdivision located between Bentsen Road and Taylor Road September 22, 1997 
(Ord. No. 1997-83) 1.46 acres street right-of-way out of Kayo Mullins Subdivision which lies within north "L" Street and East Beech Avenue January 12, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-06) A ten-foot utility easement on Lots 104 and 105, Northridge Park Subdivision Phase 3 located at 7015 and 7019 North 1st Lane January 12, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-10) The unused Old San Francisco Road in Block 1 and Block 2, of Guerra's Addition located between Houston Avenue and Jackson Avenue. January 27, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-12) A four-foot portion of a ten-foot utility easement located on the west side of Lot 84, Idela Park Subdivision Unit 1 located at 4605 South 27th Street February 9, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-18) A street described as the south 30 feet of Lot 2, Playland Subdivision located at 620 East Pecan Boulevard February 9, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-19) A 20-foot alley right-of-way easement on the west side of Lots 1 and 2, Fox Run Subdivision Unit #4, but retaining a utility easement thereon March 9, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-33) A four-foot portion of a ten-foot utility easement located on the east side of Lot 80, Ponderosa Park Subdivision, Phase 1 located at 3101 Iris March 9, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-34) A 65-foot by 150-foot right-of-way located between Business Highway 83 and Ash Avenue May 11, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-47) 0.032 acre (1,437 sq. ft.) tract of land situated in the City of McAllen, County of Hildago, State of Texas, and being a portion of Lot 1 as created by that certain subdivision entitled "Wal-Mart Subdivision No. 2, per book 27, page 11 as recorded March 26, 1991, in Hildago County Map Records May 11, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-48) 0.034 acre (1,511 sq. ft.) tract of land situated in the City of McAllen, County of Hildago, State of Texas and being a portion of Lot 1 as created by that certain subdivision entitled "Wal-Mart Subdivision No. 2, per book 27, page 11 as recorded March 26, 1991, in Hildago County Map Records May 11, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-49) Twenty-five feet of road right-of-way which could be more or less known as N. 28th Street between Tamarack and Upas Avenues June 8, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-57) A 1.21 acre tract of land, the east 20 feet of Taylor Road right-of-way of Lots 47 and 57 John H. Shary Subdivision Vol. 1, Page 17, Deed Records, Hidalgo County, Texas September 28, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-89) Main Street from the north intersection of Wichita Avenue North a distance of 1,320 feet October 12, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-94) Uvalde Street from its west intersection with Main Street, west a distance of 667.40 feet October 12, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-96) Portion of a 20-foot alley located between Lots 1 and 2 and Lots 15 and 16, Block 31, Hammond's Addition October 26, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-99) Portion of a 20-foot by 100-foot alley located east of Lots 1 and 2, Chula Vista Subdivision November 23, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-112) Portion of South 38th Street within South Point Subdivision December 14, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-120) Portion of a street right-of-way described as the east 20 feet of Taylor Road right-of-way of Lots 47 and 57, John H. Shary Subdivision December 14, 1998 
(Ord. No. 1998-121) Portion of Taylor Road out of Lots 46, 47, 56, 57 and abandoned canal right-of-way out of John H. Shary Subdivision February 22, 1999 
(Ord. No. 1999-16) Existing alleys within Lots 1 through 18, Block 1, Young's Subdivision subject to retaining a 20-foot utility easement in place of the east-west alley right-of-way along the south side of Lots 1 through 12 and a payment of $481.00 to remove the existing line and pole from the north/south alley right-of-way February 22, 1999 
(Ord. No. 1999-17) A five-foot of a 10-foot utility easement located at the rear of Lot 174, Gardenia Terrace Subdivision 13 March 8, 1999 
(Ord. No. 1999-22) Uvalde Avenue between Main Street and Bicentennial Boulevard March 8, 1999 
(Ord. No. 1999-23) Portion of Main Street from the north intersection of Wichita Avenue north a distance of 1,203 feet 1999-32 
(Ord. No. 1999-32) West four feet of a 10-foot utility easement located at Lot 20, Ponderosa Park Subdivision, Phase 1 May 25, 1999 
(Ord. No. 1999-53) A 15-foot drainage easement located over and across Wisteria Executive Suites Subdivision, as shown on the map or plat thereof recorded in Volume 26, page 192-B Map Records, Hidalgo County, Texas subject to granting of a drainage easement at another location within Wisteria Executive Suites Subdivision. June 14, 1999 
(Ord. No. 1999-58) An "L" shaped alley west and north of Lots 23-36, and "L" shaped alley lying east and south of Lots 37-41, and South 7th Street, South 6th Lane and portion of Victoria Avenue right-of-way in Fairway Development Corporation Subdivision #2 October 11, 1999 
(Ord. No. 1999-87) A 0.1022 acre utility easement out of Lot 12, Sharyland Business Park December 11, 1999 
(Ord. No. 1999-88) A ten-foot by 119.64-foot portion of alley lying west of Lots 2 and 3, of the subdivision of Lot 4 and part of Lot 3, Stewart's Addition and a ten-foot by 69.64-foot portion of alley lying east of Lot 1, of the subdivision of Lot 4 and part of Lot 3, Stewart's Addition October 25, 1999 
(Ord. No. 1999-92) The east ten feet of the 20-foot utility easement along the west property line of Lot 1A, Fox Run Subdivision #4 November 22, 1999 
(Ord. No. 1999-102) A 1.5 feet by 34.4 feet portion of a utility easement out of the south six and one-half (6.5) of Lot 6, Block 6, Morningside Addition December 13, 1999 
(Ord. No. 1999-106) A 0.0633 acre utility easement out of Lots 57 and 67, John H. Shary January 34, 2000 
(Ord. No. 2000-08) The west 4.6 feet of the south 26.8 feet of the east 10.0 feet of the south 26.8 feet of Lot 43, The Village Subdivision February 28, 2000 
(Ord. No. 2000-15) A portion of Idela Road out of Lots 7 and 8, Block 2 and out of Lots 5 and 6, Block 3, Rio Bravo Plantation Company Subdivision adjacent to the south wastewater treatment plant April 10, 2000 
(Ord. No. 2000-32) A 4.16 acre tract of land out of Lot 117 and Lot 118, La Lomita Irrigation and Construction August 14, 2000 
(Ord. No. 2000-58) The south eight feet of the north 15 feet located on the north side of Lot 7, Redbud Subdivision No. 3 August 14, 2000 
(Ord. No. 2000-59) The south five feet of a 15-foot utility easement located on the north side of Lot 20, Green Meadows Subdivision August 14, 2000 
(Ord. No. 2000-60) A 25-foot road easement along the west side of Lot A, Southwest Industrial Park Subdivision August 14, 2000 
(Ord. No. 2000-61) A four-foot sidewalk easement on the north side of Lot 22, Sefela Emerald Forest Subdivision August 14, 2000 
(Ord. No. 2000-62) A portion of a 35-foot dedication to the city for North 33rd Street right-of-way and a portion of a 70-foot dedication to the city for Primrose Avenue right-of-way described as 1.58 acres out of McAllen Independent School District No. 9 September 11, 2000 
(Ord. No. 2000-69) The north six feet of a ten-foot utility easement along the south property line of Lot 10, Shady Oaks Subdivision Unit No. 1 October 24, 2000 
(Ord. No. 2000-80) A portion of a 25-foot dedicated road out of the northwest portion of Lot 130, La Lomita Irrigation and Construction Company Subdivision. May 14, 2001 
(Ord. No. 2001-36) A 70-foot by 90-foot tract of land out of a 15.63 acre tract of land out of the North 1/2 of Lot 119, La Lomita Irrigation and Construction Company's Subdivision. June 11, 2001 
(Ord. No. 2001-40) A portion of a 40-foot road right-of-way easement being .45 acre tract of land out of 150-foot reservation for canal and road, as shown on plat of Steele and Pershing Subdivision, of Porciones 66 and 67, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to plat recorded in Volume 8, Page 115, deed records; said tract lying west of and adjacent to Lot 1, Cathay Courts Annex, City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to plat recorded in Volume 5, page 7, map records, and lying west of and adjacent to a portion of Lots 3 and 4, Rancho de la Fruta Subdivision No. 1, City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to plat recorded in Volume 1, Page 38, map records, Hidalgo County, Texas, subject to retaining a utility easement. July 9, 2001 
(Ord. No. 2001-45) A 10-foot alley lying north of Lots 1-6, inclusive, of the Zachman Addition, City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to the plat recorded in Volume 11, page 45, map records of Hidalgo County, Texas, subject to retaining a utility easement. July 25, 2001 
(Ord. No. 2001-47) 3.3 feet by 26.1 feet and 1.1 feet by 24 feet of the 10-foot utility easement along the south line of Lot 6, Block 1, Golden Acres Retirement Subdivision No. 2, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, as per map or plat thereof recorded in Volume 16, Page 29, map records of Hidalgo County, Texas, subject to retaining the remaining utility easement. August 15, 2001 
(Ord. No. 2001-52) A portion of a 40-foot road right-of-way, being a 0.481 acre tract of land out of 150-foot reservation for canal and road, as shown on plat of Steele and Pershing Subdivision, of Porciones 66 nd 67, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to plat recorded in Volume 8, Page 115, deed records; said tract lying west of and adjacent to Lot 3 Block 4, Steele and Pershing Subdivision, subject to retaining a utility easement. August 27, 2001 
(Ord. No. 2001-58) A 10-foot utility easement at the east 5 feet of Lot 14, and the west 5 feet of Lot 13, Block 2, Scott Ford Subdivision, City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to the plat recorded in Volume 9, Page 12, map records of Hidalgo County, Texas, subject upon execution of a 6-foot utility easement being the east 6 feet of the west 21 feet of Lot 13, block 2, Scott Ford Subdivision. August 27, 2001 
(Ord. No. 2001-59) 0.185 acres (8,054 sq. ft., ) being a 25-foot alley out of Kingwood Estates Subdivision, Phase II, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to plat recorded in Volume 36, Page 143, map records of Hidalgo County, Texas, subject to retaining a utility easement. December 11, 2001 
(Ord. No. 2001-90) 0.27 acre tract of land out of 150-foot reservation for canal and road, as shown on Plat of Steele & Pershing Subdivision, of Porciones 66 and 67, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to plat recorded in Volume 8, Page 115, deed records subject to retaining a utility easement January 16, 2002 
(Ord. No. 2002-04(a)) 0.17 acre tract of land as shown on plat of El Cazador Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to plat recorded in Volume 19, Page 35, map records; subject to retaining a utility easement January 16, 2002 
(Ord. No. 2002-04(b)) 0.31 acre tract of land out of El Cazador Subdivision No. 2, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to plat recorded in Volume 19, Page 58, map records; subject to retaining a utility easement January 16, 2002 
(Ord. No. 2002-05) A utility and electric easement out of Lot 15, North Garden Estates Subdivision, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hildago County, Texas, as per map or plat thereof recorded in Volume 29, Page 35A, map records; adjacent to Quail Avenue beginning at the Southwest Corner of Lot 15 and ending at the Northeast Corner of Lot 15 January 16, 2002 
(Ord. No. 2002-06) 45.4 feet of 65.03 by 10-foot utility easement, being the south 10 feet of the north 20 feet of Lot 1, Paseo Del Norte Phase 3 Subdivision, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, as per map or plat thereof recorded in Volume 36, Page 15, map records; subject to retaining the remaining utility easement March 11, 2002 
(Ord. No. 2002-19) The north 5 feet of the 10-foot utility easement out of Lot 15-A, Willow Trace amended, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, as per map or plat thereof recorded in Volume 21, Page 70, map records, adjacent to the rear of the property March 25, 2002 
(Ord. No. 2002-22) Utility easements between Lots 2 and 3, Lots 6 and 7, Lots 14 and 15, Lots 18 and 19, and Lots 23 and 24, and abandoning East Daffodil Street and the 20-foot alleys; all in Willow Ridge Subdivision, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, as per map or plat; subject to retaining a utility easement over East Daffodil Street and the alleys May 31, 2002 
(Ord. No. 2002-31) The north 30 feet of the 60-foot ingress/egress and utility easement being the north 30 feet of the south 60 feet of Lot 2, 495 Commerce Center, Phase II, City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to plat recorded in Vol. 38, Pg. 163, Map Records, Hidalgo County, Texas. April 8, 2002 
(Ord. No. 2002-24) A 65-foot by 100-foot right-of-way located between Business Highway 83 and Ash Avenue July 24, 2002 
(Ord. No. 2002-42) A 0.11 acre tract of land, being a portion of 40-foot road, out of Lots 204 and 207, Pride-O-Texas Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to plat recorded in Vol. 5, Pg. 58 and 59, Map Records, Hidalgo County, Texas. August 14, 2002 
(Ord. No. 2002-48) The south four feet of the north ten feet of the east 36.5 feet of the west 46.5 feet out of Lot 99, Bentsen Heights Subdivision Unit 2, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, as per map or plat thereof recorded in Volume 32, Page 4, Map Records August 28, 2002 
(Ord. No. 2002-50) A tract of land containing 0.553 of an acre situated in the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, being a private access drive and utility easement out of Block 5, Lakes Business Park Phase 2 Subdivision, according to the plat thereof recorded in volume 37, page 168, Hidalgo County map records September 9, 2002 
(Ord. No. 2002-58) A strip of land out of Lot 2, Block 7, A.J. McColl Subdivision, of Porcion 68, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to plat recorded in Vol. 21, Page 598, deed records and a 0.101 acre of Whalen Road right-of-way lying adjacent to Lots 24 and 25, Whalen acres, City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to plan recorded in Vol. 1, Page 28, Map Records, Hidalgo County, Texas November 11, 2002 
(Ord. No. 2002-76) The east four feet of a ten-foot utility easement on the west side of Lot 74, Ponderosa Park Phase 6, Hidlago County, Texas, as per map or plat thereof recorded in Volume 37, Page 66, Map Records, Hidalgo County, Texas January 13, 2003 
(Ord. No. 2003-03) An existing ten-foot water and fire hydrant easement at Lot 2A, Woodlands Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to plat recorded in Vol. 28, Page 142B, Map Records, Hidalgo County, Texas January 13, 2003 
(Ord. No. 2003-04) A portion of an existing four-mile road right-of-way easement, being a 0.14 acres out of Lot 13, Block 1, C., E. Hammond's Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas March 10, 2003 
(Ord. No. 2003-18) A ten-foot utility easement, being the south ten feet of Lot 5, Del Oro Unit 2 Subdivision, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, as per map or plat thereof recorded in Volume 20, Page 71, map records May 12, 2003 
(Ord. No. 2003-35) A portion of Beaumont Avenue lying between Lots 42 and 65, and 25-foot alley lying west of and adjacent to Business Highway 83, and a portion of a 20-foot alley lying between Lots 38, 39, 40, and 42, Betty Rose Subdivision May 29, 2003 
(Ord. No. 2003-39) West 20 feet of dedicated road right-of-way out of Lots 67, 77, 87, 97, 107, 117, John H. Shary Subdivision May 29, 2003 
(Ord. No. 2003-40) A utility easement being part of Lot 1-A, Inter National Bank, recorded in Volume Q, Page 177, Deed Records, Hidalgo County June 23, 2003 
(Ord. No. 2003-49) A 0.21-acre tract of land being the north 10 feet of the east 455.0 feet of Lot 1, M.I.S.D. No. 12 Subdivision June 23, 2003 
(Ord. No. 2003-62) A portion of a 20-foot alley lying west of and adjacent to Lots 3, 4, 5 and 6 El Cazador Subdivision No. 2 and a portion of irregular shaped alley lying between Lot 6, El Cazador Subdivision No. 2 and Lots 5 and 10, J.W. Martin Subdivision July 14, 2003 
(Ord. No. 2003-51) A 60-foot by 353-foot strip of road right-of-way dedicated as part of the Medical Treatment and Education Center Subdivision July 14, 2003 
(Ord. No. 2003-52) A 1.87-acre tract utility easement out of Lot 68, La Lomita Irrigation and Construction Company Subdivision August 11, 2003 
(Ord. No. 2003-60) A 30-foot by 351.6-foot strip of land being the 30-foot future street right-of-way along the north side of Tract 2, McAllen Northwest Industrial Subdivision October 27, 2003 
(Ord. No. 2003-72) A 40-foot by 640-foot tract of land out of a 40-foot reservation for road as shown on plat of Rancho de la Fruta Subdivision No. 1, revised, of Porciones 66 and 67, Hidalgo County, Texas as recorded in Vol. 6, Page 31, map records, said tract lying west of a portion of Lot 10. October 27, 2003 
(Ord. No. 2003-75) East 20 feet of dedicated Stewart Road out of a portion of Lot 21 and a portion of Lot 11, John H. Shary Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to map or plat recorded in Bol .1, Page 17, Map Records, Hidalgo County, Texas January 12, 2004 
(Ord. No. 2004-06) East four feet of a ten-foot utility easement of Lot 89, Ponderosa Park, Phase 6 January 12, 2004 
(Ord. No. 2004-07) 30-foot by 1,451.30-foot tract of land, being a 30-foot road out of Lots 115 through 124, inclusive, and out of Canal right-of-way, lying west of Lots 115 and 124, Sharyland Orchards Subdivision March 8, 2004 
(Ord. No. 2004-20) A ten-foot by 160-foot strip of land out of Lot 1, Northwest 1/4 of Section 7, Hidalgo Canal Company's Subdivision of Porciones 64, 65, and 66 April 12, 2004 
(Ord. No. 2004-31) A utility easement being a 0.066-acre tract consisting of the north 10.0 feet of Lot 1-A, out of Lot 1-A and 1-B, McAllen Properties Subdivision April 12, 2004 
(Ord. No. 2004-32) A 25-foot dedicated right-of-way out of Lots 1-A and 1-B, McAllen Properties Subdivision July 14, 2004 
(Ord. No. 2004-55) A 30-foot by 610-foot strip of road right-of-way for Hawk Avenue, on the south side of Lots 9 through 16, Shady Oaks Subdivision, Units #1 July 26, 2004 
(Ord. No. 2004-59) A ten-foot alley on the west side of Lots 1 through 6, inclusive, and the north ten feet of Lot 7, Block 1, Bryan's Addition to McAllen Subdivision August 23, 2004 
(Ord. No. 2004-65) A 20-foot alley being a 0.2636 of an acre tract of land out of Calvary Baptist Subdivision September 14, 2004 
(Ord. No. 2004-68) A ten-foot utility easement, being Lots 44 through 50, Cardona at Bentsen Lakes Phase II Subdivision September 13, 2004 
(Ord. No. 2004-69) A 0.16 of an acre of drainage ditch R.O.W. out of Blocks 3A, 4A and 5A, Lakes Business Park Phase 2 Subdivision October 25, 2004 
(Ord. No. 2004-85) Apple Drive, Melon Circle, Pear Drive, Plum Drive, Lemon Drive, Peachtree, Citrus Square and a 30-foot private drive located approximately 645 feet south of Dallas Avenue between 33rd Street and Lemon Drive together with all utility easements shown on subdivision plan of Valley Haven Mobile Park October 25, 2004 
(Ord. No. 2004-86) Kings Highway out of Lots 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20, Kings Hiway Subdivision and Galveston Avenue out of Lots 85, 86, 87, and 88 McAllen Third Subdivision Citrus Groves Subdivision January 24, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-07) An existing alley out of Lot 1, Block 1, Pena Subdivision and dedicated alley lying between Lots 11 and 16, Block 4, Hammond's Addition March 14, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-19) An existing 20.0 foot alley containing 1,440 square feet between Lots 1 and 2, Block 7, Thomas Terrace Subdivision March 14, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-20) A utility easement being a 0.02 acre tract consisting of the east 10.0 feet of the south 68.31 feet of Lot 1, Conchita Estates March 28, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-23) Austin Avenue and the adjoining sidewalk between 17th Street and Bicentennial Boulevard April 11, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-29) A utility easement being 0.069 acre tract of land being the west ten feet of Lots 1 and 2, Greenridge Park Subdivision April 25, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-38) Ash Avenue between 17th Street and Bicentennial Boulevard April 25, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-39) Thirty-five-foot existing canal and alley right-of-way adjacent to the south side of Lot 1, Block 1, Gert's Addition No. 1 May 9, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-47) A portion of a 15-foot public utility easement recorded as Document No. 1284489, Official Records of Hidalgo County, Texas May 9, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-49A) A potion of a 40-foot by 594-foot road right-of-way lying south of Dallas Avenue and east of 2nd Street May 9, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-49B) A potion of a 40-foot by 594-foot road right-of-way lying south of Dallas Avenue and east of 2nd Street June 13, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-54) Portion of a 30-foot utility easement abandoned Hawk Avenue located south of Lot 16, Shady Oaks Subdivision, Unit 1 July 11, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-58) A utility easement retained over the east 20 feet of abandoned Stewart Road out of a portion of Lot 21 and a portion of Lot 11, John H. Shary Subdivision September 26, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-73) An existing 30-foot utility and road easement, not being used, being 1.05 acres out of Lot 348, John H. Shary Subdivision September 26, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-74) A 20-foot dedicated alley along the west side of Lots 1 through 5 inclusive and the south side of Lot 5, Block 3-A, North Park Estates Unit No. 2 Subdivision November 14, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-96) A ten-foot unimproved alley along the south side of Lot 10, Block 3, Colonia Fina Subdivision December 12, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-98) A 20-foot alley running along the east side of Lots 25, 26, 27, 32, 33 and 38; Whispering Winds Subdivision December 12, 2005 
(Ord. No. 2005-99) Utility easements between Lots 14 and 15, Willow Ridge Subdivision January 16, 2006 
(2006-01) A part or portion of Swallow Avenue Road right-of-way out of Plantation Gap Subdivision Phase I, Hidalgo County January 16, 2006 
(2006-02) A 10-foot utility easement being the west 10 feet of Lot 1, South Texas Eye Clinic Subdivision January 16, 2006 
(2006-03) Tract of land containing 1.63 acres together with a 10-foot utility easement being a tract of land containing 0.14 of an acre and a tract of land containing 0.25 of an acre being a 10-foot and 5-foot utility easement all out of Tico Acres Subdivision, Unit 4, Phases I, II and III March 27, 2006 
(Ord. No. 2006-35) The east 2.5 feet of a 10-foot utility easement out of Lot 57, Cardona at Bentsen Lakes Phase 1 March 27, 2006 
(Ord. No. 2006-36) Easements on three tracts of land out of Lots 17 and 18, Frontera Estates Subdivision May 8, 2006 
(Ord. No. 2006-49) A 20-foot by 189-foot dedicated alley out of the northeast 1/4 of Lot 12 of Section 9, Hidalgo Canal Company's Subdivision May 8, 2006 
(Ord. No. 2006-57) Violet Avenue between 10th Street and 11th Street, being along the south side of Violet Venue Subdivision June 26, 2006 
(Ord. No. 2006-71) A 15-foot utility easement on the south side of Lot 63, Kingsley Subdivision June 26, 2006 
(Ord. No. 2006-72) Dedicated 48th Street being a 1.529 acre tract of land, more or less out of Sharyland I.S.D. Junior High School Subdivision June 26, 2006 
(Ord. No. 2006-73) A ten-foot utility easement out of Lots 2 and 2, Section 8, Hidalgo Canal Company's Subdivision of Porciones 64, 65 and 66 October 23, 2006 
(Ord. No. 2006-107) A ten-foot unimproved alley along the south side of Lot 10, Block 3, Colonia Fina Subdivision October 23, 2006 
(Ord. No. 2006-111) Portion of Taylor Road 40-foot right-of-way being a 3.613 acre tract of land situated in Porcion 60, Hidalgo County, over and across Lots 16, 17, 26, 27, 36 and 37, as dedicated by the John H. Shary Subdivision October 23, 2006 
(Ord. No. 2006-112) Portion of Taylor Road being a 1,231 square foot tract of land, more or less out of Lot 67 John H. Shary Subdivision November 13, 2006 
(Ord. No. 2006-115) Existing drainage easement being a 0.1770 acre tract of land situated in Porcion 60, Hidalgo County, and being that portion of a 20-foot wide road right-of-way, being a portion of Lot 67, John H. Shary Subdivision November 13, 2006 
(Ord. No. 2006-116) East five feet of a 15-foot utility easement on the west side of Lot 77, Dominion Subdivision November 27, 2006 
(Ord. No. 2006-120) An existing 15-foot utility easement being a 15-foot by 620.55-foot strip of land out of Lots 45, 46, and 47, McAllen First Suburban Citrus Groves Subdivision of Porciones 61, 62, and 63 February 12, 2007 
(Ord. No. 2007-12) Two tracts of land: A portion of Gumwood Avenue being a 50-foot by 125-foot strip of land lying being Blocks 1 and 8, Hammond's Addition and a portion of Fir Avenue being a 25-foot by 75-foot strip of land lying south of and adjacent to Block 8, Hammond's Addition February 12, 2007 
(Ord. No. 2007-15) N. 25th Street between Ivy Avenue and Jasmine Avenue, being a 0.191 of one acre (8,301 s.f.) out of Lots 27 and 28, block 2, C.E. Hammond's Subdivision May 14, 2007 
(Ord. No. 2007-35) A 12-foot utility easement being the east six feet of Lot 2 and the west six feet of Lot 3, Del Lago Subdivision May 14, 2007 
(Ord. No. 2007-36) The north one foot of a ten-foot utility easement on the south side of Lot 37, Oxford Heights Subdivision May 14, 2007 
(Ord. No. 2007-37) A ten-foot utility and irrigation easement out of Lots 18 and 19, Section 229, Texas-Mexican Railway Company's Survey June 25, 2007 
(Ord. No. 2007-51) The west four feet of the ten-foot utility easement on the east side of Lot 14, The Village Subdivision June 25, 2007 
(Ord. No. 2007-52) A 15-foot alley easement along the north side of Lot 26 and an unimproved alley being ten feet along the east side of Lots 26, 27, 28 and 29, Belaire Subdivision July 23, 2007 
(Ord. No. 2007-58) A ten-foot by 263.22-foot tract of land being additional road right-of-way dedicated for Cynthia Avenue July 23, 2007 
(Ord. No. 2007-59) A 46-foot by 1,260-foot right-of-way (South 29th Street) on the west side of Lots 1 through 7, Botelo Industrial Park Subdivision August 27, 2007 
(Ord. No. 2007-65) A ten-foot utility easement being the south five feet of Lot 8 and the north five feet of Lot 9, the Gables Subdivision August 27, 2007 
(Ord. No. 2007-66) A 20-foot right-of-way being the west 20 feet of the south 669.96 feet of Lot 13, Section 278 Texas-Mexican Railway Co. Survey October 8, 2007 
(Ord. No. 2007-81) A four-foot by 20-foot strip out of a ten-foot utility easement along the west side of Lot 16, Schuster Acres Subdivision January 14, 2008 
(Ord. No. 2008-01) The north 3.8 feet of the ten-foot utility easement on the south side of Lot 22, Sendero Ranch Estates Subdivision February 25, 2008 
(Ord. No. 2008-10) A ten-foot utility easement being a 0.0773 acre tract out of Lot 4, Lakes Business Park Phase 3 February 25, 2008 
(Ord. No. 2008-11) A 20.0-foot by 165.0-foot dedicated right-of-way for alley, passageway, out of the east 2.5 acres of the west five acres of the north 20 acres of Lot 2, Block 11, Steele and Pershing Subdivision April 14, 2008 
(Ord. No. 2008-24) A five-foot by 65-foot utility easement on the west side of Lot 15, Falling Water Subdivision April 28, 2008 
(Ord. No. 2008-29) A portion of N. 25th Street between Laurel Avenue and Jasmine Avenue, being a 0.81 of one acre (35,139 s.f.) out of Lots 23 and 28, Block 2, C.E. Hammond's Subdivision May 15, 2008 
(Ord. No. 2008-33) A six-foot utility easement being a 660 square foot tract of land out of Lot 3, Oak Terrace Subdivision May 27, 2008 
(Ord. No. 2008-39) A five-foot by 103.5-foot portion of the five-foot utility easement along the west side of Lot 26, Saltillo at Bentsen Lake Subdivision May 27, 2008 
(Ord. No. 2008-40) A 20-foot alley along the west and south sides of Lot 67, Jackson Meadows Subdivision June 23, 2008 
(Ord. No. 2008-47) A five-foot utility easement, being the north five-foot save and except the east ten feet thereof, of Lot 11, Cardona at Bentsen Lakes, Phase III March 23, 2009 
(Ord. No. 2009-19) A 20' x 100' alley right-of-way on the west side of Lot "A", Auto Shack Subdivision, Unit 1 April 27, 2009 
(Ord. No. 2009-25) An easement containing 0.334 of an acre, situated in the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, being part or portion of Lot 1, Retama Village Phase II April 27, 2009 
(Ord. No. 2009-27) Thirty-six (36) 5 ft. utility easements out of Lots 49, 50, 57, 58, 72, 73, 89, 90, 117, 118, 122, 123, 128, 129, 131, 132, 136, 137, 139, 140, 148, 149, 167, 168, 174, 175, 183, 184, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 199 & 200, Trinity Oaks Subdivision June 8, 2009 
(Ord. No. 2009-33) A 10' x 120' utility easement out of Lot 67A, out of Lots 67A & 67B, Jackson Meadows Subdivision August 24, 2009 
(Ord. No. 2009-36) The east 20 feet of the 40 foot dedicated road as shown on plat of Steele & Pershing Subdivision of Porciones 66 AND 67. August 24, 2009 
(Ord. No. 2009-46) A 20' × 161' alley right-of-way being a portion of an alley out of lot 1, block 1, RTG Subdivision. September 14, 2009 
(Ord. No. 2009-53) Repealing Ord. No. 2002-22; providing for vacating, abandoning and closing utility easements between lots 2 & 3, lots 6 & 7, lots 18 & 19 and lots 23 & 24, and abandoning East Daffodil and the 20 foot alleys, all in Willow Ridge Subdivision. September 14, 2009 
(Ord. No. 2009-54) A 20.0 foot by 225.0 foot portion of alley (between Ithaca & Jackson, Fifteenth & Main) in block 3, nelson addition. Such abandonment shall not take effect until the utility lines have been relocated at the owner's expense and the resubdivision plat has been recorded. September 14, 2009 
(Ord. No. 2009-55) A 20' alley right-of-way and a 25' street right-of-way out of Yesenia Subdivision. October 26, 2009 
(Ord. No. 2009-63) A 0.221 acre strip of land, being a 15' easement, out of Block 3, M & M Subdivision November 9, 2009 
(Ord. No. 2009-68) The east 5 feet of the 10 foot utility easement on the west side of Lot 119, El Pacifico Subdivision Phase II January 11, 2010 
(Ord. No. 2010-01) A 20.0 foot alley and utility easement out of the east 1/2 of the north 1/2 of the east 1/2 of Lot 3, Block 11, Steele and Pershing Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas, save & except the south 40 feet of the north 70 feet and further save & except the south 60 feet of the north 110 feet February 8, 2010 
(Ord. No. 2010-04) A 10 ft. utility easement along the east side of Lot 12, Antigua Subdivision February 8, 2010 
(Ord. No. 2010-05) The south 3 ft. by 422.0 ft. of a 10 ft. utility easement out of Lots 1 thru 15, inclusive, McAllen Industrial Drive Subdivision June 14, 2010 
(Ord. No. 2010-37) The inside 4 ft. of a 10 ft. utility easement of six (6) tracts of land being out of Lots 1 thru 7, inclusive & Lots 7 thru 41 inclusive, Villas Del Tesoro Subdivision June 14, 2010 
(Ord. No. 2010-38) The north 4.5 ft. of the north side of a 10 ft. electrical and utility easement located on the rear side of Lot 103, Eagle's Crossing Subdivision June 14, 2010 
(Ord. No. 2010-39) Three easements as follows: Tract (a) containing 0.003 acres of land, more or less, out of a 10-foot utility easement; tract (b) containing 0.014 acres of land, more or less, out of a 15-foot utility easement; and tract (c) containing 0.002 acres of land, more or less, out of a 10-foot utility easement, all being out of Lot 6, McAllen Towne Center Subdivision July 12, 2010 
(Ord. No. 2010-41) A 0.07 acre tract of land being a portion of a 10 ft. utility easement out of Lot 1, Church of the King, Mcallen, Hidalgo County, Texas September 27, 2010 
(Ord. No. 2010-57) Vacating, abandoning and closing alley right-of-way being the south 10 feet of the north 165 feet of the west 615 feet of the east 630 feet of Lot 9, Kings Hiway Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas September 27, 2010 
(Ord. No. 2010-58) Abandoning: (1) a 20.0 foot by 270.0 foot tract of land (drainage easement reserved in Ordinance No. 1991-28, out of Lot 1, Smith Center, City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, and (2) the north 30.0 feet of a certain 35.0 foot alley and canal right-of-way lying south and adjacent to Lot 1, Block one, Gert's Addition No. One, revised, city of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas February 28, 2011 
(Ord. No. 2011-08) Vacating, abandoning and closing: (1) a 0.008 of one acre of street right-of-way out of Candle Flower Subdivision unit 1, City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, according to the plat thereof recorded in Volume 22, Page 144, Hidalgo County, map records, Hidalgo County, Texas and (2) a 0.035 of one acre of highway right-of-way easement out of Lot 13, Block 1, c. E. Hammond Subdivision, according to the plat thereof recorded in Volume 1, Page 8, Hidalgo County, map records, Hidalgo County, Texas May 9, 2011 
(Ord. No. 2011-22) Vacating, abandoning and closing a 0.003 of one acre situated in the City of McAllen, being a part or portion of a 10' UE out of Lot 11, Country Club Estates Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas June 13, 2011 
(Ord. No. 2011-29) Vacating, abandoning and closing a 35 ft. by 5 ft. utility easement on the east side of Lot 71, Falling Water Subdivision, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas June 27, 2011 
(Ord. No. 2011-33) Abandoning a 0.0207 of one acre out of 29th St. and Covina Ave. rights-of-way adjacent to the corner clip of Lot 1, Block 9, Balboa Acres, Hidalgo County, Texas July 11, 2011 
(Ord. No. 2011-38) Abandoning part of a 10 ft. utility easement (0.0132 acre (574 sq. ft.) out of Lot 5A, of Lots 5A and 6A, La Plaza Subdivision, City of Mcallen, Hidalgo County, Texas October 24, 2011 
(Ord. No. 2011-59) Abandoning the north 10 feet of a 15 feet, utility easement located at the rear of Lot 14, Oak Tree Subdivision, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas October 24, 2011 
(Ord. No. 2011-60) Abandoning a 0.038 acre (or 1,650.0 sq. ft) tract of land, more or less, consisting of that certain 15.0 foot wide City of McAllen drainage easement centered between Lots 3 and 4, Coronado Estates, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas February 13, 2012 
(Ord. No. 2012-06) Abandoning 10' x 62', utility easement located at the rear of Lot 142, Woodhollow, Phase IV, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas February 13, 2012 
(Ord. No. 2012-09) Abandoning a utility easement of 0.730 acres (3,199 sq. ft.) comprised of 0.0365 acres out of Lot 13 and 0.0365 acres out of Lot 16, Ridge Plaza Subdivision, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas March 26, 2012 
(Ord. No. 
2012-17) Abandoning portions of utility easements being Tract 1 (0.4162 acres), Tract 2 (0.0760 acres) and Tract 3 (0.1704 acres), and any interest in a private alley out of Tract 1 (0.4162 acres) and private street out of Tract 4 (0.07983 acres) out of Lots 2 through 9, Sgian Dubh Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas June 11, 2012 
(Ord. No. 
2012-37) Abandoning the north 8 ft of a 15 ft utility easement located directly north of the 10 ft irrigation easement located at the rear of Lots 16 through 23, Oak Tree Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas July 9, 2012 
(Ord. No. 
2012-42) Abandoning the south 65.5 feet of the 10-foot utility easement located at the west side of Lot 137, Ivory Palm Estates, Hidalgo County, Texas August 13, 2012 
(Ord. No. 
2012-50) Abandoning the 470.65 square-foot tract of land more or less, being a portion of an existing utility easement out of Lot Five (5), Laguna Hermosa Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas September 10, 2012 
(Ord. No. 
2012-57) Vacating, abandoning and closing the portion of Nightingale Boulevard and North 4th Street, being dedicated streets as shown on North Pointe Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas September 10, 2012 
(Ord. No. 
2012-58) Abandoning the portions of utility easements being a 20-foot alley and utility easement out of a 5.25-acre tract out of Lot 3, Block 11, Steele and Pershing (proposed Pecan Heights) Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas September 24, 2012 
(Ord. No. 
2012-64) Abandoning a 24-foot wide "l" shaped fire lane (0.49 acres) and a "T" shaped utility easement (0.51 acres) out of Lot 1 and 2, Bicentennial Square Hidalgo County, Texas. October 8, 2012 
(Ord. No. 
2012-68) Abandoning a 96.0 sq. ft. tract of land, more or less, out of Lot twenty six (26), Puerta Del Sol Estates, Hidalgo County, Texas as per map or plat thereof recorded in Volume 30, Page 15a. January 28, 2013 
(Ord. No. 
2013-07) Abandoning a 20 ft. alley on the south side of Lots 1-4, Block 7 and Block 2, Kehm's Addition to McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas April 8, 2013 
(Ord. No. 
2013-27) Abandoning the west 5 feet of the 10-foot utility easement located on the west side of Lot 28, Heritage Manor #2 Subdivision (amended), an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas April 8, 2013 
(Ord. No. 
2013-28) Abandoning a portion of a utility easement on an abandoned alley adjacent to the north of Lot 47, Margaret Estates, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas April 22, 2013 
(Ord. No. 
2013-33) Abandoning the north 4 feet of the 10-foot utility easement on the south side of Lots 42 and 43, Sendero Ranch Estates Subdivision, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas May 28, 2013 
(Ord. No. 
2013-36) Abandoning a 0.086 acre tract of land being a 10-foot utility easement out of Lot 1, M & T Plaza, Hidalgo County, Texas May 28, 2013 
(Ord. No. 
2013-37) Abandoning a 0.25 of an acre tract of land being the 20.00-foot alley adjacent to the west of Lot 66, Jackson Meadows Subdivision, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas; Retaining a 20-ft. utility easement June 24, 2013 
(Ord. No. 
2013-46) Abandoning a tract of land containing 0.3076 acres, Hidalgo County, Texas, Being the west 20.00 feet of the south 669.96 feet of Lot 13, Section 278, Texas-Mexican Railway Company Survey; Retaining a 20-ft. utility easement July 22, 2013 
(Ord. No. 
2013-55) Abandoning a tract of land containing 0.1538 acres, Hidalgo County, Texas, Being the east 10.00 feet of the west 20 feet the south 669.96 feet of Lot 13, Section 278, Texas-Mexican Railway Company Survey August 26, 2013 
(Ord. No. 
2013-70) An ordinance abandoning the following street and alley right of ways 1) alley north of East Beaumont Avenue and east of South "K" Center Street, 2) East Beaumont Avenue east of South "K" Center Street, 3) alley east of South "K" Center Street and south of Beaumont Avenue and north of Chicago Avenue, but retaining a 20 ft. utility easement over the tract of land being abandoned, 4) an "L" shaped utility easement out of Lot 1, Burns Motor Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas south of Beaumont Avenue touching the corner of Chicago Avenue and entirely north of the southern boundary of Chicago Avenue, 5) a 0.43 acre tract of land out of Lot "A", Boggus Subdivision II, City of McAllen, recorded in volume 32, page 168A, map records, and out of Lot 1, Burns Motor Subdivision, City of McAllen, recorded in volume 33, page 111, map records, and out of Lots 8 through 17, Whalens Acres, City of McAllen, recorded in volume 7, page 28, map records, all in Hidalgo County, Texas October 14, 2013 
(Ord. No. 
2013-79) An ordinance abandoning a tract of land containing 1.034 acres (45,037.64 square feet) situated in the County of Hidalgo, Texas being that part or portion of the Trailblazer Avenue right-of-way adjacent to the north line of lots 158 thru 168, La Puerta Subdivision December 9, 2013 
(Ord. No. 
2013-102) An ordinance abandoning six (6) separate tracts of road rights-of-way as described as follows: 1) a 1.19 acre tract of land being the west 20 feet of the north 310 feet of Lot 45 and the west 20 feet of Lots 46 thru 48 and the east 20 feet of Lots 49 thru 51 and the east 20 feet of the north 310 of Lot 52, Citrus Properties Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas; 2) a 0.40 acre tract of land being the east 20.00 feet of the north 310 feet of Lot 45 and the east 20.00 feet of Lots 46 and 47, Citrus Properties Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas; 3) a 2.98 acre tract of land being the west 20.00 feet of Lots 46 thru 64, block "C", Retama Acres Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas; 4) a 6.22 acre tract of land being the west 20 feet of the north 297.35 feet of Lot 45, block "B" and the west 20 feet of Lots 46 thru 64, block "B" and the east 20 feet of the north 297.35 feet of Lot 45, block "C" and the east 20 feet of Lots 46 thru 64, block "C", Retama Acres Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas; 5) a 4.84 acre tract of land being the north 20.00 feet of Lots 1 and 2, Block 20 and the south 20.00 feet of Lots 5 and 6, Block 13, Rio Grande Development Company's Subdivision, Hidlgo County, Texas, and the north 20.00 feet of Lot 60, Block "B" and Lot 60, Block "C" and the south 20.00 feet of Lot 61, Block "B" and Lot 61, Block "C", Retama Acres Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas; 6) a 2.34 acre tract of land being the south 20.00 feet of the west 1308.33 feet of Lot 46, Block "B" and the south 20.00 feet of the east 1236.10 feet of Lot 46, Block "C" and the north 20.00 feet of the west 1308.33 feet of Lot 45, Block "B" and the north 20.00 feet of the east 1236.10 feet of Lot 45, Block "C", Retama Acres Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas December 9, 2013 
(Ord. No. 
2013-103) Abandoning the following electrical easements: 1) an electrical easement being a tract of land containing 0.029 of one acre [1,260.00 square feet] being the west 5.00 feet of Lot 159 and the east 5.00 feet of Lot 160, La Puerta Subdivision, Phase I; and 2) an electrical easement being a tract of land containing 0.029 of one acre [1,260.00 square feet] being the west 5.00 feet of Lot 164 and the east 5.00 feet of Lot 165, La Puerta Subdivision Phase I April 28, 2014 
(Ord. No. 
2014-15) Abandoning a 0.09 acre tract of land out of Lot 1, Block 17, Steel & Pershing Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas June 23, 2014 
(Ord. No. 
2014-28) Abandoning a 10-foot utility easement located in the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, being out of and a portion of that certain Lot 1, Berkshire Subdivision June 23, 2014 
(Ord. No. 
2014-29) Abandoning a tract of land located in the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, being out of and a portion of that certain Lot 1, Berkshire Subdivision August 25, 2014 
(Ord. No. 
2014-39) Abandoning 2.19 acres of land located in the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, being a part or portion out of Lot 1, Block 6. Steele & Pershing Subdivision September 8, 2014 
(Ord. No. 
2014-43) Abandoning an existing 20.0' service access easement located in Hidalgo County, Texas, being out of Lot 1, Orgo Subdivision January 12, 2015 
(Ord. No. 
2015-02) Abandoning the south four feet of the north ten feet of the utility easement located on the north side of Lot 1, Anaya Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas May 26, 2015 
(Ord. No. 
2015-45) Abandoning parcels 98A through 106A out of Lot 72, La Lomita Irrigation and Construction Company Subdivi- 
sion, Hidalgo County, Texas December 14, 2015 
(Ord. No. 
2015-105) Abandoning a 0.12 acre tract of land out of Lot 2, Nolana Heights, Hidalgo County, Texas January 11, 2016 
(Ord. No. 
2016-02) Abandoning a 5-foot by 351.0-foot tract of East Dallas Ave. right-of-way lying south of and adjacent to Lot 1, Burns Motors Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas February 22, 2016 
(Ord. No. 
2016-14) Abandoning a 0.138 acre tract of land out of Lot 1, Block 16, Steele and Pershing Subdivision, Hidalgo County, Texas May 9, 2016 
(Ord. No. 
2016-29) Abandoning an 8 square foot portion of a 10 foot utility easement out of lot 26, Bedford Estates No. 2, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas May 23, 2016 
(Ord. No. 
2016-33) Abandoning 0.040 acres of land out of lot 72, R.E. Horn's Addition to McAllen First Suburban Citrus Groves Subdivision June 27, 2016 
(Ord. No. 
2016-42) Abandoning a tract of land containing 0.07 of one acre in Hidalgo County, Texas, and also being part or portion of lot 15, section 279 August 8, 2016 
(Ord. No. 
2016-50) Abandoning a 10 feet by 118 feet alley that lies East of Lots 7 and 8, Block 5, Cathay Court Subdivision and the West of Lot 140, Betty Rose Subdivision, and runs North of Dallas Avenue, City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas September 12, 2016 
(Ord. No. 
2016-55) Abandoning a tract of land containing 5.693 acres situated in Hidalgo County, Texas, consisting of 2.745 acres being a part or portion out of section 227 and 2.948 acres out of section 232, all out of Texas-Mexican Railway Company survey November 28, 2016 
(Ord. No. 
2016-80) Abandoning a tract of land containing a 0.385 of an acre (16,760.46 square feet) tract of land, more or less, being a 30-foot strip road as shown in lot 12, Eureka Park Subdivision in Hidalgo County, Texas May 22, 2017, 
(Ord. No. 
2017-31) Abandoning a 0.007 acres tract of land out of and forming part or portion of Lot Thirty-Two (32), Auburn Hills Subdivision, recorded in Document #2762244, map records of Hidalgo County, Texas September 11, 2017, 
(Ord. No. 
2017-49) Abandoning a 10.0-foot-wide irregularly shaped tract of land out of Lot 1A, State Farm February 12, 2018, 
(Ord. No. 
2018-10) Abandoning and closing a portion of a 40-foot road right-of-way, being a 0.007 tract of land and a 0.021 acre tract of land out of 150-foot reservation for canal and road, as shown on plat of Steele 7 Pershing Subdivision, of Porciones 66 and 67, Hidalgo County, Texas April 9, 2018, 
(Ord. No. 
2018-20) Abandoning a 2.03 acre tract of land out of all of north 66th Lane and part or portion of Wesleyan Avenue, Sharyland Independent School District Pioneer High School Subdivision, an addition to the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas April 9, 2018, 
(Ord. No. 
2018-21) Abandoning a 40.0-foot Flamingo Avenue right-of-way being a 0.786 acre tract of land out of Lot 15, Block 1, C.E. Hammonds Subdivision, according to the plat thereof recorded in Volume 1, Page 8, Hidalgo County map records, which said 0.786 of one acre is a part or portion out of a larger tract conveyed to Hidalgo County April 9, 2018, 
(Ord. No. 
2018-22) Abandoning a 10.0-foot wide utility easement along the east line of Lot 1A, State Farm Place, Lot 1A, City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas August 23, 2018, 
(Ord. No. 
2018-51) Abandoning approximatley 5 feet out of a 10 foot utility easement and a 1.0 foot technology easement, which said easements being 0.017 of one acre and located along the west side out of lot 90, Escondido at Tres Lagos Subdivision September 24, 2018, 
(Ord. No. 
2018-66) Abandoning a 20 right-of-way (0.638 acre tract of land) being out of lot 11, section 5, Hidalgo Canal Company Subdivision September 24, 2018, 
(Ord. No. 
2018-67) Abandoning a 10.0-foot utility easement being a 0.04 acre tract of land out of lot 1, the Warehouse Kingdom Subdivision January, 28, 2019, 
(Ord. No. 
2019-03) Abandoning 0.02 acres of a 20 foot alley lying east of Lot 1, Jonquil Heights Subdivision, City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is a list of the streets, alleys, etc., that have been closed or vacated by the city. 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94; traffic and vehicles, ch. 102. 

APPENDIX D - FRANCHISES 
ARTICLE I. - CABLE TELEVISION 
DIVISION 1. - HERITAGE CABLEVISION OF TEXAS, INC.[1] 
Adopted July 1, 1963 
Expires July 1, 2001 
ORDINANCE NO. 95(1963) 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING THE RIGHT AND PRIVILEGE OF USING THE PRESENT AND FUTURE STREETS, ALLEYS, AND PUBLIC WAYS OF THE CITY OF McALLEN, TEXAS FOR THE PURPOSE OF CONSTRUCTING, SUPPLYING, AND MAINTAINING A CLOSED CIRCUIT TELEVISION SYSTEM TO McALLEN CABLE TELEVISION CORPORATION; PROVIDING FOR TWENTY-FIVE YEAR TERM; PROVIDING FOR COMPENSATION TO BE PAID BY THE CITY OF McALLEN; PROVIDING FOR RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS OF OPERATION; PROVIDING FOR INDEMNIFICATION OF THE CITY OF McALLEN; PROVIDING FOR LIABILITY AND PROPERTY DAMAGE INSURANCE; ESTABLISHING RATES TO BE CHARGED BY GRANTEES; PROVIDING FOR ASSIGNMENT; GIVING TO THE CITY OF McALLEN THE RIGHT TO ESTABLISH RATES; ESTABLISHING THE TIME WITHIN WHICH CONSTRUCTION MUST BEGIN; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; AND ORDAINING OTHER MATTERS RELATED TO THE SUBJECT MATTER. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF McALLEN, TEXAS. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is cable television franchise, as adopted by Ordinance Number 1963-95 on July 1, 1963. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Ordinance number 1985-77, adopted Dec. 2, 1985, changed the name of the franchisee in ordinance number 95(1963) from Valley Cable TV, Inc. to Heritage Cablevision of Texas, Inc. Ordinance No. 1986-33, adopted June 2, 1986, amended section 1, by changing the expiration date from July 1, 1988 to July 1, 2001. 

Section 1. - Grant [of] authority. 
    There is hereby granted to Heritage Cablevision of Texas, Inc., a Texas corporation, hereinafter called "grantee," the right, privilege and franchise (this franchise having heretofore been assigned to it by Valley Cable TV, Inc., in accordance with section 9 of this ordinance) to have, acquire, construct, reconstruct, maintain, use and operate in the City of McAllen, Texas, a television signal receiving, amplifying and distribution system and service, hereinafter called "community antenna television system," and to have, acquire, construct, reconstruct, maintain, use and operate in, over, under, along and across the present and future streets, highways, alleys, bridges, public utility poles, ways and places in the city all necessary poles, towers, anchors, wires, cables, electronic conductors, underground conduits, manholes and other structures, appliances and appurtenances necessary for the construction, maintenance, and operation of a community antenna television system within said city; provided however, that the right, privilege and franchise hereby granted shall expire and the terms thereof shall end on July 1, 2001, unless the same is extended and renewed as herein provided. Upon the expiration of the initial term of said franchise, the grantee may apply for renewal or extension of said franchise for a period of an additional 15 years, which shall be granted upon the determination by the city, after a full public proceeding affording due process, that the grantee has provided satisfactory service, has filled the terms and conditions of the original franchise, as amended, and remains fully qualified to continue to provide cable television service to the city. The city has approved grantee [as to] legal, character, financial, technical and other qualifications and the adequacy and feasibility of its construction arrangements, which have resulted in the provisions of satisfactory community antenna television service throughout the entire city, as a part of a full public proceeding affording due process. 
(Ord. No. 1976-5, § A, 1-19-76; Ord. No. 1985-77, § 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 1986-33, § I, 6-2-86) 
Section 2. - Compliance with applicable laws. 
    The work done in connection with the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of said community antenna television system shall be subject to and governed by all laws, rules and regulations of the city now in force, or that may be hereafter passed and adopted for the government and regulation thereof and not inconsistent herewith. Should the Federal Communications Commission or any other proper state or federal regulatory agency adopt rules and regulations by which community antenna television system shall be regulated, then all such rules and regulations so promulgated shall be complied with by grantee. In the event the FCC should amend or modify any provision of its requirements relating to local community antenna television franchise or license agreements or contracts, such modifications or amendments shall be incorporated into this agreement within one year of the adoption by the FCC of such modification, or at the time of renewal of this agreement, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 1976-5, § B, 1-19-76) 
Section 3. - Compensation. 
    For the rights and privileges hereby granted to grantee, and to compensate grantee for its regulatory activities hereunder, grantee shall pay to the City of McAllen annually on April 1 of each year hereafter during the term of this permit, four per cent of the annual subscriber revenues actually received by grantee for the rendition of its regular closed circuit television service; provided however, that commencing April 1, 1977, the amount of this payment to the city shall be in the annual sum of three per cent of that of the annual subscriber revenues actually received by grantee for the rendition of its regular closed circuit television service within the city, and provided further that the parties agree that should the city, prior to April 1, 1977, make a showing to the Federal Communications Commission, pursuant to section 76.31(b) of the Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission that a franchise fee of four per cent is reasonable in light of a planned local regulatory program then the compensation to city shall remain at four per cent as specified above and the preceding provision shall not come into force on April 1, 1977 and shall be of no force or effect. Payment to the City of McAllen under this provision shall be received in lieu of any other license, gross receipts charge, or other rental charge for the use of the streets, alleys or public ways of the City of McAllen, Texas. The city shall have the right at all reasonable times to inspect the records and books of account of grantee. 
(Ord. No. 1976-5, § C, 1-19-76) 
Section 4. - Approval of location of equipment. 
    Grantee will use poles of franchised utility companies now operating in McAllen, subject to approval of owners thereof, for grantee's wire, conduit, equipment and apparatus of every kind, but is authorized to install its own poles only where utility company pole facilities are not available, subject to the following: The location of all poles, cables, wires, and other equipment and apparatus constructed in, over, or under the public streets, alleys, and public ways of the City of McAllen shall be subject to the approval of the City of McAllen. When required to do so by the city, grantee will, at its own expense, move any of its poles, cables, wires, apparatus, or other equipment. Grantee will furnish to city, upon request, appropriate maps, charts, or plats showing the location of all its lines, poles, wires, or other equipment in the City of McAllen. Such installations shall be so located that they will not interfere with the orderly and proper use by the public of the streets, alleys, and public ways of the city. All installations by grantee, in, on, or under the public streets, alleys, and ways, and on property of customers, shall be done in accordance with all applicable ordinances of the City of McAllen, including, but not limited to, the building code and the electrical code. All reasonable safety precautions shall be performed and safety devices installed in order to protect property of city and its inhabitants, including the receiving sets and apparatus of customers and users of grantee's service. Wires, cables, conduits, or other lines shall be placed at a height above the ground or structures so as not to interfere with or damage property of city or its inhabitants. 
    Grantee shall have a sufficient number of maintenance and service personnel available in the City of McAllen at all times as are reasonably necessary who will service and maintain grantee's equipment and customer services when required. 
(Ord. No. 1968-22, § 1, 8-5-68) 
Section 5. - Use of other utility equipment and facilities. 
    Grantee shall have the right and privilege of negotiating for and securing permission from any and all other public utility and franchise holders operating within the City of McAllen, Texas, to use, for the purposes above set forth, the poles, bridges, viaducts, wires, cables, and other equipment and apparatus that are located and situated in, over, or under the public streets, alleys, and ways of the City of McAllen, Texas. 
Section 6. - Insurance coverage. 
    The grantee shall, at all times during the existence of this permit, carry and require its contractors to carry in an insurance company satisfactory to city, public liability insurance in at least the amount of $100,000.00 for injury to a single person, and at least $300,000.00 for injuries arising out of a single occurrence, and at least $50,000.00 property damage, the city to be furnished with a copy of such insurance policies, and to be furnished with satisfactory evidence or proof of payment of the premiums thereon. This requirement shall be effective when the grantee commences installation and construction of its system. 
Section 7. - Indemnification. 
    Grantee shall defend the city against all lawful claims or injuries to any person or property caused by the negligence of the grantee in the construction, operation, and maintenance of its property and in the event of a determination of liability, shall indemnify the city. More particularly the grantee herein, its successors and assigns, does hereby agree to indemnify and hold harmless the City of McAllen, Texas from any and all liability, claim, demand, or judgment growing out of any injuries to any person or property as a result of the violation or failure on the part of the grantee, its successors and assigns, to observe its proper duty or as a result of its negligence in whole or in part, arising out of or resulting from the construction, repair, extension, maintenance, or operation of its equipment of any kind or character used in connection with this permit. 
Section 8. - Service charges. 
    Grantee will provide its service to individual subscribers at maximum monthly charges as set forth in exhibit "A" attached hereto. No rate shall be charged for basic cable television service in excess of the rates provided herein before the board of commissioners has approved the amount to be charged, except special installation fees, pay television or late charges for delinquent payment bills which charges may be set by grantee and except that grantee may hereafter raise its rates above rates herein specified, provided that the percentage increase of such rate (or rates) over the rates established hereby, does not exceed the percentage of the increase in the Consumer Price Index, as maintained by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, from May 1, 1986 to the time of the increase and provided that 30 days' advance [notice] of such increase is given to the city in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1976-5, § D, 1-19-76; Ord. No. 1978-34, § 1, 7-3-78; Ord. No. 1981-12, § 1, 2-16-81; Ord. No. 1985-77, § 2, 12-2-85) 
Section 8(a). - Installation charge and reconnection charge. 
    Grantee may charge the installation, reconnection or addition of service fee set forth in exhibit "A" attached hereto. 
(Ord. No. 1976-5, § E, 1-19-76; Ord. No. 1978-34, § 2, 7-3-78; Ord. No. 1981-12, § 3, 2-16-81; Ord. No. 1985-77, § 3, 12-2-85) 
Editor's note- Exhibit "A" as referred to in sections 8 and 8(a) hereof, is not set out herein, but may be found on file in the city secretary's office. 
Section 9. - Assignment. 
    The right, privilege and license granted hereunder may be assigned to any corporation in which the grantee or its principal stockholders have the controlling interest; otherwise, the right, privilege and franchise granted hereunder shall not be assigned to any person, firm or corporation except upon the prior approval of the governing body of the city. No assignment to any person, firm or corporation shall be effective until the assignee has filed with the city secretary an instrument, duly executed, reciting the fact of such assignment, accepting the terms of this license, and agreeing to perform all the conditions hereof. Assignment of this ordinance from McAllen Cable Television Corporation to its parent Valley Cable TV, Inc., is specifically approved. 
(Ord. No. 1976-5, § F, 1-19-76; Ord. No. 1981-12, § 5, 2-16-81) 
Section 10. - Provision of system service. 
    The grantee shall maintain its current system in a state of good repair and make no changes in such system that might make its service unavailable in areas currently served. The grantee shall complete the extension of its system and offer service to all homes and businesses in the areas of McAllen indicated on exhibit "A," attached hereto and made a part hereof for all purposes, on or before December 31, 1982. The grantee shall continue to extend its system to all unserved areas in McAllen when such areas have reached a density of 50 homes per mile of plant required to reach the property to be served ("plant required to reach the property" shall mean all cable extensions excluding yard lines). Such extensions to unserved areas, not specifically included in exhibit "A" shall be completed within two years of the grantee's notification that the proper density exists. Grantee shall be notified that such density exists by the city manager of the City of McAllen. 
(Ord. No. 1978-34, § 3, 7-3-78; Ord. No. 1981-12, § 4, 2-16-81) 
Editor's note- Exhibit "A" referred to above is not included herein but is on file in the city secretary's office. 
Section 11. - Right to terminate. 
    Failure on the part of the grantee to comply with any of the provisions hereof shall automatically cancel and terminate this franchise; provided, however, that the City of McAllen shall give the grantee written notice of any such default at its post office address, and after the mailing of such notice grantee shall have 30 days' time within which to correct or cure any defaults pointed out by the City of McAllen. 
Section 12. - Severability. 
    If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be illegal, unconstitutional or in violation of the Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1976-5, § G, 1-19-76) 
Section 13. - Acceptance by grantee. 
    The grantee shall, within seven days from the passage of this ordinance file with the city clerk of the City of McAllen, Texas, a written acceptance of this ordinance. 
Section 14. - Complaint procedures. 
    Grantee and city have adopted procedures for the investigation and resolution of all complaints regarding community antenna television operations. Grantee shall maintain a local office for the purpose of investigating and resolving such complaints. The city hereby designates the office of the city manager to have primary responsibility for the continuing administration of this agreement and implementation of complaint procedure. Upon the adoption of this provision, grantee shall notify subscribers at the time of initial subscription to the cable system of the procedure for reporting and resolving complaints. 
(Ord. No. 1976-5, § H, 1-19-76) 
Section 15. - Review of compliance. 
    If at any time the city commission of the City of McAllen feels that the grantee is not complying with the provisions of this franchise, the city commission may call a public hearing after 30 days' written notice to the grantee to reconsider the rates allowed to be charged by the grantee herein, the provisions of section 11 of this franchise notwithstanding. The rates allowed in this franchise specifically take into consideration not only the plant of grantee in current operation but all future plant, its installation and operation, under the terms and provisions of this franchise, in arriving at whether or not the grantee is receiving a reasonable rate of return on its property used and useful in providing cable television service to the citizens of McAllen. Failure to provide all of the plant and service provided for in this franchise shall be a failure to provide all the property used and useful for providing cable television service in McAllen which was taken into consideration in setting the rates provided herein and thus will reduce the amount of return needed to provide the grantee a reasonable return, all other factors excluded. 
(Ord. No. 1978-34, § 4, 7-3-78) 
Section 16. - Public hearing regarding complaints. 
    Grantee agrees that it will, upon 30 days' written notice from city, attend any meeting of the city commission of the City of McAllen, or any public hearings scheduled by such city commission for the purpose of answering any questions of city officials or of interested citizens at such meeting or hearing. Such representatives will be prepared to discuss all aspects of the grantee's service and any planned additional service in the City of McAllen and to answer any complaints with respect thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1978-34, § 4, 7-3-78) 
    READ, CONSIDERED, APPROVED AND PASSED this 1st day of July, 1963. 
CITY OF McALLEN By  _____
PAUL G. VEALE, Mayor 
City of McAllen 
1300 Houston Avenue 
McAllen, Texas  
ALICE 
CABLE 
TELEVISION 
Mayor and City Commissioners  July 5, 1963 
City Hall 
McAllen, Texas 
Gentlemen: 
    As required by the ordinance you passed last Monday, the 1st of July, 1963, granting a franchise to McAllen Cable Television Corporation, written notice is hereby given of acceptance of this franchise as read. 
    I would like to express my personal appreciation to each of you for your patience and courtesy extended to me during the hearing on this franchise. I had no idea that so many problems would arise during the preparations and readings of this ordinance. 
    I am looking forward to becoming a part of McAllen, and I can assure you of the complete cooperation of my associates and guarantee that we will render the best service possible. 
Very truly yours, 
WILLIAM C. CUNNINGHAM  
DIVISION 2. - TEXAS CABLE PARTNERS, L.P., D/B/A TIME WARNER COMMUNICATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-77, §§ 1-15, adopted Nov. 26, 2001, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Div. 2, §§ 1-15, and Exhibits A-E, was at the discretion of the editor. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 1. - Definitions. 
1.1. In general. For the purposes of this franchise agreement, the following words, terms, phrases, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context in which they are used, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in the plural number include the singular number; and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The word "may" is not mandatory and is merely permissive. 
1.2. Additional insureds shall have the meaning defined in part 7. 
1.3. Affiliate and affiliated shall mean any entity controlling, controlled by or under common control with the entity in question. 
1.4. Authorized area shall mean the entire area from time to time within the corporate limits of municipality. 
1.5. Basic tier shall mean that service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and EG channels. 
1.6. Cable gross revenues shall mean all amounts derived directly or indirectly by company which are in connection with or attributable to the operation of the cable system within municipality for company's provision of cable services. 
1.6.1. Cable gross revenues shall include, without limitation, subscriber and customer revenues (including those for basic cable services; additional tiers; premium services; pay per view; services included under either or both section 1.7.1 and 1.7.2; program guides; forfeited deposits; installation, disconnection or service call fees; fees for the provision, sale, rental or lease of converters, remote controls, additional outlets and other customer premises equipment); revenues from the use of leased access channels; advertising revenues (national, regional or local); leased access rentals; commissions received from home shopping services or the like. 
1.6.2. Cable gross revenues shall include all amounts received during a period regardless of whether the amounts are to be paid in cash, in trade, or by means of some other benefit to company (excluding de minimus amounts, the value of free service to employees and municipality, and the like). 
Cable gross revenues shall exclude sales tax and uncollected accounts during the period, computed on a fair basis consistently applied. 
Cable gross revenues shall not include the revenue of any entity affiliated with company, including, without limitation, a supplier of programming of the company, to the extent that said revenue is also included in cable gross revenue of company. 
1.6.3. Revenues from subscribers shall be allocated to municipality based upon whether or not the location being provided cable service is located in municipality or not, and not by any other allocation method. 
1.6.4. Advertising revenues, home shopping network revenues or other revenues whose source cannot be specifically identified with a particular subscriber shall be allocated among the units of government served by company from the cable system "headend" serving municipality in proportion to the number of subscribers in each. 
1.6.5. Cable gross revenues shall include amounts collected from subscribers for franchise fees unless otherwise prohibited by applicable law. 
1.6.6. If and to the extent any state sales or use tax or local sales tax is extended to cable services, then amounts collected by company due to the application of such tax(es) to cable services shall not be included in cable gross revenues. 
1.6.7. Cable gross revenues shall include internet access service unless the same is determined not to be a cable service under applicable law. 
1.7. Cable services shall mean only: 
1.7.1. The one-way transmission to all subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming services, 
1.7.2. Subscriber interaction, if any, including but not limited to that which is used for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming services. 
1.8. Cable system or system shall mean company's system: 
1.8.1. Consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed and used solely to provide cable services which includes video programming to multiple subscribers within the authorized area, but such term does not include (i) a facility that serves only to re-transmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (ii) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way, (iii) a facility of a common carrier which is subject in whole or in part to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such a facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c)) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, except if the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services. For the purpose of the preceding, the term "interactive on-demand services" means a service providing video programming to subscribers over switched networks on an on-demand, point-to-point basis, but does not include service providing video programming prescheduled by the programming provider. 
1.9. Cable television business shall mean the provision by the company of cable services solely by means of the cable system. 
1.10. Commission shall mean the legislative body of municipality, or its designee. This subsection does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the commission. In any case in which a hearing is held pursuant to this franchise agreement, the commission may conduct the hearing or, in its sole discretion, may by resolution appoint a committee or subcommittee of the commission or a hearing officer to conduct the hearing and submit a proposal for decision to it, pursuant to procedures established by resolution. 
1.11. Company shall mean Texas Cable Partners, L.P., as the grantee of this franchise. 
1.12. Control (and its variants) shall mean effective control, by whatever means exercised, such as those described in report and order and further notice of proposed rule making in MM Docket 92-264, 8 FCC Rcd 6828 (1993) at paragraphs 22-28 (adopting broadcast transfer of control standards as then in effect), and in part 11 hereof. 
1.13. Drop shall mean the cable or wire that connects the distribution portion of a cable system to a customer's premises. 
1.14. Effective date shall be the date described as the effective date in Part 15. 
1.15. Emergency alert system shall have the meaning defined in part 4. 
1.16. Event of default shall have the meaning defined in part 12. 
1.17. Facilities means cables, conduits, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, hand holes, manholes, vaults, equipment, drains surface location markers, appurtenances and related facilities owned by company and to be installed in the public right-of-way and used by it in the provision of cable services. 
1.18. FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
1.19. Franchise or franchise agreement shall mean this document. 
1.20. Indemnitees shall have the meaning defined in part 7. 
1.21. Local off air channels shall mean full power "local commercial television stations" and "qualified non-commercial educational television stations" as such terms are defined in sections 614 and 615 of the Federal Communications Act of 1934 (as in effect on October 1, 1997) 
1.22. Manager shall mean the municipality's city manager or his or her designee. 
1.23. Municipality shall mean the City of McAllen. 
1.24. Municipal charter shall mean municipality's charter. 
1.25. Municipal code means the ordinances of municipality. 
1.26. Normal business hours shall mean those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers and, in any event, not less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, excluding holidays. In addition, "normal business hours" must include some evening hours (up to 7:00 p.m.) at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
1.27. Normal operating conditions shall mean those service conditions which are within the control of company. Those conditions which are not within the control of company include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are within the control of company include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular or seasonal demand periods, changes in the billing cycle, changes in channel lineups that are within company's control, and repairs, or maintenance of the cable system. 
1.28. EG channels means the educational channels and government channels provided by company on the cable system under part 6, for locally produced programming that is noncommercial, not-for-profit and non-competitive. 
1.29. Public right-of-way and public ways means the surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the surface of the particular public streets, road, sidewalks, alleys, and the ways, which may now or hereafter exist, that are held by and/or under the control of the municipality for use for utilities, excluding easements not intended for public works and further excluding property of city which is not a dedicated public right-of-way. This term shall not include any property owned by any person or agency other than the municipality, except as provided by applicable law or pursuant to an agreement between the municipality and any person permitting the municipality to authorize third parties to use such property. 
1.30. School systems shall mean McAllen Independent School System. 
1.31. Service interruption shall mean the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. 
1.32. Uncured event of default shall have the meaning defined in part 12. 
1.33. User shall mean a person authorized to operate or use a EG channel and shall include municipality. If several persons share the operation of a EG channel each person shall be a separate user. 
1.34. Video programming shall mean programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. 
(Ord. No. 2001-77, § 1, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 2. - Grant of rights. 
2.1. Permission/franchise agreement: Subject to all the terms and conditions contained herein, the Texas Constitution, the municipal charter, the municipal code and generally applicable municipal ordinances as from time to time in effect, municipality hereby grants company non-exclusive permission to erect, construct, install and maintain a cable system in, over, under, along and across the public ways in the authorized area and to transact a cable television business in such area. 
2.1.1. Company accepts the grant set forth above and agrees as set forth herein to erect, construct, install and maintain the cable system (including the emergency alert system) and, during the term of this franchise agreement, to transact a cable television business in municipality in conformance with the provisions of this franchise agreement. 
2.1.2. Municipality reserves the right to grant one or more additional franchises for a cable system in accordance with state and federal law; provided, however, and to the extent not prohibited by applicable federal or state law or regulation, municipality agrees that any grant of additional franchises by municipality to any other entity shall cover the entire territorial area of municipality and shall not be on terms and conditions (including, without limitation, the franchise fee) more favorable or less burdensome to the grantee of any such additional franchise than those which are set forth herein. 
2.2. Additional services: This franchise agreement may be amended by mutual agreement to allow the provision of such additional services as may be agreed to by company and municipality, or permission for the provision of additional services may be granted by a separate document. 
2.3. Municipality's rights in public ways: Company acknowledges that by this franchise agreement it obtains no rights to or further use of the public ways other than those expressly granted herein. 
2.4. Emergencies: Municipality may remove or damage portions of the cable system in the case of fire, disaster, or other emergencies, as determined by municipality. In such event neither municipality nor any agent, contractor or employee thereof shall be liable to company or its customers or third parties for any damages caused them or the cable system, such as for, or in connection with, protecting, breaking through, moving, removal, altering, tearing down, or relocating any part of the cable system. Where possible prior notice shall be given to company. In any event notice of such action shall be given to company after such removal or damage within two business days. 
2.5. Backup power: Company shall install an electric generator which starts automatically in the event of loss of conventional power to provide electric service to the cable system head-end and associated equipment in the event of a power failure. Company shall provide battery backup power (or an electric generator) at key locations on the cable system in the public ways where the loss of electric power might disrupt the provision of service within municipality such that the cable system shall operate for at least two hours even if electric service from conventional utility lines is interrupted. 
2.6. Compliance with law: Company shall be subject to and comply with all generally applicable and controlling local, state and federal laws, including the rules and regulations of any and all agencies thereof, whether presently in force or whether enacted or adopted at any time in the future. In constructing, maintaining and operating the cable system, company shall act in a good and workmanlike manner, observing high standards of engineering and workmanship and using materials of good and durable quality. Company shall comply in all respects with the National Electrical Safety Code; the National Electric Code; the Bellcore Code of Pole Line Construction; all rules, standards, practices, procedures and the like of the FCC; and the pole-attachment and conduit requirements in its agreements with other utilities whose poles and conduits it uses. 
2.7. Maintenance and repair: Company shall keep and maintain a proper and adequate inventory of maintenance and repair parts for the cable system. Company shall maintain or otherwise have available a work force of skilled technicians for cable system repair and maintenance. 
2.8. Permits: This franchise agreement does not relieve company of the obligation to obtain generally applicable permits, licenses and other approvals from municipality or other units of government, which are required for the construction, repair or maintenance of the cable system or provision of cable services; or from compliance with generally applicable municipal codes and ordinances such as zoning and land use ordinances, pavement cut ordinances, subdivision and project improvement ordinances, curb cut permits, building permits and the like. Notwithstanding the foregoing, company shall not pay fees to obtain applicable local licenses, permits, and authorizations required for the construction, installation, maintenance, or operation of its cable system. 
2.9. Right of condemnation reserved: Nothing in this franchise Agreement shall limit any right the municipality may have to acquire by eminent domain any property of company. 
2.10. Fees: Except as otherwise provided herein, nothing in this franchise agreement shall be construed to limit the authority of municipality to impose a generally applicable, non-discriminatory tax, fee, or other assessment of any kind on any person. 
2.11. Identification: All field employees and service personnel of company shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible identification card bearing their name and photograph. Every service vehicle of company shall be clearly identified as such to the public with, for example, the company logo, phone number, or the like plainly visible. 
(Ord. No. 2001-77, § 2, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 3. - Public ways and construction. 
    In the event that subsequent to the effective date of this agreement the municipality adopts an ordinance governing use of the public rights-of way by utilities and other users, company's utilization of the public rights-of way shall continue to be governed and controlled in all respects by this section 3 and other provisions of this agreement notwithstanding the later adoption of any such ordinance or anything to the contrary contained in such ordinance or this agreement. 
3.1. Easement usage: To the extent allowed by applicable state and federal law, this franchise agreement authorizes the construction of the cable system over public ways, and through easements, within the authorized area and which have been dedicated for compatible uses, subject to the requirements in the balance of this section and of this franchise agreement. In using all easements, company shall comply with all federal, state, and generally applicable local laws and regulations governing the construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of a cable system. Without limitation, company shall ensure that: 
3.1.1. The safety, functioning and appearance of the property and the convenience and the safety of other persons not be adversely affected by the installation or construction of facilities necessary for the cable system; 
3.1.2. The cost of the installation, construction, operation, or removal of such facilities be borne by company; and 
3.1.3. The owner of the property be justly compensated by company for any damages caused by the installation, construction, operation, or removal of such facilities by company. 
3.2. No adverse impact upon other authorized users. Except as permitted by applicable law or this agreement, company shall not damage, or impair the use of, any public right-of-way or any other authorized facilities therein, including without limitation, streets, sidewalks, sanitary sewers, storm drains, water mains, gas mains, poles, overhead or underground wires or conduits without the prior written approval of the municipality which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. 
3.3. Safe condition. Company shall construct and keep its facilities in good and safe condition and free from any nuisance. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, company shall comply with: the construction, maintenance and other standards contained in the municipality's general construction permitting requirements. 
3.4. Weather. No underground installation or other work activities may be initiated when weather conditions prohibit proper restoration of disturbed areas in a timely manner. The manager may waive the preceding requirement on a case by case basis, with conditions appropriate to the circumstances. 
3.5. Barriers. While any portion of the streets or public ways are open, company shall maintain reasonable barriers, lights at night and other warnings to the users of the streets or public ways in compliance with applicable government regulations requiring and pertaining to such barriers or as reasonably requested by the manager. 
3.6. Traffic control. For all work in the streets or public ways which may disturb the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, company shall employ roadway closure or partial closure practices, as delineated in the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices or comparable manual. 
3.7. Repair of any damage. Company shall be responsible for any damage to municipality streets, existing utilities, curbs and sidewalks that is caused by its installation, maintenance, repair or removal of its facilities in public right-of-way, and shall repair, replace and restore in kind any such damage at its sole expense. In addition, company shall restore property affected by construction and/or repair of facilities to a condition that is, to the extent possible, substantially similar to or better than the condition of the property prior to the performance of said work. 
3.8. Tree trimming. Company may trim trees upon and overhanging the streets and public ways so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into contact with the cable system. No trimming shall be performed in the streets or public ways without previously informing municipality. Except in emergencies all trimming of trees on public property shall have the advance approval of municipality and all trimming of trees on private property shall require notice to the property owner. 
3.9. Trees and landscaping. The following applies to trees or shrubs within the streets or public ways. 
a.  All damaged trees or shrubs shall be replaced or restored in a mutually agreeable fashion. 
b.  Replacement sod and seeded areas shall be maintained until the lawns are established. 
3.10. Emergency notification. Company shall provide the manager with a 24-hour emergency telephone number at which a named responsible adult representative of company (not voice mail or a recording) can be accessed in the event of an emergency. 
3.11. Right of inspection. Municipality shall have the right to inspect all reconstruction or installation work and to make such tests as it deems necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the franchise agreement, municipal code, or other pertinent provisions of law. 
3.12. Notice of construction to municipality. Throughout the period of construction or reconstruction, company shall give municipality written notice, a reasonable time before the commencement of construction or reconstruction in any block (meaning an area typically bounded by four streets) but in no event shall said notice be given less than seven business days before such commencement. 
3.13. Notice of construction to residents. Company shall provide advance notice, appropriate to the circumstances, prior to entry whenever desiring to enter or cross any private property within municipality or work in abutting streets or public ways. During construction, maintenance work, installation work, and outage repair, company shall attempt to notify affected residences prior to entering private property. Work performed in an emergency in easements, streets or public ways to repair the system is exempted from this section. 
3.14. Utility crowding. In areas of municipality where the manager finds that the streets or public ways will not readily accommodate further underground facilities, company shall meet with the manager in conjunction with other right-of-way users to devise a plan to manage future undergrounding. 
3.15. Removal of obsolete facilities/cooperation. When company opens a trench, accesses a conduit or boring, or is working on aerial locations, it shall remove all unusable and inactive cable system facilities (excluding those held for future use) from such locations. 
a.  When company opens a trench or access to borings, it shall notify municipality, which may notify all other recipients of franchise agreements, franchisees and permittees in advance of such work, so that they may remove their obsolete facilities from such locations or add new facilities. Company shall cooperate with such persons in such activities provided such persons proceed in an expeditious manner. 
b.  When company receives notification that another entity is opening a trench or access to borings, company shall remove all of its obsolete facilities from such location while they are open. 
3.16. New developments. Provided company receives reasonable advance notice from the developer and is able to obtain access to rights-of-way on terms and conditions acceptable to company, company shall install conduit (excluding only drops to individual dwelling units) in all new subdivisions and developments on the earlier of the date on which the installation of electric facilities or the date on which and telephone facilities are installed in such subdivision or development, such that company shall make service available in accordance with the requirements of subsection 4.4. 
3.17. Preventive maintenance. Upon completion of reconstruction, company shall institute and adhere to a preventive maintenance program at least as rigorous and stringent as those established from time to time by the FCC. 
3.18. Parallel installation. All cables and wires or other work shall be installed parallel with existing telephone and electric utility wires whenever reasonably possible. Multiple cable configurations shall whenever reasonably possible be in parallel arrangement and bundled in accordance with engineering and safety considerations and all applicable codes. 
3.19. Identification. Company shall identify its cable system and cable drops (by color code, stamping, engraving, tags, stickers, or other appropriate method selected by company) so as to distinguish company's cables from that of all other cable operators, utilities, and service providers in the authorized area. 
3.20. Ownership of installed cable. Ownership of cable home wiring shall accord with federal law. 
3.21. Easements. Any easements over or under private property necessary for the construction or operation of the cable system shall be arranged by company. Any casements over or under property owned by municipality other than the public ways shall be separately negotiated with municipality, except that company may use general utility easements that are dedicated for compatible uses on property owned by municipality as set forth in section 3.1. 
3.22. Joint use by municipality. Company shall permit, with negotiated, reasonable compensation and conditions, the joint use of excess height, space and capacity in its poles, conduits and facilities located in the streets or public ways by municipality or other governmental entities. 
3.23. Compliance with law. Company shall be subject to all generally applicable laws, ordinances or regulations of municipality in the course of constructing, installing, operating or maintaining the cable system in municipality. Company shall comply with all generally applicable zoning and land use restrictions as may exist or may hereafter be amended. 
3.24. Poles. Company shall not erect any utility poles without the advance written permission of municipality for the pole(s) in question, which permission shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
3.25. Underground facilities. Company's cable, wires and other equipment shall be placed underground wherever existing utilities are underground. If municipality in the future so requires, for all or any portion of municipality, that all the utilities in such area place their lines underground, then company shall in concert with other utilities and in a reasonable period of time place its existing and its future cable, wires, or other equipment in such area underground without charge, expense or liability therefor to municipality. If municipality reimburses any right-of-way user for such undergrounding, company shall be similarly reimbursed. 
3.26. Underground street crossing. Whenever company must place the cable system or other facilities beneath the traveled or paved portion of the streets or public ways, unless otherwise approved in advance by the manager, company shall do so by directional boring and not by excavation of a trench in which to place cable conduit. Directional boring shall be done wherever technically and economically possible so that the excavations necessary for it are not in the paved portion of the right-of-way. On a case-by-case basis, the manager may request, and company agrees to consider, placement of such facilities by directional boring and not by excavation of a trench in which to place cable conduit. 
3.27. Temporary relocation. Upon ten business days notice, company shall either temporarily raise or lower its wires or other equipment upon the request of any person, including without limitation, a person holding a building moving permit issued by municipality. Company may charge a reasonable rate for this service, not to exceed its actual costs with an advance deposit of the estimated cost. 
3.28. Pavement cut coordination. Company shall coordinate its construction program and all other work in the streets and public ways with municipality's program for street construction, rebuilding and resurfacing (collectively, "street resurfacing"). Company shall meet with the manager at manager's request to this end. 
a.  The goals of such coordination shall be to require company to conduct all work in the streets and public ways in conjunction with or immediately prior to any street resurfacing planned by municipality. 
b.  Without express permission from municipality, company shall not cut or otherwise breach or damage the surface of any paved street or public way within 96 months after such public way has been resurfaced. 
3.29. Vacation. If a street or public way where company has facilities is vacated, eliminated, discontinued or closed, company shall be notified of same and all rights of company under this franchise agreement to use same shall terminate and company shall immediately remove the cable system from such street or public way unless company obtains any necessary easements from the affected property owners to use the former street or public way or a court orders the provisions of such easements. Where reasonably possible and to the extent consistent with the treatment of other utility facilities in the former street or public way, municipality shall reserve easements for company to continue to use the former street or public way. Company shall bear the cost of any removal or relocation of the cable system unless municipality reimburses other right-of-way users or the vacation is primarily for the benefit of a private party, in which case the private party shall bear such costs. company shall be provided 30 days notice of any proposed vacation proceedings involving its facilities. 
3.30. As-builts/location of facilities. Company shall keep accurate, complete and current maps and records of the cable system and its facilities and shall provide copies to municipality as set forth below. Such maps and records shall be available for inspection by municipality only. municipality acknowledges that such maps contain proprietary information and municipality shall not disclose to, or share the same with, any third party. 
a.  Company shall furnish one complete set of "as-built" maps and records to municipality and company shall provide municipality copies of any new or revised "as-built" or comparable drawings as and if they are generated for portions of company's facilities located within municipality (and in no event later than 90 days after construction and activation of any portion of the cable system). Upon request by municipality in an emergency, company as soon as possible (but no more than one business day from the request) shall inform municipality of any known or documented changes from such maps and records previously supplied and shall mark up any maps provided by municipality so as to show the location of the cable system. 
b.  The "as built" maps shall include at a minimum all system and facility routings and the location of appurtenant structures, such as nodes, amplifiers, power supplies and system monitor test points, and shall be drawn to a scale and upon such media as mutually agreed by company and the manager. 
c.  Company agrees to provide, if one is available, such records in a form compatible with the municipality's geographical information system (GIS), using a program and format which accurately displays its "as built" cable system. In addition, company shall provide information and assistance on the GIS program it is using and its implementation so as to aid municipality in converting the layer into a form easily used by municipality and in using the layer. 
3.31. Utility notification program. Company shall participate in and be a member of the state's utility notification program, whether provided for by statute or otherwise. 
3.32. No cost to municipality. The construction, installation, operation, maintenance and removal of facilities shall be accomplished without cost or expense to the municipality, and in accord with such construction and other standards as the municipality may from time-to-time apply generally to all users of the public right-of-way, and shall be accomplished in such manner as not to endanger persons or property, or unreasonably obstruct access to, travel upon or other use of the specified public right-of-way. 
3.33. Removal. Company shall remove or relocate, without cost or expense to municipality, only if such removal or relocation is at the request of the municipality, the facilities it installs under this agreement if and when made necessary by (i) any change of grade, alignment or width of any street; (ii) any changes to the municipality's water system, storm sewers or sanitary sewers; (iii) construction, maintenance or operation of any other municipality underground or aboveground facilities, and/or (iv) relocation of roadway needed to improve traffic conditions. If such removal or relocation is at the request of or for the convenience of a third party, then such third party shall be obligated for any costs or expenses incurred by company, which shall be prepaid at any time before construction commences. Said removal or relocation may be completed within 60 days following written notification by municipality, or such shorter period as the municipality may reasonably direct in the event of an emergency. In the event company fails to remove or relocate its facilities within such period, municipality may cause the same to be done at the sole expense of company. The municipality for its own and on behalf of any third party, will cooperate and issue, on an expedited basis, all permits necessary to enable company to relocate its facilities without disruption to its service. If municipality reimburses any right-of-way user for such removal or relocation, company shall be similarly reimbursed. 
3.34. Submission of plan of complete system to municipality. Company shall, within 60 days following a written request from municipality, but no more often than annually, provide the city engineer with a map showing the location of all facilities which company may plan to construct in any public right-of-way within the municipality at any time during the next year, provided, however, that company may change any such plans in the future. 
3.35. Discontinuance and removal of the system. In accordance with applicable law, upon the revocation, or expiration and non-renewal of this franchise agreement, either (a) by mutual agreement of municipality and company, (b) by company's acquiescence or failure to challenge same, or (c) by a final order of a court which company either does not appeal or from which there is no further right of appeal, then the following shall occur: company shall immediately discontinue the provision of cable services and all rights of company to use the streets and public ways shall cease. Company, at the direction of municipality, shall remove its cable system, including all supporting structures, poles, transmission and distribution portions of the system and other appurtenances, fixtures or property from the streets and public ways, in, over, under, along, or through which they are installed within six months of the revocation, or expiration and non-renewal except that (a) company may abandon its facilities in place with municipality's consent, and (b) company cannot remove underground facilities without municipality's consent in advance, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. Prior to any removal company shall notify municipality and persons owning property abutting public ways where removal will occur. Company shall also restore any property, public or private, to the condition in which it existed prior the installation, erection or construction of its cable system, including any improvements made to such property subsequent to the construction of its cable system. Restoration of streets and municipal property, including, but not limited to, the public ways, shall be in accordance with the directions and specifications of municipality, and all generally applicable laws, ordinances and generally applicable regulations, at company's sole expense. If such removal and restoration is not completed within six months after the revocation, or expiration and non-renewal, all of company's property remaining in the affected streets and public ways shall, at the option of municipality, be deemed abandoned and shall, at the option of municipality, become its property or municipality may obtain a court order compelling company to remove same. In the event company fails or refuses to remove its cable system or to satisfactorily restore all areas to the condition in which they existed prior to the original construction of the cable system, municipality, at its option, may perform such work and if such work is performed within one year of the revocation, or expiration and non-renewal of this franchise agreement collect the costs thereof from company. No surety on any performance bond shall be discharged until municipality has certified to company in writing that the cable system has been dismantled, removed, and all other property restored, to the satisfaction of municipality. 
3.36. Failure to discontinue service. In the event that company fails to discontinue the provision of cable services pursuant to the terms set forth in section 3.39 then company shall continue to pay franchise fees as herein provided. 
3.37. Removal or relocation of facilities. Company shall, after the removal or relocation of its facilities, at either its own cost or the cost of third persons, repair and return the public right-of-way on which the facilities had been located to a safe and satisfactory condition in accordance with the generally applicable construction standards and specifications established by municipality. Should company remove or relocate its facilities in the public right-of-way, it shall give municipality not less than ten days' prior written notice of its intent to do so. before proceeding with removal or relocation work, company shall obtain such additional generally applicable permits as may be required by the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 2001-77, § 3, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 4. - Cable service. 
4.1. Programming services: Company shall include in the video programming it offers subscribers the following: 
4.1.1. Company agrees to complete an upgrade of the system to 750 MHz in accordance with the specifications in Exhibit A. 
4.1.2. For each of the following broad categories of programming, at least one channel 20 hours or more of whose daily programming is in the category in question: 
4.1.2.1. Weather programming. 
4.1.2.2. News programming. 
4.1.2.3. Public affairs programming. 
4.1.2.4. Sports programming. 
4.1.2.5. Children and family entertainment programming. 
4.2. Service provided: Cable service shall at all times include at least 64 activated channels of programming. 
4.3. Access to service: Except as otherwise provided by applicable law, Company shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate on the availability or rates, terms or conditions of cable services provided to actual or potential subscribers on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, location within municipality, or difficulty in constructing drops, provided such subscribers' obligations to company are fulfilled, including but not limited to the timely payment of bills. Company shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and generally applicable local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination. 
4.4. Service: No line extension charge or comparable charge shall be imposed on any current or potential subscriber for extensions of the cable television system whenever the company receives requests for service by a potential subscriber and there are at least five dwelling units within 1,320 cable bearing strand feet (one-quarter mile) of company trunk or distribution cable and company shall extend its cable system to such potential subscriber(s) at no cost to said potential subscriber(s). The 1,320 feet distance or any multiple thereof shall be measured in extension length from trunk and feeder cable which is located within the public ways or an existing available easement. Service to subscribers not meeting the foregoing line extension formula shall be prorated between Company and the subscribers requesting service. 
4.5. Drops: Company's standard installation charge shall include a 150-foot aerial drop from the existing distribution system, such that current or potential subscribers shall only be charged for a drop to the extent the drop serving them requires underground installation or exceeds 150 aerial feet, measured from the tap on the distribution portion of the cable system to the subscriber's premises. 
4.5.1. Upon the termination of service, company shall either entirely remove its drop or secure the drop in a method reasonably acceptable to municipality. 
4.6. Free service: Company shall provide without any installation charge or monthly charge one free cable system video outlet connection in each municipal building or facility located within 150 aerial feet of company's existing distribution system; on each campus of a public, private, charter and parochial school serving no less than 100 students between grades kindergarten through 12, and shall allow municipality at its cost and each such school at its cost without additional charge, to extend such service to some or all rooms, classrooms and auditoriums. company shall, at cost borne by municipality or school, extend service to buildings beyond 150 feet of company's existing distribution system. 
4.6.1. In addition, one service outlet (which shall be at a location designated by municipality within 150 aerial feet of company's existing distribution system) shall receive without charge all basic, expanded basic, digital and premium programming provided by company, not to include pay-per-view. Such service shall be provided in such a manner that municipality may monitor the programming and use of the cable system for compliance with this franchise agreement, FCC technical standards, and other applicable law. The services provided according to the preceding sentence shall be in an office location and not in a location conducive to public viewing. 
4.6.2. Company shall not provide free or discounted service to elected or appointed officials of municipality or to municipality's employees, agents or officers. The term "free or discounted service" shall mean any service on terms and conditions other than those available to residents of municipality generally. 
4.7. Continuity of service: Company shall operate the cable system and provide cable service 24 hours per day, seven days per week. Company shall voluntarily interrupt the provision of cable service only with good cause and for the shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations (or as otherwise provided herein), only after periodic cablecasting notice of service interruption, including at the same time of day as the anticipated interruption. Service may be interrupted between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. for routine testing, maintenance and repair, without notification, any night except Friday, Saturday, or Sunday, or the night preceding a holiday. 
4.8. Interconnection: Upon written request by municipality, company shall promptly enter into negotiations with other cable operators regarding the process of interconnecting the cable system with other cable systems serving municipality or any portion thereof, so as to transmit, receive, and exchange EG programming with such systems or the entities operating EG channels on such systems. The cost of interconnecting the EG channels of such other systems with company's system shall be borne by the operator of such other system(s). 
4.8.1. Company shall cooperate with any interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or local, state or federal governmental entity which regulates or provides for the interconnection of cable systems affecting municipality. 
4.9. Emergency alert system: Company shall provide without charge to municipality an emergency alert system ("emergency alert system") consistent with applicable federal and state law. 
4.9.1. Company shall install as a part of its cable system, and shall operate throughout the term hereof, an emergency alert system ("EAS") or successor to that system in accordance with all requirements imposed from time to time by the FCC including without limitation the requirement currently set forth in the FCC regulations that a cable television system transmit a visual EAS message on at least one channel and that a cable system also provide video interruption and audio EAS message on all channels with the video further stating which channel is carrying the visual message. In establishing its EAS system, company shall, in accordance with FCC regulations, cooperate with municipality and duly authorized regional emergency management officials on the use and operation by area governmental authorities of the emergency alert system. 
(Ord. No. 2001-77, § 4, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 5. - Cable customer service. 
5.1. Customer service standards: Company shall at all times comply with the provisions of the customer service, consumer protection and technical standard provisions of Exhibit E of this franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2001-77, § 5, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 6. - Cable system access. 
6.1. EG channels generally: Company shall provide on the cable system educational channels and government channels as specified herein at no charge to the user. All EG channels shall be placed on the basic tier of service (and in the lowest tier of service, if different) and shall be available to all subscribers. Such channels shall be available 24 hours per day throughout the term of this franchise agreement. 
6.1.1. The EG Channels can be in either analog (six MHz NTSC) or digital format and shall be utilized for non-commercial purposes only. 
6.1.2. Company shall not exercise any editorial control over any educational or governmental use of channel capacity. 
6.1.3. A given EG channel shall not be moved from one channel number to another number more often than once every 36 months. Company must give municipality and each user at least 90 days notice of any change in the channel number on which a EG channel will be distributed on company's cable system. The preceding sentences shall not apply to changes that are beyond company's control, such as a television station under federal law being able to require carriage on a channel currently used by a EG channel. Company shall reimburse users of such channel for their reasonable costs (not to exceed $250.00 per channel location change, and not to exceed a total of three users) in connection with the change such as changing stationery, changing logos, changing advertising materials and generally notifying subscribers and potential subscribers of the change. 
6.1.4. Every user of an EG channel (other than municipality) shall have in full force and effect a contract with municipality relating to the EG channel it uses prior to providing programming on such channel. 
6.2. Number of EG channels: 
6.2.1. Company shall provide two channels for EG usage ("EG channels"). 
6.3 Allocation of EG channels: EG channels are and shall be allocated by municipality. 
6.3.1. The initial allocation of EG channels amongst and between various uses and users is as set forth below. 
6.3.2. One government channel for use by municipality. 
6.3.3. One educational channel to be administered and utilized by the school systems as determined by municipality. 
6.3.4. Company may use the EG channels for the provision of video programming if the EG channels are not being used. 
6.4. Signal input points: 
6.4.1. Company shall provide, without charge to municipality, transmission capability for one video signal from each of the locations set forth on Exhibit C to City Hall, 1300 Houston, McAllen, Texas, for purposes of receiving programming for the government access channel. Municipality may change such locations from time to time, upon reasonable notice to company. Costs for such relocations shall be borne by the municipality. 
6.4.2. Company shall provide return feed capability from City Hall, 1300 Houston McAllen, Texas and from McAllen Public Safety Building, Pecan Boulevard, McAllen, Texas, to Company's headend for purposes of transmitting government access programming on the government access channel transmitted to subscribers. In addition, company shall provide return feed capability from McAllen Independent School District, 2000 N. 23rd Street to Company's headend for purposes of transmitting educational access programming on the educational access channel transmitted to subscribers. 
6.4.3. Company shall provide the modulators and demodulators necessary to transport the signal. All other equipment shall be the responsibility of the municipality. 
6.5. EG access assistance: Company shall provide to municipality equipment grants for the EG channels equal to $1 for each $5.00 spent by the municipality on EG programming in years one, two and three of the franchise, up to a total of $1.00 per paying customer per year. Municipality shall allocate such grants among the entities administering the EG channels as it determines is in the public interest. Prior to company's obligation to provide the funding herein, municipality shall give company an accounting and any reasonably requested backup documentation of monies spent by municipality. Within 60 days of the execution of this agreement, municipality shall provide such an accounting of monies spent for the 12-month period prior to the effective date of this franchise. Upon receipt and approval of municipality's documented expenses, company shall provide the initial equipment grant. Grants for year 2 and year 3 shall be made on or near the anniversary of the initial grant following the same procedure. Company shall list all educational and governmental access channels on all print and cablecast electronic program guides, with descriptions on each channel, such as "government channel," "education channel." 
6.5.1. Company shall include written information about educational and governmental access programming and activities in its customer handbook, and in materials given to new subscribers, provided such materials are provided by the entities operating those channels, at those entities' cost. 
6.6. Educational services: For as long as they are available to company, company shall offer cable in the classroom guides to the schools in the municipality served by company, free of charge. 
6.7. Leased access: Company shall make available suitable channel capacity for leased access by third parties not affiliated with company to the extent from time to time required by federal law and regulations. Company shall have the sole responsibility for all operating aspects and for the fixing of rates and conditions for leased access use. 
(Ord. No. 2001-77, § 6, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 7. - Indemnity and insurance. 
    Except in connection with the use of EG channels and the emergency alert system, and instances involving negligence on the part of the hereinafter mentioned parties, company shall indemnify municipality as set out in this section. 
7.1. Disclaimer of liability: Municipality shall not at any time be liable for injury or damage occurring to any person or property from any cause whatsoever arising out of company's construction, maintenance, repair, use, operation, condition or dismantling of company's cable system or company's provision of cable service, unless said injury or damage results from the negligence or misconduct of municipality. 
7.2. Indemnification: Company shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless municipality and all associated, affiliated, allied and subsidiary entities of municipality, now existing or hereinafter created, and their respective officers, boards, commissions, employees, agents, and attorneys, (hereinafter referred to as "indemnitees"), from and against: 
7.2.1. Any and all liability, obligation, damages, penalties, claims, liens, out-of-pocket costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or be asserted against the indemnitees by reason of any act or omission of company, its personnel, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors, resulting in personal injury, bodily injury, sickness, disease or death to any person or damage to, loss of or destruction of tangible or intangible property, libel, slander, invasion of privacy and unauthorized use of any trademark, trade name, copyright, patent, service mark or any other right of any person, firm or corporation, which may arise out of or be in any way connected with the construction, reconstruction, installation, operation, maintenance or condition of the cable system (including those arising from any matter contained in or resulting from the transmission of programming over the cable system but excluding any programming provided by the indemnitees which is transmitted over the cable system), the provision of cable services or company's failure to comply with any federal, state or generally applicable local statute, ordinance or regulation. 
7.2.2. Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens, out-of-pocket costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and other consultants), which are imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees by reason of any claim or lien arising out of work, labor, materials or supplies provided or supplied to company, its contractors or subcontractors, for the installation, construction, reconstruction, operation or maintenance of the cable system or provision of cable services, and, upon the written request of municipality, company shall cause such claim or lien covering municipality's property to be discharged or bonded within 30 days following such request. 
7.2.3. Any and all liability, obligation, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or be asserted against the indemnitees by reason of any financing or securities offering by company or its affiliates for violations of the common law or any generally applicable laws, statutes, or regulations of the State of Texas or the United States, including those of the Federal Securities and Exchange Commission, by company. 
7.2.4. Company's obligation to indemnify indemnitees under this franchise agreement shall extend to claims, losses, and other matters covered hereunder that are caused or contributed to by the negligence of one or more indemnitees. However, in such case the obligation to indemnify shall be reduced in proportion to the negligence of the indemnitees. An example of such a reduction is set forth on Exhibit D. 
7.3. Assumption of risk: Company undertakes and assumes for its officers, agents, contractors and subcontractors and employees (collectively "company" for the purpose of this section), all risk of dangerous conditions, if any, on or about any municipality-owned or controlled property, the streets and public ways caused by company, and company hereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the indemnitees against and from any claim asserted or liability imposed upon the indemnitees for personal injury or property damage to any person (other than from indemnity's negligence) arising out of company's installation, operation, maintenance or condition of the cable system or company's failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation. 
7.4. Defense of indemnitees: In the event any action or proceeding shall be brought against the indemnitees by reason of any matter for which the indemnitees are indemnified hereunder, company shall, upon notice from any of the indemnitees, at company's sole cost and expense, resist and defend the same with legal counsel selected by company; provided, however, that company shall not admit liability in any such matter on behalf of the indemnitees without the written consent of such indemnitees, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld; and provided that indemnitees shall not admit liability for, nor enter into any compromise or settlement of, any claim for which they are indemnified hereunder, without the prior written consent of company. In the event the indemnitees fail to abide by their obligations hereunder, company shall have the right to withdraw its indemnification hereunder. 
7.5. Notice, cooperation and expenses: The indemnitees shall give company prompt notice of the making of any claim or the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of part 7. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the indemnitees from cooperating with company and participating in the defense of any litigation by their own counsel. 
7.6. Insurance: Company shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect throughout the term of this franchise insurance with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas and acceptable to the municipality. All companies will be required to be rated A-VII or better by A.M. Best or A-minus or better by Standard and Poors. Company shall provide municipality with proof of such insurance so required at the time of filing the acceptance of franchise. 
7.6.1. Worker's compensation insurance meeting Texas statutory requirements and employer's liability insurance with minimum limits of $100,000.00 for each accident. 
7.6.2. Comprehensive commercial general liability insurance with minimum limits of $2,000,000.00 as the combined single limit for each occurrence of bodily injury, personal injury and property damage. 
7.6.3. Comprehensive automobile insurance with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 for owned/leased, non-owned and hired automobiles. 
7.6.4. Coverage for programming on channels that are directly or indirectly controlled by grantee with minimum limits of $2,000,000.00 for libel, slander and copyright violations. 
7.6.5. The coverage amounts set forth above may be met by a combination of underlying and umbrella policies so long as in combination the limits equal or exceed those stated. Notwithstanding the foregoing, at any time during the term of this agreement if the "caps" to which municipalities are subject pursuant to the Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code exceed the amounts indicated herein, then the required insurance shall be the greater of the amount indicated herein or such "caps." Municipality agrees to provide company with notice and documentation of any revised "caps." 
7.7. Named insured: All policies, except for business interruption and worker's compensation policies, shall name the "City of McAllen, a municipal corporation of the State of Texas and all associated, affiliated, allied and subsidiary entities of the municipality, now existing or hereafter created, and their respective officers, boards, commission, employees, and agents, as their respective interests may appear" as additional insureds (herein referred to as the "additional insureds"). Each policy which is to be endorsed to add additional insureds hereunder, shall contain cross-liability wording, as follows: 
"In the event of a claim being made hereunder by one insured for which another insured is or may be liable, then this policy shall cover such insured against whom a claim is or may be made in the same manner as if separate policies had been issued to each insured hereunder." 
7.8. Evidence of insurance: Certificates of insurance for each insurance policy required to be obtained by company in compliance with this part, shall be filed and maintained with municipality annually during the term of the franchise agreement. Company shall immediately advise the indemnitees of any claim or litigation that may result in liability to them. 
7.9. Cancellation of policies of insurance: All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this franchise agreement shall contain the following endorsement: 
"At least 60 days prior written notice shall be given to the City of McAllen by the insurer of any intention not to renew such policy or to cancel, replace or materially alter same, such notice to be given by registered mail to the parties named in part 7 of the franchise agreement." 
7.10. Deductibles: Company agrees to indemnify and save harmless the indemnitees and additional insureds from and against the payment of any retainage or deductible and from the payment of any premium on any insurance policy required to be furnished by this franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2001-77, § 7, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 8. - Fees and payments. 
8.1. Franchise fee: Company shall pay municipality throughout the term of this franchise agreement a franchise fee in an amount equal to five percent of company's actual cable gross revenues received on a quarterly basis, as follows: 
8.1.1. Company shall pay franchise fees on a quarterly basis as provided below: 
Due Date Quarter May 15 First (January 1-March 31) August 15 Second (April 1-June 30) November 15 Third (July 1-September 30) February 15 Fourth (October 1-December 31)  
8.1.2. Company shall file with the cable administrator with each quarterly franchise fee payment a written report, in a form consistent with that set forth in Exhibit B containing an accurate statement of company's cable gross revenues and the computation of the payment amount. 
8.2. Audit: Within four years of the date of submission of any franchise fee payment, municipality may audit company to verify the accuracy of franchise fees paid municipality. All records reasonably necessary for such audit shall be made available by company at a location in municipality, or if outside municipality at company's expense. Any undisputed additional amount due municipality shall be paid within 30 days of municipality's submitting an invoice for such sum, and if such sum shall exceed five percent of the total franchise fee which the audit determines should have been paid for any calendar year, company shall pay municipality's cost of auditing that calendar year as well. 
8.3. Permit fees: For as long as company pays franchise fees outlined in section 8.1 hereof, company shall have no obligation to pay municipality any other fees in connection with its utilization of the public rights-of-way. 
8.4. Interest: All sums not paid when due shall bear interest at a rate which is one percent over the prime rate then being charged by Chase Bank (or its successors), and computed monthly. 
8.5. Prior fees: Company shall pay the balance of its final franchise fee payment due under any prior franchise between company and municipality in conjunction with its first franchise fee payment obligation in accordance with the payment schedule established in section 8.1.1. It is understood that company will pay franchise fees during any expired term of the previous franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2001-77, § 8, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 9. - Cable rates and regulation. 
9.1. Rates: Company's rates and charges for the provision of cable services (and for related services, such as equipment rental, deposits, disconnect fees and downgrade fees) shall be subject to regulation by municipality to the full extent from time to time authorized by federal law. Municipality may from time to time elect not to regulate company's rates and charges, and any such election shall not waive municipality's rights to regulate in the future. 
9.2. Regulation: Municipality reserves the right to regulate company, the cable system, and the provision of cable services to the extent from time to time permitted by federal law. 
9.3. Uniformity: Company's rates and charges for its cable services shall be uniform throughout the authorized area, except as otherwise allowed by federal law. 
9.4. Notice of certain costs: If company's rates are regulated, then in accordance with applicable FCC rules, company shall notify municipality in writing at least annually of the identity of all costs which company claims are external costs potentially entitled to pass through to cable service subscribers under the FCC rate regulation rules in effect on the effective date or subsequent law with a similar effect. 
(Ord. No. 2001-77, § 9, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 10. - Term. 
10.1. Term: This franchise agreement shall expire 15 years after the effective date outlined in section 15.20, plus any extensions. 
10.2. Termination: Subject to applicable law, this franchise agreement and all rights of company hereunder shall automatically terminate on the expiration of the term of this franchise agreement. 
10.2.1. Municipality acknowledges that as of the date of this franchise agreement its ability to enforce the preceding sentence is limited by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, and applicable FCC regulations. 
10.3. Performance evaluation sessions: Municipality and company may hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions every three years from the anniversary date of company's award of this franchise agreement and as may be required by federal and state law. 
10.3.1. Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of this franchise agreement at the request of municipality or company, and upon 90 days written notice. 
10.3.2. All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation within municipality at least ten days prior to each session. If municipality makes a 30-second spot available at least seven days in advance in a mutually agreeable format, company shall notify its subscribers of all evaluation sessions by announcement displayed prominently on at least two channels of its cable system during prime time, for five consecutive days preceding each session. 
10.3.3. Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but not be limited to, service rate structures; franchise agreement fees, liquidated damages; application of new technologies; system performance; services provided; customer complaints; privacy; amendments to this franchise; judicial and FCC rulings; line extension policies; and municipal or company rules. 
(Ord. No. 2001-77, § 10, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 11. - Transfers, ownership and control. 
11.1. Operation of cable system: Only company and its affiliates shall operate, manage and maintain the cable system and the provision of cable services by use of the cable system. Company shall not otherwise directly or indirectly assign, in whole or in part, the operation, management or maintenance of the cable system or the provision of cable services by use of the cable system. 
11.1.1. Any deviation from this section 11.1 shall only be pursuant to the prior consent of municipality. 
11.1.2. This section shall not apply to company's employment contracts and other personnel decisions, nor shall it prohibit company from contracting for or subcontracting, in whole or in part, any operational, management or maintenance functions in connection with the cable system, so long as company does not relinquish its decision making authority over or its responsibilities hereunder for any particular function. 
11.2. Franchise agreement transfers: This franchise agreement, the cable system and any portion of the cable system shall not be transferred, leased, subleased, or assigned, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of municipality which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
11.2.1. For the purpose of this section 11.2 "transfer" and "transferred" shall not include a transfer solely for security purposes (such as the grant of a mortgage or security interest) but shall include any realization on the security by the recipient, such as a foreclosure on a mortgage or security interest. 
11.2.2. For the purpose of this section 11.2 "transfer" and "transferred" shall not include the replacement of components of the cable system in the course of ordinary maintenance and day-to-day operation. 
11.2.3. Company may, without approval by municipality, transfer or assign this franchise agreement to any entity controlling, controlled by or which is under the same common control as company provided the entity: assumes all of company's obligations and liabilities under this franchise agreement; agrees to comply with all provisions of this franchise agreement. Municipality shall be advised in writing of such transfer and of the entity's qualifications at least 60 days before such transfer occurs. 
11.3. Applications for consent/procedure/restrictions: If company seeks to obtain the consent of municipality to any transactions or matters described in section 11.1 or 11.2, (collectively "transfer"), company shall submit an application for such consent to municipality and shall submit or cause to be submitted to municipality such documents and information as required by federal law. The approval process shall be conducted consistent with federal laws and regulations governing such franchise transfers. 
11.3.1. Municipality shall have 120 days from the date of submission of an FCC Form 394 to act upon any such application for consent. If municipality fails to act upon such application for consent within 120 days, such application shall be deemed consented to unless municipality and company otherwise agree to an extension of time. 
11.3.2. Municipality shall not unreasonably withhold its consent to any proposed transfer. 
11.3.3. Nothing in any approval by municipality of an authorization of any transfer shall be construed to waive or release any rights of municipality in and to the streets, public ways and public places of municipality, property owned by municipality or as a release of any of municipality's police powers, or as an exercise of eminent domain. 
11.3.4. Municipality's granting of consent in any one instance shall not require it to grant consent in other instances. 
(Ord. No. 2001-77, § 11, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 12. - Defaults. 
12.1. Events of default: The occurrence, at any time during the term of the franchise agreement, of any one or more of the following events, shall constitute an event of default by the company under this franchise agreement. 
12.1.1. The failure of company to pay the franchise fee, Part 6 EG support fees or liquidated damages assessed pursuant to Parts 3, 5 or 13 hereof on or before the due dates specified herein. 
12.1.2. Company's breach or violation of any of the material terms, covenants, representations or warranties contained herein or company's failure to perform any material obligation contained herein. 
12.1.3. Company's failure to pay or cause to be paid any generally applicable and nondiscriminatory governmentally imposed taxes of any kind whatsoever, including but not limited to real estate taxes, income taxes and personal property taxes on or before the due date for same; provided, however, company shall not be in default hereunder with respect to the non-payment of taxes which are being disputed in good faith in accordance with applicable law. 
12.1.4. Excepting a transaction that is permissible under section 11, the dissolution or termination, as a matter of law, of company or any general partner of company without the prior approval of municipality, which shall not unreasonably be withheld. 
12.1.5. If company files a voluntary petition in bankruptcy; is adjudicated insolvent; obtains an order for relief under section 301 of the Bankruptcy Code (11 U.S.C. § 301); files any petition or fails to contest any petition filed against it seeking any reorganization, arrangement, composition, readjustment, liquidation, dissolution or similar relief for itself under any laws relating to bankruptcy, insolvency or other relief for debtors; seeks or consents to or acquiesces in the appointment of any bankruptcy trustee, receiver, master, custodian or liquidator of company, or any of company's property and/or this franchise agreement and/or of any and all of the revenues, issues, earnings, profits or income thereof; makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors; or fails to pay company's debts generally as they become due. 
12.2. Uncured events of default: Upon the occurrence of an event of default which can be cured by the immediate payment of undisputed money to municipality or a third party, company shall have 30 days from written notice from municipality to company of an occurrence of such event of default to cure same before municipality may exercise any of its rights or remedies provided for in part 13. Upon the occurrence of an event of default by company which cannot be cured by the immediate payment of undisputed money to municipality or a third party, company shall have 90 days from written notice from municipality to company of an occurrence of such event of default to cure same before municipality may exercise any of its rights or remedies provided for in part 13. 
12.2.1. If any event of default is not cured within the time period allowed for curing the event of default, as provided for herein, such event of default shall, without additional notice, become an uncured event of default, which shall entitle municipality to exercise the remedies provided for in part 13. 
(Ord. No. 2001-77, § 12, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 13. - Remedies. 
13.1. Remedies: Upon the occurrence of any uncured event of default as described in part 12, municipality shall be entitled to exercise any and all of the following remedies: 
13.1.1. The commencement of an action against company at law for monetary damages. 
13.1.2. The commencement of an action in equity seeking injunctive relief or the specific performance of any of the provisions which, as a matter of equity, are specifically enforceable. 
13.1.3. For a violation of a material provision of this franchise agreement, municipality shall have the right to forfeit and terminate the franchise agreement in accordance with the procedures outlined in 13.1.4 and upon the forfeiture and termination thereof this franchise agreement shall be automatically deemed null and void and have no force or effect, company shall remove the cable system from municipality (as set forth in section 3.37) as and when requested by municipality and municipality shall retain any portion of the franchise agreement fee and other fees or payments paid to it, or which are due and payable to it, to the date of the forfeiture and termination. 
13.1.4. Municipality shall notify the company of its intention to revoke, terminate or cancel this franchise. The written notice shall describe in reasonable detail the specific violation so as to afford company an opportunity to remedy the violation. Company shall have 90 days or such additional period of time as may be reasonably necessary subsequent to the receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation before Municipality may formally revoke, terminate or cancel this franchise. company may, within 30 days of receipt of the notice, notify municipality that there is a dispute as to whether the violation has, in fact, occurred. Such notice by company to municipality shall stay the 90-day period described above. Municipality shall hear company's dispute and shall determine whether a default or violation by company has occurred. In the event that municipality shall determine that a default or violation has occurred municipality shall supplement the decision with written findings of fact. If after hearing the dispute company has been found to be in default, company shall then have 90 days from such a determination to remedy the violation or failure. At any time after that 90-day period municipality may, by formal action at a public hearing affording reasonable notice and opportunity for company to be heard, revoke, terminate or cancel this franchise. 
13.2. Security fund: 
13.2.1. Company shall furnish municipality, no later than 30 days after the effective date, as security for the faithful performance by company of the provisions of this franchise agreement and compliance with all generally applicable orders, permits, and directions of any agency of municipality and the payment of all claims, liens, generally applicable fees, penalties and generally applicable taxes to municipality, a performance bond in the amount of $10,000.00. Failure to furnish or maintain said performance bond in a timely fashion, in the full amount required hereby, in effect during the entire term of this franchise agreement, and of any renewal or extension thereof, or (if later) company's fulfillment of its obligations under section 3.37, shall constitute a material breach of this franchise agreement. 
13.2.2. If company fails to make timely payment to municipality or its designee of any amount due as a result of this franchise agreement, or of other agreements between company and municipality; or fails to make timely payment to municipality of any generally applicable taxes due; or fails to repay municipality for damages and costs in accordance with the terms of this agreement; or fails to comply with any material provision of this franchise agreement which municipality reasonably determines can be remedied by an expenditure of monies, municipality may draw upon the performance bond an amount sufficient to repay municipality with interest and any penalties. 
13.2.3. Prior to drawing upon the performance bond, municipality shall follow the procedures outlines in section 13.1.4 to provide company with due process. Thereafter, municipality may send written notification of the amount, date and purpose of such drawing to company by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
13.2.4. If at the time of a drawing by municipality, the aggregate amount realized from the performance bond is insufficient to provide the total payment toward which the drawing is directed, the balance of such payment shall constitute an obligation of company to municipality until paid, at judgment rate. 
13.2.5. No later than 30 days after mailing of notification to company of a drawing pursuant to subsections 13.2.2 and 13.2.3 above, Company shall cause the performance bond to be restored to the full amount required hereby. Failure to timely restore the performance bond shall constitute a material breach of this franchise agreement. 
13.2.6. The rights reserved to municipality with respect to the part 3 reconstruction bond and this performance bond are in addition to all other rights of municipality, whether reserved by this franchise agreement or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such bond or letter of credit shall affect any other rights municipality may have. 
13.3. Remedies not exclusive: The rights and remedies of municipality set forth in this franchise agreement shall be in addition to and not in limitation of, any other rights and remedies provided by law or in equity. Municipality and company understand and intend that such remedies shall be cumulative to the maximum extent permitted by law and the exercise by municipality of any one or more of such remedies shall not preclude the exercise by municipality, at the same or different times, of any other such remedies for the same uncured event of default. However, notwithstanding this section 13.3 or any other provision of this franchise agreement, municipality shall not recover both liquidated damages and actual damages for the same violation, breach, non-compliance, or uncured event of default, either under part 13 or under any other provision of this franchise agreement. 
13.4. Liquidated damages: In addition to the remedies provided for in sections 13.1.2 and 13.1.3, liquidated damages in the amounts set forth below may be awarded municipality (individually and on behalf of subscribers) from company. Company acknowledges that the amounts of actual damages for the violations and uncured events of default set forth below will be difficult or impossible to ascertain; that the liquidated damages set forth below are a reasonable approximation of actual damages; that the actual damages are often incurred by municipality and subscribers and, while cumulatively large, are too small to be worth while for individual subscribers to pursue; and that this section 13.4 is intended to provide compensation to municipality and its subscribers and is not a penalty. 
13.4.1. For violations of part 11 hereof, liquidated damages not to exceed $500.00 per day. 
13.4.2. For violations of parts 6 and 7 hereof, liquidated damages not to exceed $500.00 per day. 
13.4.3. For uncured events of default other than violations of parts 6, 7, and 11 and section 3.1, liquidated damages not to exceed $200.00 for each day that the uncured event of default continues. 
13.5. Liquidated damages procedure: Liquidated damages may be awarded in accordance with the following procedure. 
13.5.1. Following notice from the manager, which notice, at manager's election, may be combined with the noticed described in section 13.5.2, company shall meet with manager to attempt to resolve the issue of what liquidated damages shall be awarded. If there is no resolution of such issue within 20 days of the mailing of the notice described in the first sentence then the commission may assess liquidated damages as described below. 
13.5.2. Municipality shall notify the company of its intention to assess liquidated damages. The written notice shall describe in reasonable detail the specific violation so as to afford company an opportunity to remedy the violation. Company shall have 90 days or such additional period of time as may be reasonably necessary subsequent to the receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation before municipality may damages. Company may, within 30 days of receipt of the notice, notify municipality that there is a dispute as to whether the violation has, in fact, occurred. Such notice by company to municipality shall stay the 90-day period described above. Municipality shall hear company's dispute and shall determine whether a default or violation by company has occurred. In the event that municipality shall determine that a default or violation has occurred municipality shall supplement the decision with written findings of fact. If after hearing the dispute company has been found to be in default, company shall then have 90 days for such a determination to remedy the violation or failure. At any time after that 90-day period municipality may, by formal action at a public hearing affording reasonable notice and opportunity for company to be heard assess liquidate. 
(Ord. No. 2001-77, § 13, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 14. - Provision of information. 
14.1. Filings: Upon reasonable request, company shall provide municipality or its attorneys with copies of (a) all documents specifically identified by municipality which company sends to the FCC or the state utilities or commerce commission (or similar successor agencies having jurisdiction over company), and (b) all records specifically identified by municipality and required by company to be maintained under Section 76 of the FCC regulations (47 C.F.R. Part 76) or successor sections. company's obligation herein shall be specifically limited to those documents and/or records pertaining to or including the City of McAllen franchise. 
14.2. Books and records: The municipality may review such of company's books and records, during normal business hours and on a non-disruptive basis, as are reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms hereof. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, records required to be kept by the company pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC, and financial information underlying the written report accompanying the franchise fee. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, company is not required to disclose personally identifiable subscriber information without the subscriber's consent in violation of Section 631 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, 47 U.S.C. Section 551, regarding the protection of subscriber privacy. To the extent permitted by law, municipality agrees to treat on a confidential basis any information disclosed by company to it under this section. In so according confidential treatment, disclosure of company's records by municipality shall be limited to only those of its employees, representatives and agents that have a need to know, and that are in a confidential relationship with municipality. Subject to applicable law, municipality agrees not to disclose such information to any competitor of company. 
(Ord. No. 2001-77, § 14, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 15. - General. 
15.1. Entire agreement: This franchise agreement, including the exhibits attached hereto, contain the entire agreement between the parties and all prior negotiations and agreements are merged herein and hereby superseded. 
15.2. Recitals: The representations set forth in the recitals at the start of this franchise agreement are material and are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this franchise agreement as though they were fully set forth in this part 15. 
15.3. Taxes: Nothing contained herein shall be construed to except company from any generally applicable tax, liability or assessment which may be authorized by law. 
15.4. State of art: Company shall make reasonable efforts to undertake construction and installation necessary to keep the system current with general developments in the cable industry in similarly sized and situated communities, as long as these developments are economically and technically feasible. For the purposes of this agreement, an improvement shall be economically feasible if grantee will realize a reasonable return on investment to provide the improvement within the remaining term of the franchise. 
15.5. Notices: Except as otherwise specified herein, all notices, consents, approvals, requests and other communications (herein collectively "notices") required or permitted under this franchise agreement shall be given in writing and addressed as follows: 
If to Municipality: 
City of McAllen 
Attn: City Manager's Office 
1300 Houston 
McAllen, Texas 78501 
With a copy to: 
James E. Darling 
City Attorney 
City of McAllen 
1300 Houston 
McAllen, Texas 78501 
If to Company: 
General Manager 
Time Warner Communications 
2921 South Expressway 83 
Harlingen, TX 78551-2327 
With a copy to: 
Division President 
Southwest Division 
300 Parker Square, Suite 210 
Flower Mound, TX 75028 
Either party to this franchise agreement may change its address or personnel for the receipt of notices at any time by giving notice thereof to the other as provided in this section. Any notice given by a party hereunder must be signed by an authorized representative of such party. 
15.5.1. Notices may be transmitted in any of the following four ways: 
15.5.2. By personal delivery, in which case they are deemed given when delivered. 
15.5.3. By delivery to Federal Express, United Parcel Service, or other nationally recognized overnight courier service, in which case they shall be deemed given when delivered to such service. 
15.5.4. By being deposited in the U.S. mail, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, in which case notice shall be deemed given when so deposited in the U.S. mail. 
15.5.5. By facsimile transmission where the sender's transmittal log shows successful transmission to all the recipients (with any replacement transmission as a recipient shall request) and with a hard copy on the same date mailed to all by first class mail, postage prepaid, in which case notice shall be deemed given on the date of facsimile transmission. 
15.6. Conferences: The parties hereby agree to meet at reasonable times to discuss any aspect of this franchise agreement or the services or facilities of company. At all meetings company shall make available personnel qualified for the issues to be discussed and such meetings shall be at municipality's offices unless otherwise agreed. 
15.7. Governing law: This franchise agreement shall be construed pursuant to the laws of the State of Texas except where superseded by federal law. 
15.8. No inducement: Company, by accepting this franchise agreement, acknowledges that it has not been induced to accept the franchise agreement by any promise, oral or written, by or on behalf of municipality or by any third person regarding any term or condition of this franchise agreement not expressed herein. Company further pledges that no promise or inducement, oral or written, has been made to any municipal employee or official regarding the grant, receipt or award of this franchise. 
15.9. Non-discrimination: Company agrees not to discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment with respect to his or her hire, tenure, terms, conditions or privileges of employment, or any matter directly or indirectly related to employment, because of his or her race, color, religion, national origin, age, or sex. 
15.10. Franchise agreement accepted: Company further acknowledges by acceptance of this franchise agreement that it has carefully read the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement and accepts the obligations imposed by the terms and conditions herein. 
15.11. Waiver filings: Concurrent with any filing by company or its affiliates for any waivers, exceptions or declaratory rulings or other rulings with the same effect from the FCC or any other federal or state regulatory agency which may affect municipality or its residents, company or its affiliates shall provide municipality with copies of such filings. 
15.12. Waiver of compliance: No failure by either party to insist upon the strict performance of any covenant, agreement, term or condition of this franchise agreement, or to exercise any right, term or remedy upon a breach thereof shall constitute a waiver of any such breach or such covenant, agreement, term or condition. No waiver of any breach shall affect or alter this franchise agreement, but each and every covenant, agreement, term or condition of this franchise agreement shall continue in full force and effect with respect to any other then existing or subsequent breach thereof. 
15.12.1. Municipality may waive any provision of this franchise agreement, in whole or in part, at any time. Such waivers include but are not limited to instances of a claim or showing by company that the costs associated with the provision being waived would increase the rates company is legally allowed to charge subscribers, such as a claim that such costs are an "external cost" which allow company to increase its cable rates under the FCC rules. 
15.13. Independent contractor relationship: The relationship of company to municipality shall be an independent contractual relationship, and no liability or benefits, such as worker's compensation, pension rights or liabilities, insurance rights or liabilities or other provisions or liabilities, arising out of or related to a contract for hire or employer/employee relationship, shall arise or accrue to either party or to either party's agents or employees as a result of the performance of this franchise agreement, unless expressly stated in this franchise agreement. 
15.14. Diligent prosecution: Company agrees to use its best efforts, at its expense, to actively and diligently conduct the prosecution of all applications to the FCC or other governmental regulatory bodies necessary to permit construction and operation of its cable system in accordance with this franchise agreement. 
15.15. Severability: If any section, paragraph, or provision of this franchise agreement shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph, or provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this franchise agreement. 
15.16. General reserved rights: In addition to all rights provided in this franchise agreement, municipality reserves all rights and powers conferred by federal law, the Texas Constitution, state statutes and decisions, the municipal charter, municipal code, and municipal ordinances which municipality is allowed to exercise. Company similarly reserves all of its rights conferred by federal and state laws, constitutions and legislation. 
15.16.1. Company also recognizes municipality's right to impose such other regulations of general applicability as shall be determined by municipality to be conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public. 
15.17. Misleading statements: If company knowingly or willfully provides information to municipality in connection with any matters under this franchise agreement which contains an untrue statement of a material fact or omits a material fact necessary to make the information not misleading, it shall constitute a violation of this franchise agreement and shall be subject to the remedies provided in part 13. 
15.18. Authority: Company represents, and agrees to warrant and defend, that it has the corporate authority to enter into this franchise agreement and that the persons signing on its behalf have received all necessary authorizations and approvals to execute this franchise agreement on behalf of company. Municipality represents that this franchise agreement was approved by its legislative body on November 26, 2001 and that the persons executing this franchise agreement have been duly authorized to execute it on behalf of municipality. 
15.19. Effective date: This franchise agreement shall be effective on November 26, 2001. 
(Ord. No. 2001-77, § 15, 11-26-01) 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have hereto set their hands as of the day and year first above written. 
WITNESS 
/s/ Leticia M. Vacek   CITY OF McALLEN 
/s/ Mike R. Perez, 12/5/2001 
      City Manager   WITNESS 
/s/ Kathy Rodd   TIME WARNER CABLE 
/s/ William C. Carey, III 1/7/02 
      President, Southwest Division   Exhibit A. Cable System Description 
    The cable system shall meet the requirements set forth below, in accordance with CFR, Section 76, Subpart K. 
    System functional requirements: The cable system shall be designed, spaced, and constructed for system operation including analog capacity up to 550 MHz and digital capacity from 550 MHz to at least 750 MHz meeting or exceeding all FCC standards at full channel loading. 
    At a minimum the cable system shall use a hybrid fiber optic/coaxial trunk and coaxial feeder/distribution network architecture as is set forth below. The fiber optic/coaxial transfer point ("nodes") shall be placed so that the signal meets or exceed FCC specifications at the subscriber terminal. 
    The cable system will be fully interactive, two-way capable. 
    The cable system shall be capable, without modification, of providing the continuous, one-way downstream transport of cable service. 
    The video signal delivered to the subscriber shall meet or exceed the FCC standards for signal quality set forth at 47 CFR §76.601 and following as such standards are in effect on September 1, 1997. 
    Cable system architecture: Subscribers shall be grouped in nodes that are arranged geographically. Node sizing shall average 500 homes served. From each node, coaxial cable shall be used to deliver all information to and from subscribers; optical cable shall be used to carry upstream and downstream communication from Company's headend/hub to the node. 
    All future upgraded coaxial cable drops and coaxial cable installed by company on subscriber premises (to the outlets typically located on a subscriber's wall), shall allow the passage of one GHz of spectrum while meeting or exceeding the FCC standards for signal quality described above so as to allow for channel expansion without replacement of such coaxial cable. 
Exhibit B. Form of Franchise Agreement Fee Report 
July August September Totals Installation - Basic Service - Pay Services - FM - Guides - Franchise Fees - Pay-Per-View - Late Fees - Miscellaneous - __________CPSM-300 Payments 
Total Other Cash Receipts - - - - Advertising Total - - - - Bad Debt Recovery _______ _______ _______ _______ GRAND TOTAL _______ FRANCHISE FEE @ 5% _______ July August September Total QVC, HSN & Valuevision - Guides - Misc (Bulk, Prod.) _______ _______ _______ _______ _______ _______ _______ _______ TOTAL - - - - Total Ad Sales Account McAllen Percentage 5% 5% 5% Advertising Total - - -  
Exhibit C. Signal Input Points 
    The locations of the signal input points referred in to Part 6 are: 
1.  Lark Community Center, 2601 Lark Avenue, McAllen, Texas. 
2.  Palmview Community Center, 3401 Jordan Road, McAllen, Texas. 
Exhibit D. Indemnification 
    Assume an incident occurs for which company is 85 percent at fault and Indemnitees are 15 percent at fault. The total amount due and owing a third party from the resulting claim is $100,000.00. 
    Company's obligation to indemnify municipality is 85 percent of $100,000.00, or $85,000.00. 
Exhibit E. Cable Customer Service Plan 
1. OFFICE AND PHONE REQUIREMENTS. 
1.1. Company will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
1.1.2. Trained company representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours. 
1.1.3. After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
1.2. Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. 
1.3. Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. 
1.4. Customer service center or bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours. 
2. INSTALLATIONS, OUTAGES AND SERVICE CALLS. 
2.1. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than 95 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis: 
2.1.1. Standard installations will be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed. "Standard" installations are those that are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system. This requirement shall not apply to commercial subscribers, multiple dwellings served by a single drop, or inside "wall fish" installations. 
2.1.2. Excluding conditions beyond the control of the company, company will begin working on "service interruptions" promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. Company must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. 
2.1.3. The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. (Company may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer.) 
2.1.4. Company may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
2.2. If a company representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
3. CUSTOMER COMMUNICATIONS. 
3.1. Company shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
3.1.1. Products and services offered; 
3.1.2. Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; prices shall include those for programming, equipment rental, program guides and installation; 
3.1.3. Installation and service maintenance policies; 
3.1.4. Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
3.1.5. Channel positions of programming carried on the system, including a listing specific to municipality showing the channel names and numbers actually available to subscribers in municipality; and, 
3.1.6. Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the local franchise authority's cable office, but with a notice for the subscriber to initially contact company with complaints and questions. 
3.2. Customers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the company. In addition, the company shall notify subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by section 3.1. Notwithstanding any other provision, company shall not be required to provide prior notice of any rate change that is the result of a regulatory fee, franchise fee, or any other fee, tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by any federal agency, state, or franchising authority on the transaction between the company and the subscriber. 
3.3. Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates, credits and late charges. 
3.3.1. In case of a billing dispute, the company must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. 
3.4. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either: 
3.4.1. The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier. 
3.4.2. The return of the equipment supplied by the Company if service is terminated. 
3.5. Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
4. REQUIRED SERVICES AND SERVICE POLICIES. 
4.1. Lockout device: Company may at a charge set in accordance with federal law provide all subscribers with the option of obtaining a device by which the subscriber can prohibit the viewing of a particular cable service during periods selected by the subscriber. 
4.2. Program guide: Upon request and subject to its availability, company shall provide subscribers with a periodic (e.g. -monthly) program guide listing the specific programs available, their times and (when applicable and available) ratings. Company may charge a fee for this service. 
4.3. Office requirement: Company shall maintain within municipality either (1) the physical office described in 4.3.1 or (2) a "virtual office" consisting of (a) a toll-free telephone number which all subscribers in municipality can access during normal business hours to register complaints or ask questions concerning cable service, billing matters or the cable system, (b) one or more conveniently located bill payment offices within municipality where subscribers can pay their bills, and (c) delivery and pickup of converter boxes, remotes and similar company-provided customer premises equipment at no charge to subscribers. 
4.3.1. The physical office of company shall be a place where subscribers may pay their bills, return converter boxes and comparable items and receive information on company and its services. Any such office shall be open during normal business hours. 
4.4. Late payments: Each bill shall specify on the face thereof the date on which a payment is due, and the number of days after that date on which a late payment charge (however denominated or described) shall be added to the subscriber's bill. 
4.4.1. All late payment charges, however denominated, shall be separately stated on the subscriber's bill. 
4.5. Disconnection: Company shall promptly disconnect any subscriber who so requests disconnection. No period of notice prior to requested termination of service can be required of subscribers by company. 
4.6. Complaints to municipality: If municipality refers a cable service complaint from a subscriber to company for resolution, then within five business days of company's receipt of such referral it shall investigate (including attempting to contact the subscriber) and respond to municipality in writing as to its resolution of same. 
5. TECHNICAL STANDARDS. 
5.1. The company shall comply with the rules and regulations relating to cable television technical standards for signal quality, currently set forth at 47 CFR § 76.601. 
5.1.1. Company shall provide municipality on an annual basis upon request the results of the FCC proof of performance test. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRIC 
DIVISION 1. - CENTRAL POWER AND LIGHT COMPANY[3] 
Adopted March 23, 1992 
Expires December 1, 2022 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO CENTRAL POWER AND LIGHT COMPANY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS A FRANCHISE FOR THE PURPOSE OF OPERATING ITS ELECTRICAL FACILITIES, IN, ALONG, AND ACROSS ALL PUBLIC STREETS, AVENUES, ALLEYS, AND BRIDGES IN SAID CITY; PRESCRIBING THE ANNUAL COMPENSATION DUE THE CITY UNDER THIS ORDINANCE; PRESCRIBING THE CONDITIONS GOVERNING THE USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND THE PERFORMANCE OF CERTAIN CONSTRUCTION WORK ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR CENTRAL POWER AND LIGHT COMPANY'S FACILITIES; PROVIDING FOR WRITTEN ACCEPTANCE OF THIS ORDINANCE BY CENTRAL POWER AND LIGHT COMPANY; AND PROVIDING FOR A TERM AND AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    WHEREAS, Central Power and Light Company (hereinafter referred to as "CPL") is now and has been engaged in the electrical power business in the State of Texas and in furtherance thereof, has erected and maintained certain items of its physical plant in the City of McAllen, Texas (hereinafter referred to as the "city") for many years pursuant to such rights as have been granted it by and under the laws of the State of Texas, and subject to the reasonable exercise of the police powers granted by and under said laws to the city; and 
    WHEREAS, CPL has operated its electrical power business in the city under successive ordinances of the city, the last of which was the ordinance adopted on October 21, 1960, and in order to enhance the ability of CPL to borrow funds for plant and system expansion and improvement, an extension to the existing franchise agreement is requested by CPL; and 
    WHEREAS, it is to the mutual advantage of both the city and CPL that an agreement should be entered into between CPL and the city establishing the conditions under which CPL shall maintain and construct its physical plant in the city in the future; 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF McALLEN, TEXAS, THAT: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is an electric franchise of the city, as adopted by Ordinance Number 1992-29 on March 23, 1992. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section I. - [Grant of franchise.] 
    That there is hereby granted to Central Power and Light Company, its successors and assigns, herein called the "Grantee," the right, privilege, and franchise until December 1, 2022, to construct, maintain, and operate in the present and future streets, alleys and public utility rights-of-way or easements (collectively referred to as "public rights-of-way") of the City of McAllen, Texas, as the limits of city now exist and as they may hereafter be extended, and its successors, electric light and power lines, with all necessary or desirable appurtenances (including underground conduits, poles, towers, wires, and transmission lines, and telegraph and telephone wires for its own use) for the purpose of supplying electricity to the city, the inhabitants thereof, and persons and corporations within and beyond the limits thereof, for light, heat, power, and other related electrical public utility purposes. 
Section II. - [Location of poles, towers, etc.] 
(a)  Poles, towers, power lines, and appurtenances shall be constructed so as not to interfere unreasonably with traffic over streets, alleys, and sidewalks, nor interfere with the flow of stormwater in any gutter or drain, and the city may make and impose reasonable requirements fixing the location of poles, towers, and conduits, provided that no such requirement shall be unreasonably burdensome upon grantee or unreasonably interfere with the proper operation of said facilities. 
(b)  The surface of any public street, alley or public right-of-way disturbed by grantee in the construction or maintenance of its electrical power transmission system shall be restored within a reasonable time after the completion of the work to as good a condition as before the commencement of the work. Should the city reasonably determine, within one year from the date of such restoration, that such surface requires additional restoration work to place it in as good a condition as before the commencement of the work, grantee shall perform such additional restoration work to the reasonable satisfaction of the city. No public street, alley or public right-of-way shall be encumbered for a longer period than shall be reasonably necessary to execute all work. 
Section III. - [Service quality, additional regulations authorized.] 
    The service furnished hereunder to said city and its inhabitants shall be first-class in all respects considering all circumstances and shall be subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as the grantee shall make from time to time. 
Section IV. - [Hold harmless agreement.] 
    The grantee shall hold the city harmless of and from all expense or liability for any act or neglect of the grantee hereunder. 
Section V. - [Consideration.] 
    For and as full consideration and compensation for this franchise and the rights, privileges, and easements granted and conferred thereby and as rental for the use of the streets, alleys, and other public areas within or that may hereafter be within said city, the grantee shall pay said city four percent of the grantee's gross receipts from the sale of electric energy in and for use within the corporate limits of the City of McAllen for the month of March, 1992, and for each month thereafter throughout the remainder of the term herein provided for, with each such payment to be made on the first day of the second succeeding month. If grantee should agree to pay to any other municipality which it serves a greater percentage than four percent of its said gross receipts, grantee will automatically thereafter pay to the City of McAllen the same percentage of its gross receipts within the City of McAllen derived from the sale of electric energy. 
Section VI. - [Nonexclusive franchise.] 
    This franchise is not exclusive and nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the city from granting other like or similar rights and privileges to any other person, firm, or corporation. 
Section VII. - [Acceptance.] 
    This grant is conditioned that the grantee shall file its written acceptance of this franchise within the 90 days after the adoption of this ordinance and upon such acceptance and completion of all acts necessary to make this ordinance a legal, valid and enforceable obligation in accordance with the requirements of the City of McAllen, Texas, the electric franchise under which grantee has been operating heretofore in the City of McAllen, Texas, being the electric franchise granted to Central Power and Light Company, its successors and assigns, by an ordinance adopted by the city commission of the City of McAllen, Texas, and approved on October 21, 1960, as amended by ordinance adopted by the city commission of the City of McAllen, Texas, and approved on December 21, 1970, shall stand surrendered. 
    CONSIDERED, PASSED and APPROVED this 23rd day of March, 1992, at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of the City of McAllen at which a quorum was present and which was held in accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. by the following vote, to wit: 
AYES: Mayor Othal E. Brand 
Comm. Leo Montalvo 
Comm. Charles Wilson 
Comm. Phyllis Griggs 
Comm. A.M. Longoria NAYS: None  
SIGNED this 25th day of March, 1992. 
CITY OF McALLEN By: /s/  _____
Othal E. Brand, Sr., Mayor  
ATTEST: 
By: /s/  _____
Leticia M. Vacek, City Secretary 
DIVISION 2. - MAGIC VALLEY ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE, INC.[4] 
Adopted February 23, 2004 
Expires October 31, 2008 
ORDINANCE NO. 2004-18 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is an electric franchise of the city, as adopted by Ordinance Number 1973-35 on August 20, 1973. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2004-18, adopted Feb. 23, 2004, enacted provisions providing for a new franchise agreement with Magic Valley Electric Cooperative, Inc., codified as a new Div. 2 to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Section 1. - [Definitions.] 
    For the purpose of this franchise, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this article, when not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this article shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
1.1.  "City" refers to and is the municipal corporation designated as the City of McAllen, Texas, Hidalgo County, Texas and includes the territory as currently is or may in the future be included within the boundaries of the City of McAllen, Texas (hereinafter "McAllen" or "city"). 
1.2.  "Company" refers to and is Magic Valley Electric Cooperative, Inc., and its successors and assigns, but does not include its affiliates, subsidiaries or any other entity in which it has an ownership interest. 
1.3.  "Council" or "city council" refers to and is the legislative body of the city. 
1.4.  "Distribution facilities" refers to and is only that portion of the company's electric system, which delivers electric energy from the substation breakers to the point-of delivery of the customer, including all devices connected to that system. 
1.5.  "Facilities" refer to and are all facilities reasonably necessary to provide electrical energy within and through the city and include plants, works, systems, substation, transmission and distribution structures, lines, equipment, pipes, mains, conduit, transformers, underground lines, meters, wires, cables and poles. 
1.6.  "Overhead conversion" refers to and is the process of covering overhead electric distribution facilities to underground facilities. 
1.7.  "Public easements" refer to and are public and dedicated easements created and available for use by utilities for their facilities. 
1.8.  "Relocation" refers to and is the movement of facilities from one location to another in public easements or streets and other public places. 
1.9.  "Residents" refers to and includes all persons, business, industry, governmental agencies, and any other entity whatsoever, presently located or to be hereinafter located, in whole or in part, within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
1.10.  "Revenues" refer to and are those amounts of money which the company receives from its customers within the city from the sale of electrical energy to customers within the city and under rates authorized by the company's tariff and represent amounts billed under such rates as adjusted for refunds, the net write-off of uncollectible accounts, corrections or other regulatory adjustments. 
1.11.  "Streets and other public places" refer to and are streets, alleys, viaducts, bridges, roads, lanes and other public places in said city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Section 2. - Grant of franchise. 
    2.1. Grant of franchise. The City of McAllen hereby grants to Magic Valley Electric Cooperative, Inc., for the period specified in and subject to the conditions, terms and provisions contained in this franchise, a non-exclusive right to furnish, sell and distribute electrical energy to the city and to all residents of the city. Subject to the conditions, terms and provisions contained in this franchise, the city also hereby grants to the company a non-exclusive right to acquire, construct, install, locate, maintain, operate and extend into, within and through the city all facilities reasonably necessary to furnish, sell and distribute electrical energy within and through the city and a non-exclusive right to make reasonable use of the streets and other public places as may be necessary to carry out the terms of this franchise. These rights shall extend to all areas of the city as it is now constituted and to additional areas as the city may increase in size by annexation or otherwise. 
    2.2. Street lighting service. Wherever reference is made to the sale of electrical energy or the provision of electric service in this franchise, these references shall be deemed to include the provision of street lighting service. Wherever reference is made to company facilities, equipment, system or plant in this franchise, this reference shall be deemed to include company-owned street lighting facilities, equipment, system and plant. 
    2.3. Term of franchise. This franchise shall take effect on November 1, 2003. The initial term of this franchise shall be for five years, beginning with said effective date of this franchise and expiring on October 31, 2008. Unless the city gives company notice at least 90 days prior to said expiration, the term shall automatically be extended by an additional term of five years to expire on October 31, 2013. 
    2.4. Extent of franchise. This grant of franchise does not apply to service outside of the company's certified service areas. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Section 3. - Franchise fee. 
    3.1. Franchise fee. In consideration for the grant of this franchise, the company shall pay the city a sum equal to four percent of all revenues received from the sale of electrical energy within the city, excluding revenues paid by the city to the company. 
    3.2. Payment schedule. For the franchise fee owed on revenues received after the effective date of this franchise, payment shall be made in installments not more than 30 days following the close of the month for which payment is to be made. Initial and final payments shall be prorated for the portions of the months at the beginning and end of the term of this ordinance. All payments shall be made to the city finance director. The city finance director, or other authorized representatives, shall have access to the books of the company for the purpose of auditing or checking to ascertain that the franchise fee has been correctly computed and paid. 
    3.3. Franchise fee payment in lieu of other fees. The franchise fee is the only monetary payment to the city for the rights granted in this franchise. The company, by this agreement, is not exempt from any property tax, from any sales or use tax, from any other tax not related to the franchise, from other fees or taxes assessed generally upon business, or from fees and charges that are uniform and generally applicable to contractors performing similar work. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Section 4. - Supply, construction and design. 
    4.1. Supply of electrical energy. The company shall take all reasonable and necessary steps to provide an adequate supply of electrical energy to its customers at the lowest reasonable cost consistent with long-term reliable supplies. If the supply of electrical energy to its customers should be interrupted, the company shall take all necessary and reasonable actions to restore such supply within the shortest practicable time. 
    4.2. Restoration of service. In the event the company's electric system, or any part thereof, is partially or wholly destroyed or incapacitated, the company shall use due diligence to restore its system to satisfactory service within the shortest practicable time. 
    4.3. Obligations regarding company facilities. The company shall install, maintain, repair, renovate and replace its facilities with due diligence in a good and workmanlike manner and the company's facilities will be of sufficient quality and durability to provide adequate and efficient electric service to the city and its residents. Company facilities shall not interfere with the city's water mains, sewer mains or other municipal use of streets and other public, places. The company shall erect and maintain its facilities in such a way so as to minimize interference with trees and other natural features. Company facilities shall be installed in public easements so far as reasonable so as to cause a minimal amount of interference with such property. 
    4.4. Excavation and construction. All excavation and construction work done by the company shall be done in a timely and expeditious manner which minimizes the inconvenience to the public and individuals. All public and private property and dedicated easements whose use conforms to restrictions in public easements disturbed by company excavation or construction activities shall be restored as soon as practicable by the company at its expense to substantially its former condition, subject to inspection by the city director of public works and compliance by the company with reasonable remedial action required by said director pursuant to said inspection. 
    4.5. Relocation of company facilities. Any relocation of the company's facilities in any street or other public place required, caused or occasioned by any city project shall be at the cost of the company. Relocation shall be completed within a reasonable time from the date when the city makes its request, such time to be established by the company as soon as possible after the city's request. The company shall be granted an extension time of completion equivalent to any delay caused by conditions not under its control provided that the company proceeds with due diligence at all times. Relocated underground facilities shall be underground. Relocated aboveground facilities shall be aboveground unless the city agrees to pay the additional cost of moving underground. 
    4.6. Service to new areas. If the boundaries of the city are expanded during the term of this franchise, the company shall extend service to residents in the expanded area at the earliest practicable time and in accordance with the company's extension policy. Service to the expanded area shall be in accordance with the terms of this franchise agreement, including payment of franchise fees. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Section 5. - Compliance. 
    5.1. City regulation. The city expressly reserves, and the company expressly recognizes, the city's right and duty to adopt, from time to time, in addition to the provisions herein contained, such charter provisions, ordinances, and rules and regulations as may be necessary in the exercise of its police power for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and their properties. 
    5.2. Compliance with law. The company shall be subject to and comply with all applicable and controlling local, state and federal laws, including the rules and regulations of any and all agencies thereof, whether presently in force or whether enacted or adopted at any time in the future in constructing and maintaining its electric distribution system. If requested by the city, the company shall submit copies of reports of annual and long-term planning for capital improvement projects with descriptions of required street cuts, excavation, digging and related construction activities within 30 days after issuance. Except for emergencies, the city may require that all installations be coordinated with the city's street improvement programs. The city engineer and/or director of public works shall be the city's agent for inspection and for compliance with city ordinances and regulations on any such projects. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to waive company's right to challenge any statute, ordinance or regulation. 
    5.3. City review of construction. Prior to construction of any significant transmission lines or generating plant, building, substation or similar structure within the city, if requested by the city, the company shall furnish to the city the plans for such facilities, and assess and report on the impact of such proposed construction on the city environment. Such plans and reports may be reviewed by the city to ascertain, inter alia, (1) that all applicable laws including building and zoning codes and air and water pollution regulations are complied with, (2) that aesthetic and good planning principles have been given due consideration, and (3) that adverse impact on the environment has been minimized. 
    5.4. Compliance with industry standards. The electrical energy which the company distributes shall conform with the standards generally recognized in the electric industry and with the tariff provisions of the company as the same may be amended from time to time. 
    5.5. Compliance with air and water pollution laws. The company shall use its best efforts to take measures which will result in its facilities meeting the standards required by applicable federal and state air and water pollution laws. 
    5.6. Inspection. The city shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times any portion of the company's system used to serve the city and its residents. The city shall also have access to company records for the purpose of determining company compliance with this franchise. The company agrees to cooperate with the city in conducting the inspection and to correct any discrepancies affecting the city's interest in a prompt and efficient manner. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Section 6. - Public utility commission. 
    6.1. Public utility commission regulation. The city and the company recognize that the lawful provisions of the company's tariffs are controlling over any inconsistent provision in this franchise dealing with the same subject matter. In the opinion of the company, no provision of this franchise is inconsistent with any of the currently effective provisions of the company's tariffs. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Section 7. - City use of company facilities. 
    7.1. City use. The company will allow others holding a franchise from the city to so utilize such poles and suitable overhead structures upon reasonable terms and conditions to be agreed upon by the company and such holder of a franchise from the city, provided, however, that the company shall assume no liability nor shall it be put to any additional expense in connection therewith and the use of said poles and structures by the city or others holding a franchise from the city shall be in such a manner as not to constitute a safety hazard or to interfere unnecessarily with the company's use of same. 
    7.2. Underground conduit. If the company installs new electric underground conduit, opens a trench, or replaces such conduit, the company shall provide adequate advance notice to permit additional installation of similar conduit and pull-wire for the city. If the city wants additional similar conduit and pull-wire, the city will provide the same at its expense to the company which will install it without further expense to the city provided that such action by the city will not unnecessarily interfere with the company's facilities or delay the accomplishment of the project. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Section 8. - Indemnification of the city. 
    8.1. City held harmless. The company shall construct maintain and operate its facilities in a manner which provides reasonable protection against injury or damage to persons or property, provided, however, said obligation of the company hereunder shall not increase or decrease its liability on third-party claims, and provided further that the company's obligation to the city hereunder shall not be diminished by said exception. The company shall save and hold the city harmless and indemnify the city from and against all liability or damage and all claims or demands whatsoever in nature, and reimburse the city for all its reasonable expenses arising out of the negligent operations of the company within the city and the securing of and the exercise by the company of the franchise rights granted in this ordinance, including any third-party claims, administrative hearings and litigation. None of the city expenses reimbursed by the company under this section shall be surcharged by the company. The company shall not be obligated to hold harmless or indemnify the city for claims or demands to the extent arising out of or in connection with any negligent act or failure to act of the city or any of its officers or employees. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Section 9. - Transfer of franchise. 
    9.1. Consent of city required. The company shall not transfer or assign any rights under this franchise to a third party without the express, written consent of city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, excepting only corporate reorganizations of the company not including a third party, unless the majority of the legal voters voting on the question shall have approved such transfer or assignment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Section 10. - Purchase or condemnation. 
    10.1. City's right to purchase or condemn. The right of the city to construct, purchase or condemn any public utility works or ways, and the rights of the company in connection therewith, are hereby expressly reserved. 
    10.2. Continued cooperation by company. In the event the city exercises its power to purchase or condemn, the company agrees that, at the city's request, it will continue to supply any service it supplies under this franchise, for the duration of the terms of this franchise pursuant to terms and conditions negotiated for such continued operation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Section 11. - Removal of company facilities at end of franchise. 
    11.1. Limitations on company removal. In the event this franchise is not renewed at the expiration of its term or the company terminates any service provided herein for any reason whatsoever, and the city has not purchased or condemned the system and has not provided for alternative electrical service, the company shall have no right to remove said system pending resolution of the disposition of the system. The company further agrees it will not withhold any temporary services necessary to protect the public and shall be entitled only to monetary compensation in no greater amount than it would have been entitled to were such services provided during the term of this franchise. Only upon receipt of written notice from the city stating that the city has adequate alternative electrical energy sources to provide for the people of the city shall the company be entitled to remove any or all of said systems in use under the terms of this franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Section 12. - Forfeiture. 
    12.1. Forfeiture. Both the company and the city recognize there may be circumstances whereby compliance with the provisions of this franchise is impossible or is delayed because of circumstances beyond the company's control. The company shall have a reasonable time, not exceeding three months, in which to remedy the violations. If the company fails to perform any of the terms and conditions of this franchise and such failure is within the company's control, the city, acting by and through its commission, may determine, after hearing, that such failure is of a substantial nature. Upon receiving notice of such determination, the company shall have a reasonable time in which to remedy the violations. If during said reasonable time corrective actions have not been successfully taken, the city, acting by and through its commission, shall determine whether any or all rights and privileges granted the company under this agreement shall be forfeited. 
    12.2. Judicial review. Any such declaration of forfeiture shall be subject to judicial review as provided by law. 
    12.3. Other legal remedies. Nothing herein contained shall limit or restrict any legal rights that the city or the company may possess arising from any alleged violation of this franchise. 
    12.4. Continued obligations. Upon forfeiture, the company shall continue to provide service to the city and its residents in accordance with the terms hereof until the city makes alternative arrangements for such service. If the company fails to provide continued service, it shall be liable for damages to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Section 13. - Amendments. 
    13.1. Amendments to franchise. At any time during the term of this franchise, the city, through its city commission, or the company may propose amendments to this franchise by giving 30 days written notice to the other of the proposed amendment(s) desired and both parties thereafter will negotiate within a reasonable time in good faith in an effort to agree on mutually satisfactory amendment(s); provided, however, nothing in this article shall require either party to agree on any such amendments and the decision as to whether or not to agree shall be at the sole discretion of the respective parties. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Section 14. - Miscellaneous. 
    14.1. Successors and assigns. The rights, privileges, franchises and obligations granted and contained in this agreement shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon the company, its successors and assigns. 
    14.2. Third parties. Nothing contained in this franchise shall be construed to provide rights to third parties. 
    14.3. Representatives. Both parties shall designate from time to time in writing representatives for the company and the city who will be the persons to whom notices shall be sent regarding any action to be taken under this ordinance. Notice shall be in writing and forwarded by certified mail or hand delivery to the persons and addresses as hereinafter stated, unless the persons and addresses are changed at the written request of either party, delivered in person or by certified mail. Until any such change shall hereafter be made, notices shall be sent to the city manager and to the company addresses as follows: 
For the City: 
City of McAllen 
1300 W. Houston Ave 
McAllen, Texas 78501 
For the Company: 
Magic Valley Electric Cooperative, Inc. 
P.O. Box 267 
Mercedes, Texas 78570 
    14.4. Severability. Should any one or more provisions of this franchise be determined to be illegal or unenforceable, all other provisions nevertheless shall remain effective; provided, however, the parties shall forthwith enter into good faith negotiations and proceed with due diligence to draft a term that will achieve the original intent of the parties hereunder. 
    14.5. Entire agreement. This franchise constitutes the entire agreement of the parties. There have been no representations made other than those contained in this franchise. 
    14.6. Applicable law and venue. This franchise is entered into in Hidalgo County, Texas and shall be construed and interpreted according to the laws of the State of Texas with venue in Hidalgo County, Texas. 
    14.7. Reservation of rights. Nothing in this franchise agreement shall be construed to limit company's right to challenge any provision of this franchise or other ordinances, or actions taken thereunder, in a forum of competent jurisdiction or the city's right to seek revocation or reduction of company's certificate through the Public Utility Commission of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Section 15. - Approval. 
    15.1. Commission approval. This grant of franchise shall not become effective unless approved by a majority vote of the city commission. 
    15.2. Company approval. The company shall file with the city clerk its written acceptance of this franchise within 30 days after the adoption of this franchise by the city commission. The acceptance shall be in form and content approved by the city attorney. If the company shall fail to timely file its written acceptance as herein provided, this franchise shall be and become null and void. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 2-23-04) 
DIVISION 3. - SHARYLAND UTILITIES, L.P.[5] 
ORDINANCE NO. 2010-62 
Adopted November 22, 2010 
Expires December 1, 2015 
WHEREAS, Sharyland Utilities, L.P., a Texas Limited Partnership (hereinafter referred to as "SU"), provides electric delivery services within the incorporated boundaries of the City of McAllen, Texas (hereinafter referred to as the "City"); and 
WHEREAS, SU will construct and maintain certain items of physical plant necessary to deliver electric service within said area; and 
WHEREAS, it is to the mutual advantage of both the City and SU that an agreement should be entered into by the City and SU establishing the conditions under which SU shall construct and maintain its physical plant in the City in the future; 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY OF McALLEN, TEXAS THAT: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is an electric franchise of the city, as adopted by Ord. No. 2010-62, adopted on Nov. 22, 2010. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. For a complete derivation of Div. 3 see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-97, adopted Nov. 23, 2015, approved a five-year extension to the Sharyland Utilities Franchise Agreement until Dec. 1, 2020. 

Section I. - [Grant of franchise.] 
    That there is hereby granted to SU, its successors and assigns, herein called the "Grantee", the right, privilege, and franchise, until December 1, 2015 to construct, maintain, and operate in the present and future streets, alleys, and public utility rights-of-way or easements (collectively referred to as "public rights-of-way") of the City of McAllen, Texas as the limits of the City now exist and as they may hereafter be extended covering the area described in Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated herein, and its successors, electric light and power lines, with all necessary and desirable appurtenances (including underground conduits, poles, towers, wires and transmission lines, and telegraph and telephone wires for its own use for the purposes for which this franchise is granted) for the purpose of delivering electricity to the City, the inhabitants thereof, and persons and corporations within and beyond the limits thereof, for light, heat, power and other related electrical public utility purposes. 
Section II. - [Location of poles, towers, etc.] 
(a)  Poles, towers, power lines, and appurtenances shall be constructed so as not to unreasonably interfere with the flow of storm water in any gutter or drain, or the existing use of the public rights-of-way by any other franchises, and the City may make and impose reasonable requirements fixing the location of poles, towers and conduits, provided that no such requirement shall be unreasonably burdensome upon Grantee or unreasonably interfere with the proper operation of said facilities. 
(b)  The surface of any public street, alley or public right-of-way disturbed by Grantee in the construction or maintenance of its electrical power delivery system shall be restored within a reasonable time after the completion of the work to as good condition as before the commencement of the work. Should the City reasonably determine, within one year from the date of such restoration, that such surface requires additional restoration work to place it in as good condition as before the commencement of the work: Grantee shall perform such additional restoration work to the reasonable satisfaction of the City. No public street, alley or public right-of-way shall be encumbered for a longer period that shall be reasonably necessary to execute all work. 
Section III. - [Service, quality, additional regulations authorized.] 
    The service furnished hereunder to the City and its inhabitants shall be first-class in all respects considering all circumstances and shall be subject to such reasonable and non discriminatory rules and regulations as the Grantee shall make from time to time. 
Section IV. - [Hold harmless agreement.] 
    The Grantee shall hold the City harmless of and from all expense or liability for any act or neglect of the Grantee hereunder. 
Section V. - [Consideration.] 
    For and as full consideration and compensation for this franchise and the rights, privileges and easements granted and conferred thereby, and as rental for the use of the streets, alleys and other public areas within or that may hereafter be within the City, the Grantee shall pay the city $.002595 multiplied by the number kilowatt hours of delivered retail energy by the Grantee within and for use within the corporate limits of the City in semi-annual payments, being payments on or before each May 15th, computed on said delivered retail energy during the period of six (6) months ending on the preceding March 31 st and on or before November 15 th , computed on said delivered retail energy during the period of six (6) months ending on the preceding October 31. If Grantee should agree to pay The City of Mission which it serves a greater charge per kilowatt hour of its said delivered retail energy, Grantee will automatically thereafter pay to the City an equal charge per kilowatt hour of its said delivered retail energy. 
Section VI. - [Non exclusive franchise.] 
    This franchise is not exclusive and nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the City from granting other like or similar rights and privileges to any other person, firm or corporation. 
Section VII. - [Acceptance.] 
    This grant is conditioned that the Grantee shall file its written acceptance of this franchise within the 90 days after the adoption of this ordinance. 
Section VIII. - [Future rules and regulations.] 
    The Grantee by the acceptance of this franchise hereby acknowledges and agrees that City may promulgate reasonable and non discriminatory rules and regulations relating to any or all aspects of the franchise including but not limited to additional financial or technical requirements, obligation to collect fees from third parties, the basis for collection of fees, reporting requirements and construction obligations and grantee hereby agrees to abide by all such rules and regulations so promulgated and upon the failure to comply City may suspend or revoke this franchise. 
CONSIDERED, PASSED AND APPROVED this 22nd day of November, 2010 at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of the City of McAllen, Texas at which a quorum was present and which was held in accordance with V.T.C.A. Government Code § 551.001 et seq. by the following vote, to wit: 
ARTICLE III. - GAS 
DIVISION 1. - RIO GRANDE VALLEY GAS COMPANY[6] 
Adopted February 4, 1952 
Expires January 1, 2001 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO RIO GRANDE VALLEY GAS COMPANY THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO DISTRIBUTE NATURAL GAS IN THE CITY OF McALLEN, HIDALGO COUNTY, TEXAS; REGULATING SAID DISTRIBUTION; PROVIDING FOR THE RATES TO BE CHARGED TO CONSUMERS OF NATURAL GAS; PROVIDING OTHER REGULATIONS FOR THE CONDUCT OF SAID SYSTEM BY THE GRANTEE; AND REPEALING ALL ORDINANCES AND PARTS OF ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT HEREWITH. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF McALLEN: 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1997-54, §§ I-XX, adopted July 16, 1997, granted Southern Union Gas Company the right, privilege and franchise to use streets, alleys and thoroughfares to distribute natural gas in the city; regulating said distribution; providing for the rates to be charged to consumers of natural gas; providing other regulations for the conduct of said system by Southern Union Gas Company. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1997-79, adopted Sept. 9, 1997, repealed Ord. No. 1997-54 in its entirety, however Ord. Nos. 1971-15 and 1975-35 which amended the original gas franchise ordinance from Feb. 4, 1952 shall remain in full force and effect; therefore, §§ 8-10, 13, 18, 24 remain in effect. 

Sections 1-7. - Reserved. 
Section 8. - [Regulatory powers continued; rate determinations.] 
    In granting this franchise neither the grantee, nor the city shall in any manner waive its regulatory or other rights and powers under and by virtue of the laws of the State of Texas as the same may be amended, nor any of its rights or powers under or by virtue of present or future ordinances of the City of McAllen, Texas, and it is expressly provided that nothing herein shall impair the right of the city of [or] the grantee, to fix, within constitutional and statutory limits, a reasonable price to be charged for natural gas, or to provide and fix a scale of prices for natural gas to be charged by the grantee to residential consumers, large residential consumers, domestic consumers, commercial consumers, industrial consumers or to any combination of such consumers within the territorial limits of said city as same now exist or as such limit may be extended from time to time hereafter. 
(Ord. No. 1975-35, § 1, 7-21-75; Ord. No. 1997-79, § I, 9-9-97) 
Section 9. - [Rates limited; deposits.] 
(A)  The grantee shall not charge or receive any higher rate for natural gas furnished by it for any domestic residential consumer, large residential consumer, domestic consumer, commercial consumer, industrial consumer or any combination thereof within the city limits, as same now exist or as such limit may be extended from time to time hereafter, than the rate fixed by the Railroad Commission of Texas, Gas Utilities Division, by order heretofore made or any orders hereafter made. 
(B)  Grantee shall be entitled to require from each and every consumer of gas, before gas service is commenced, a deposit of twice the amount of an estimated average monthly bill, which said deposit may be retained by grantee until service is discontinued and all bills therefor have been paid. Grantee shall then return said deposit to the consumer, together with four per cent interest thereon from the date of said deposit up to the date of discontinuance of service. Grantee shall be entitled to apply said deposit, with accrued interest, to any indebtedness owed grantee by the consumer making the deposit. 
(Ord. No. 1975-35, § 1, 7-21-75; Ord. No. 1997-79, § I, 9-9-97) 
Section 10. - [Consumer.] 
    Any class of consumer. 
(Ord. No. 1975-35, § 1, 7-21-75; Ord. No. 1997-79, § I, 9-9-97) 
Sections 11, 12. - Reserved. 
Section 13. - [Term of franchise.] 
    This ordinance shall continue and remain in force until January 1, 2001. 
(Ord. No. 1971-15, § 1, 5-3-71; Ord. No. 1997-79, § I, 9-9-97) 
Sections 14-17. - Reserved. 
Section 18. - [Franchise fee.] 
    The grantee, by accepting or acting under this grant, shall pay to the City of McAllen, as a franchise tax and as compensation for the rights and privileges enjoyed hereunder, during the life of this grant, two per cent of its gross income derived from all sales of gas for consumption within the City of McAllen, Texas until March 6, 1977 or upon grantee charging and receiving a higher rate, subsequent to May 1, 1971, for natural gas furnished by it for any domestic consumer within the city limits, or a [as] such time as company pays four per cent gross receipts tax in any of the other 26 towns and cities served by the company in the Rio Grande Valley, whichever is the earliest; at which time grantee shall pay to the City of McAllen as a franchise tax and as compensation for the rights and privileges enjoyed hereunder during the remaining life of this grant four per cent of its gross income derived from all sales of gas for consumption within the City of McAllen, Texas. Such payment shall be based on receipts for each 12-month period ending December 31st and payment shall be made on or before February 1st of each and every year, beginning February 1, 1953. This tax shall be in lieu of all other franchise, license or occupation taxes, levies, rentals or charges which may be levied or attempted to be levied by the said City of McAllen, Texas. The city commission may, when it may see fit, have the books and records of grantee examined by a representative of the city to ascertain whether such statement and tax is accurate, but nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the city from ascertaining the facts by any other legal method. Nothing herein shall, or shall be construed to exempt the grantee from the payment of ad valorem taxes to said city upon its physical properties within said City of McAllen. 
(Ord. No. 1971-15, § 1, 5-3-71; Ord. No. 1997-79, § I, 9-9-97) 
Sections 19-23. - Reserved. 
Section 24. - [Proposed rate changes; application requirements.] 
    Should the grantee apply for any change or increase in the rates being charged, such application concerning proposed rates shall include an agreement by the grantee to reimburse the city within 30 days for the city's expenses as follows: 
(a)  Reasonable fees and expenses for any independent study and evaluation by consultants, engineers, or others employed by the city in its discretion to study, report, and to testify concerning or evaluating the proposed rate before the city, any agency of the state, or in any court; and 
(b)  Pay the reasonable fees and expenses of an attorney employed by the city in its discretion to represent the city and its interest and position concerning the proposed rate before the city, any state agency, or in any litigation concerning the proposed rate. 
(Ord. No. 1975-35, § 1, 7-21-75; Ord. No. 1997-79, § I, 9-9-97) 
_____
Mayor ATTEST: _____
Secretary  
Rio Grande Valley Gas Company 
Brownsville, Texas 
February 18, 1952 
Hon. Mayor and Members of the Board of Commissioners, City of McAllen 
McAllen, Texas 
Gentlemen: 
    In accordance with sections 22 and 23 of the ordinance passed and adopted by the board of commissioners of the City of McAllen on February 4, 1952, and recorded in Ordinance Book #6, which ordinance grants to Rio Grande Valley Gas Company the right, privilege and franchise to distribute natural gas in the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas, the Rio Grande Valley Gas Company hereby accepts said ordinance and files this, its consent to, and written acceptance of, the provisions and conditions of said ordinance. 
Yours very truly, RIO GRANDE VALLEY GAS COMPANY By _____
L.O. Vogelsang, Vice President ATTEST: _____         
W.H. Meredith, Asst. Secretary  
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE RATES[7] 
ORDINANCE NO. 1987-56 
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING MAXIMUM RATES TO BE CHARGED FOR NATURAL GAS SOLD TO CUSTOMERS IN THE CITY OF McALLEN, TEXAS AND REPEALING ALL OTHER ORDINANCES OR PARTS OF ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT HEREWITH. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY OF McALLEN, TEXAS, THAT: 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1987-56, adopted Nov. 16, 1987, has been deemed as superseding, and is set out in lieu of, Ord. No. 1982-14, adopted Mar. 23, 1982. Ordinances from which Div. 2 had previously derived are as follows: 
Ord. No. Section Date  9-16-63 1969-27 10-20-69 A69-27 1 10-20-69 1975-36 1  7-21-75 1978-2 1  1- 4-78 1979-10 1, 2  1-18-79 1980-54  7- 9-80 1982-71 12- 6-82  

Section I. - [Rate schedules adopted.] 
    That Rio Grande Valley Gas Company, a Delaware corporation, its successors or assigns, hereby is authorized to charge no more for natural gas sold at its general service rate and firm transportation rate, which shall be available to all of its customers in the City of McAllen, Texas, than is provided in its general service rate schedule and firm gas transportation service rate schedule which are attached hereto and made a part hereto as if copied herein in full. 
    The general service rate schedule, the firm gas transportation service rate schedule and the service charge rate schedule referred to in §§ I, II and III of Ord. No. 1987-56 and attached thereto are not set out in full, but are on file and available for reference in the office of the city [secretary]. 
Section II. - [Effective date for rates.] 
    That such general service rate schedule and firm gas transportation service rate schedule shall be placed in effect on all bills rendered beginning November 21, 1987. 
Section III. - [Service calls.] 
    That Rio Grande Valley Gas Company, its successors or assigns, hereby is authorized to charge no more for customer service calls than is provided for in the service charge rate schedule which is attached hereto and made a part hereof as if copied herein in full. 
Section IV. - [Conflicting ordinances.] 
    That all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith hereby are replaced insofar but only insofar as such conflict exists. 
    READ, IN PERTINENT PART, CONSIDERED, PASSED and APPROVED this 16th day of November, 1987 at a regular meeting of the board of commissioners of the City of McAllen, Texas at which a quorum was present and which was held in accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. 
SIGNED this 16th day of November, 1987. 
CITY OF McALLEN By:  _____
Othal E. Brand, Mayor ATTEST: By: _____
Natividad Sanchez, 
City Secretary Approved as to form: _____
James E. Darling, 
City Attorney  
DIVISION 3. - TEXAS GAS SERVICE COMPANY[8] 
ORDINANCE NO. 2013-39 
 AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO TEXAS GAS SERVICE COMPANY THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO USE STREETS, ALLEYS, THOROUGHFARES AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS TO OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM IN THE CITY OF McALLEN, HIDALGO COUNTY, TEXAS; PROVIDING REGULATIONS FOR THE CONDUCT OF THE SYSTEM BY THE GRANTEE, AND REPEALING THE PRESENT FRANCHISE ORDINANCE; PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE; PROVIDING FOR PUBLICATION; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY, AND ORDAINING OTHER PROVISIONS RELATED TO THE SUBJECT MATTER HEREOF. 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-39, §§ 1-13, adopted June 10, 2013, repealed art. III, div. 3, §§ 1-16, which pertained to simialr subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2003-17, adopted Mar. 10, 2003. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-86, adopted Oct. 28, 2013, states: "The City Commission of the City of McAllen, Texas, in open session at a regularly scheduled meeting, hereby approves the assignment and transfer by ONEOK to ONE Gas, subject to the requirement that ONE Gas sign the acceptance of this ordinance, which shall indicate that ONE Gas assumes all of ONEOK's rights, title and interests in or to the franchise and all rights and privileges granted thereunder, to be effective upon the closing of the transaction by which ONE Gas acquires certain assets and liabilities of ONEOK, including those relating to the franchise and the franchise ordinance identified herein and assumes the obligations thereunder." 

Section 1. - Grant of franchise. 
A.  Subject to the terms and conditions of this franchise ordinance, the right, privilege and franchise is hereby granted to Texas Gas Service Company, a division of ONEOK, Inc., and to its successors, lessees and assigns (hereinafter "company" or "grantee"), to have, own, acquire, install, construct, reconstruct, operate, maintain, use, and extend a system of mains, pipelines, conduits, valves, feeders, regulator stations, laterals, service lines, measuring devices, and all other necessary plants, attachments, land, structures, facilities and appurtenances (hereinafter the "system") for the purpose of selling, storing, supplying, conveying, transmitting, distributing, and/or transporting natural gas, including the equivalent substitutes, for all other lawful purposes in, through, upon, under, and along the present and future streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, sidewalks, parks, easements, highways, and any other public places including any streams, watercourses or waterways (hereinafter collectively referred to as "public ways") within the city limits of the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas (the "city"), and including any territory that the city may hereafter annex, acquire or purchase; and to distribute, sell, store, supply, transport, carry and/or convey natural gas through grantee's system in the city to other cities, towns, communities and areas outside the city and to inhabitants thereof, for the full term of this franchise ordinance. The franchise ordinance shall in no way affect or impair the present or future rights, obligations, or remedies of the city or grantee under the Gas Utility Regulatory Act, as amended. 
B.  For purposes of this franchise ordinance, "transport gas" or "transported gas" shall mean gas owned or controlled by a user or its designee (i.e., gas that is purchased or otherwise acquired by a user from someone other than grantee) and delivered by such user or its designee to grantee at a point on grantee's distribution system, such point of delivery to be defined by grantee, and carried, delivered or transported through grantee's system at a point of redelivery in the city by grantee to the user for a fee. The terms and conditions of the transportation arrangement, including but not limited to the point(s) of delivery, point(s) of redelivery, measurement and location of title transfer, shall be as set forth in the contract entered into between grantee and the transportation customer and/or grantee's transportation tariffs on file with the Railroad Commission of Texas or other appropriate regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 2013-39, § 1, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 2013-86, 10-28-13) 
Section 2. - Location of facilities and use of public ways. 
A.  The mainlines and service pipes of the company shall be laid in alleys, streets, and avenues, and other public ways, and when in streets and avenues, shall be laid parallel with the curbline thereof, or in such locations as shall be most practical; provided, however, that in no case shall any main be laid less than 18 inches below the established street grade, or if not within a street right-of-way at least 18 inches below the grade of the nearest street, without permission of the city engineer. 
B.  The company is hereby authorized, licensed and empowered to do any and all things necessary and proper to be done and performed in executing the powers and utilizing the privilege granted by this franchise ordinance, provided the same do not conflict with existing infrastructure in the public ways. Except in the case of an emergency, the company agrees to give the city reasonable notice (not less than 21 calendar days) of the dates, location and nature of all work to be performed on the company's facilities or system within the public ways or rights-of-way. This franchise ordinance shall constitute a permit to perform all work on existing company facilities or the system within the public ways or rights-of-way. 
C.  Except in the case of an emergency, within the city's full purpose jurisdiction, when the company desires to lay any new mains hereunder, and before commencing its new construction work, it shall submit to the city engineer, or other proper authority, a map or plan showing the streets, avenues, alleys, and other public places and the locations it proposes to construct such new pipes and mains. The city engineer, or other proper authority, shall by written notice, either issue or deny the permit to company within a reasonable period of time (not to exceed ten calendar days) of submission of required information by grantee. Approval by the city engineer, or other proper authority, shall constitute a permit to the company for the opening of the streets, avenues, alleys and other public places shown on the map or plan, and for the new construction or laying of the new mains and pipes by the company (the "permit") as shown on the plan. If the city engineer, or other proper authority, does not respond within ten calendar days, the permit shall be deemed approved and accepted. In the event that the permit is denied, the city engineer, or other proper authority, shall advise grantee in writing of the reasons for the denial and all necessary steps to secure approval of the permit. Company shall have the right to immediately appeal the denial of the permit to the city manager, and if not determined within five calendar days by the city manager, the company may appeal to the city council and be heard at a public meeting held in compliance with applicable law. If the council fails to act on the appeal within 21 days, the appeal will be deemed to be denied unless agreed otherwise in writing by the company and the city. Appeal of any decision made by the city council shall be made to the District Court of Travis County, Texas, and an appeal from any decision of the district court shall be as in all other civil actions. It shall not be necessary for company to secure a permit for the laying of service pipes from the mainline pipes of the company to its customers. This section 2C. shall also apply to all other facilities and equipment of the company to be constructed or installed on public property within the city's full purpose jurisdiction; provided that company shall not construct, install or erect any facilities or equipment above ground on any such public property without specific written permission of the city engineer, or other proper public authority. 
D.  In the refilling of all openings made by the company, it shall restore the city public rights-of-way to a condition equal to or better than the original condition, and when the company shall open any ground in the city rights-of-way, the company shall open no more space nor keep the space open any longer than is reasonably necessary to properly execute the work for which such space shall have been opened. The company shall at all times display and keep the necessary danger signals and barricades around all excavations and obstructions, and shall keep sufficient space in good condition for the travel of automobiles, trucks, and other motor vehicles, on at least one side of all excavations and obstructions. The company shall comply with all applicable city ordinances, rules and regulations for the repair of cuts and excavations, as are applicable to all other franchisees of the city. 
E.  The company shall not install any pipe, line or facility within any park or recreational land, and shall not install any above ground facility on city property, without specific written permission. The company may petition the council for permission to cross park lands, and any such permission shall be in the sole discretion of the council. 
F.  If city in constructing its sewers, streets, utilities or other public works should require any mains, laterals or other system facilities or equipment located in public ways to be shifted or relocated, such mains, laterals or other facilities or equipment shall be timely shifted or relocated by company at its own expense as and when required by city. 
G.  When company is required by city to remove or relocate its mains, laterals and other facilities to accommodate construction of public ways or other public or city-owned facilities, and company is eligible for reimbursement under federal, state, county, local or other programs of costs and expenses incurred by company as a result of such removal or relocation, and such reimbursement is required to be handled through city, company's costs and expenses shall be included in any application by city for reimbursement, if company submits its cost and expense documentation to city prior to the filing of the application. City shall provide reasonable notice to company of the deadline for company to submit documentation of the costs and expenses of such relocation to city. Any failure by city to notify company of any application deadlines or to include company within any reimbursement application hereunder shall not constitute a waiver of company's rights, if any, to seek available reimbursement under applicable law. 
H.  Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit, alter or modify in any way the right of company to seek or recover its costs and expenses of removal or relocation pursuant to V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 104.112. 
(Ord. No. 2013-39, § 1, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 2013-86, 10-28-13) 
Section 3. - Effect of other ordinances and agreements. 
    Except as provided in section 11, grantee, its successors, lessees or assigns, shall at all times be subject to any ordinances now in existence, or which may hereafter be passed, not inconsistent herewith. No fee or other charges of any kind shall be imposed upon grantee, or upon any consumer of gas, for the breaking or opening of any streets or other public ways or for the laying, construction, or maintenance of mainlines, service pipes or other facilities therein except as provided for hereunder. Nothing in this franchise ordinance shall be construed in such manner as to in any way abridge the right of the city to pass the necessary police ordinances for the protection of the citizens of the city and their property, and the property of grantee, as long as such ordinances are not inconsistent with this franchise ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-39, § 1, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 2013-86, 10-28-13) 
Section 4. - Damage to city properties. 
    Grantee shall use reasonable efforts to avoid permanent damage to any street, avenue, alley, lane, bridge, stream, watercourse, park or public place. If grantee fails to restore a worksite to a condition better than or equivalent to its condition immediately prior to the initiation of work, the city may complete the appropriate repair and bill grantee the associated costs. Grantee and city shall exercise reasonable efforts to ensure that any future installations of utilities in city public ways by grantee, city or other utility providers authorized by city do not unreasonably interfere with any facilities of grantee, city or other utility providers. 
(Ord. No. 2013-39, § 1, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 2013-86, 10-28-13) 
Section 5. - Grantee's rules of service. 
    Grantee, and its successors and assigns, shall have the right to adopt and enforce such reasonable rules of service as it deems necessary for the extension of its facilities, the sale of its natural gas and the prudent conduct of business, provided that such rules are not inconsistent with law or this franchise ordinance. Grantee shall supply natural gas and provide regulated services at the rates and under the terms and conditions specified by such rules, its tariffs filed with the city, and as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2013-39, § 1, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 2013-86, 10-28-13) 
Section 6. - Indemnification. 
A.  Grantee shall indemnify, save, defend, release and hold harmless the city and its officials, officers, employees, and agents for any and all claims for damages for which the city shall or might become liable to the extent caused by any negligent act or omission of grantee, its agents or contractors in the construction and operation of the system; provided, however, that in the event of such claim or claims being prosecuted against the city, grantee shall have the right to defend against the same, and to settle or discharge same in such manner as it may see fit, and the city shall give prompt written notice to grantee of the presentation or prosecution of such claims. 
B.  The city shall indemnify, save and hold harmless grantee to the extent permissible under law for any and all claims for damages for which the grantee shall or might become liable to the extent caused by any negligent act or omission of the city or its agents, contractors or subcontractors; provided, however, that in the event of such claim or claims being prosecuted against the grantee, city shall have the right to defend against the same, and to settle or discharge same in such manner as it may see fit, and the grantee shall give prompt written notice to city of the presentation or prosecution of such claims. 
(Ord. No. 2013-39, § 1, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 2013-86, 10-28-13) 
Section 7. - Assignment. 
    Grantee herein is expressly given the power and privilege to sell, transfer or assign this franchise ordinance, or any part of this franchise ordinance, to any person, entity or corporation affiliated with grantee. Grantee may sell, transfer or assign this franchise ordinance to a non-affiliated person, entity or corporation upon approval of the city and such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-39, § 1, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 2013-86, 10-28-13) 
Section 8. - Franchise fees. 
    As full consideration for the rights and privileges conferred by this franchise ordinance, and as a charge for the use of the streets, alleys and public ways, grantee shall collect from its customers and pay to the city a sum of money, known as the "franchise fee," equal to the sum of the following: 
(1)  Five percent of grantee's actual gross receipts from gas sales and tariffed miscellaneous service charges and gross receipts taxes; plus 
(2)  Five percent of grantee's actual gross receipts from gas transportation; plus 
(3)  For the first 3,000 MCF per month of transportation volumes, four percent of the imputed gas purchases, as defined in section 8B; plus 
(4)  For transportation volumes in excess of 3,000 MCF per month, two percent of the imputed gas purchases. 
A.  Subject to the other provisions herein, gross receipts from gas sales shall be defined in accordance with grantee's tariffs more specifically as grantee's total receipts from its gas sales to its customers located within the corporate limits of the city consisting of the following receipts: (i) cost of service; and (ii) purchased gas and applicable revenue adjustments. Gross receipts from gas transportation shall be defined in accordance with grantee's tariffs more specifically as grantee's total receipts from its transportation of third party gas for re-delivery to customers with re-delivery points located within the corporate limits of the city consisting of its receipts from cost of service. Grantee's gross receipts from gas sales and gross receipts from gas transportation subject to the franchise fee shall specifically exclude: (1) receipts from gas sales or gas transportation services to customers located at delivery points outside the corporate limits of the city, (2) receipts from gas consumed or transported by grantee for its own use, (3) bad debt or uncollected accounts, (4) receipts collected for gas utility taxes (V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 122), (5) receipts for any taxes, assessments, charges or fees of any kind, other than gross receipts taxes, (6) receipts for construction advances or contributions in aid of construction, (7) receipts for maintenance of appliances, machinery or equipment, (8) receipts for compensation for damage to grantee's property, (9) receipts from sales of materials, appliances or equipment, (10) receipts from any non-utility or non-regulated services or products, and (11) receipts for the generation of electricity. 
B.  Imputed gas purchases shall mean the actual volumes of gas transported for customers located within the City of McAllen, multiplied by the index price. Imputed gas purchases shall be calculated monthly. 
C.  Index price shall mean the Houston Ship Channel/Beaumont, Texas "Indexed Price" for large packages as published in "Inside FERC's Gas Market Report" under "Delivered Spot-Gas Prices" printed in the first issue of each calendar month (or other mutually agreeable index) or, if provided by the transportation customer in writing to grantee prior to the 15th day of the applicable month, the actual per-unit cost to the customer of the delivered purchase price of gas at the point of entry into the City of McAllen for that month. 
D.  Unless expressly set forth herein, or otherwise provided by law, by accepting this franchise ordinance, grantee does not agree to be responsible for the payment of franchise fees owed to the city by any other entity, corporation or firm. It is expressly agreed and understood by grantee and the city that the franchise fees due herein shall be based upon gas sold to, gas transported for, and utility regulated services provided to its customers located in the city and shall not be based, in any way, upon any other sources of receipts, revenues, contributions, or any other sources of income. 
E.  During the term of this franchise ordinance, grantee shall collect from its customers and pay the city in July and January for the preceding six months, not including July and January. Grantee shall include with the franchise fee payment a statement showing its gross receipts from gas sales, gas transportation in the city, and utility regulated service charges in the city, including the calculation of the franchise fee for the subject time period. Such statement shall be in a mutually agreeable format. Collection and payment of franchise fees shall be final as to both parties unless questioned by written notice provided to the other party within three years after payment thereof has been made. 
F.  It is expressly agreed that the franchise fee payments shall be in lieu of any payments for the right to use the public rights-of-way of the city, including expressly the charge permitted to be levied by V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 182.021-182.026, 182.081 and 182.082, or any successor statute permitting such a charge, however designated. The franchise fee shall be in lieu of and accepted as payment of all of grantee's obligations to pay all other franchise, license, easement or occupation taxes, levies, exactions, fees, rentals, street-cut fees, inspection fees, permit fees, franchise fees, or charges of any kind whatsoever which may be levied or attempted to be levied by the city for use of city's rights-of-way, with the sole exception of sales taxes and ad valorem taxes. 
G.  It is expressly agreed by the city that the franchise fees defined in this franchise ordinance are a reasonable and necessary operating expense of grantee and shall be fully recovered by grantee by collection from its customers in the city, whether asserted retroactively or prospectively, by revising its rate schedules, assessing an additional charge to the monthly bills of its customers within the city, adding an additional charge to the grantee's purchased gas adjustment clause for the city or in any legal manner determined in grantee's discretion. 
H.  The city may, upon reasonable prior written notice and during reasonable business hours, inspect and review the books and records of grantee to verify the amount of franchise fees due. It is understood and agreed that such representative may be an independent agent, assigned by the city commission to conduct the inspection of grantee's books and records for the reconciliation of franchise fee payments to determine the accuracy thereof. 
I.  The rights, privileges, and franchises granted by this franchise ordinance are not to be considered exclusive, and city hereby expressly reserves the right to grant, at any time as it may see fit, like privileges, rights, and franchises to any other person or corporation for the purpose of furnishing gas in the city. In the event any entity providing gas sales or gas transportation service to customers within the city (other than grantee) is not legally required to pay the same or an equivalent franchise fee as required to be collected and paid by grantee in this franchise ordinance, then with respect to gas sales or transportation service to those specific customers, grantee's franchise fee obligation resulting from sales or transportation service to those specific customers may be automatically reduced by grantee to a level equivalent to the amount the city legally requires to be paid by such other entity. 
J.  If, for any reason, including unbundling or deregulation of the electrical power utility industry, the city should no longer receive from electric utilities any franchise fees on the energy charge, fuel charge, or transportation/distribution charge, paid by any of grantee's transportation customers within the city, and if, in grantee's reasonable judgment, such a customer is likely to engage in fuel switching as a result of the resulting price advantage, then grantee will not be required to pay franchise fees on imputed gas sales to such customer; provided, however, city shall be notified, in writing, prior to implementation of such a decision by grantee. If city determines that such a decision by grantee was not reasonable, grantee and city shall endeavor to resolve such dispute pursuant to the dispute resolution provisions hereof. 
K.  The city shall be paid a franchise fee once with respect to the same gas sold and/or transported within the city. Should the city receive or be entitled to receive from any other company, firm, corporation or person a franchise fee or similar street rental fee payment from the transportation and/or sale of the same or equivalent gas, the aggregate amount which the city has received or is entitled to receive with respect to the same or equivalent gas transported and/or sold by grantee shall be deducted from, and reported with, the franchise fee payment to be made to the city by grantee hereunder. Among other things, this section is intended to apply to gas purchased by grantee for resale to its customers within the city and to transport gas redelivered by grantee within the city. Upon request of grantee, the city agrees to provide grantee, within a reasonable time of its receipt, with written notice setting forth the amounts of any such franchise fee or other fee received for the use of its streets for the transportation or sale of gas in the city that is ultimately transported or delivered through grantee's system in the city. 
L.  It is recognized by the city that the intent of sections 8(J), 8(K) and 8(L) is to insure that, with respect to franchise fees, grantee is on a level playing field with its competitors so as to avoid unjust discrimination against grantee. 
M.  In the event that company agrees to pay to any other city in its Rio Grande Valley service area franchise fees exceeding five percent on gross receipts from sales or gross receipts from transportation, the franchise fees payable to the City of McAllen shall be increased to match such rates. 
N.  If grantee fails to pay when due any payment provided for in this section, grantee shall pay such amount plus interest consistent with the rate for customer deposits under V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 183.003 from such date until payment is received by city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-39, § 1, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 2013-86, 10-28-13) 
Section 9. - Annexations by city. 
    The city shall notify grantee in writing of the annexation of any new territory into its city limits by providing the legal description, maps and any other relevant information such as the GPS/GIS information that highlight the newly annexed territory. Upon receipt of written notice of annexation from the city, grantee shall have 90 days to begin collecting and paying the franchise fee for any revenues received from grantee's customers residing in the newly annexed territories. City shall assist grantee in determining and classifying exemptions from franchise fees for grantee's customers, including providing or requiring written confirmation of the customer's claimed exemption. 
(Ord. No. 2013-39, § 1, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 2013-86, 10-28-13) 
Section 10. - Dispute resolution. 
    Resolution of any dispute arising under this franchise ordinance between the city and the grantee, or any of its affiliates shall first be attempted by submitting the dispute to mediation. The dispute shall be submitted to mediation upon the written demand of either party. The mediation shall be held in Travis County, Texas at the location designated by the party demanding the mediation. The mediator shall be selected by agreement within 20 calendar days from the date the demand for mediation is received by the other party. If an agreement cannot be reached on a mediator within the time period stated herein, each party shall submit the name of a mediator and the selection will be made by chance drawing. The party not making the demand for mediation shall make the blind draw from the names submitted in the presence of the other party. Thereafter, the mediation shall be held at the selected designation within 30 calendar days. Mediation of any dispute shall be a condition precedent to filing a lawsuit, except that nothing herein shall preclude a party from seeking a mandatory or prohibitive injunction, or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce or maintain the status quo pending mediation of any dispute. 
(Ord. No. 2013-39, § 1, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 2013-86, 10-28-13) 
Section 11. - Miscellaneous. 
A.  Conflicting ordinances. To the extent that all or any part of any other existing ordinance shall conflict with any provision of this franchise ordinance, this ordinance shall prevail upon passage, adoption, and acceptance of this ordinance. 
B.  Notices. Any notices required or desired to be given from one party to the other to this ordinance shall be in writing and shall be given and shall be deemed to have been served and received if: (i) delivered in person to the address set forth below; (ii) deposited in an official depository under the regular care and custody of the United States Postal Service located within the confines of the United States of America and sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, and addressed to such party at the address hereinafter specified; or (iii) delivered to such party by courier receipted delivery. Either party may designate another address within the confines of the continental United States of America for notice, but until written notice of such change is actually received by the other party, the last address of such party designated for notice shall remain such party's address for notice. 
CITY 
City Manager 
City of McAllen 
P.O. Box 220 
McAllen, Texas 78505-0220 TEXAS GAS SERVICE COMPANY 
Texas Gas Service, a Div. of 
ONEOK, lnc. 
Attn: Legal Department 
1301 South Mopac, Suite 400 
Austin, Texas 78746  
C.  Amendment of franchise ordinance. This ordinance may not be amended except pursuant to a written instrument signed by both parties. 
D.  Waiver of breach. The waiver by either party of any breach or violation of any provision of this ordinance shall not be deemed to be a waiver or a continuing waiver of any subsequent breach or violation of the same or any other provision of this ordinance. 
E.  No third party beneficiaries. This ordinance is for the benefit of Texas Gas Service Company, and the city, and not for the benefit of any third party. No provision of this ordinance shall be construed as creating any third party beneficiaries. 
F.  Severability. Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, it is expressly provided that any and all remaining portions of this ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. City hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional or invalid. 
G.  Public meeting. It is hereby officially found that the meeting at which this ordinance is passed is open to the public and that due notice of this meeting was posted, all as required by law. 
H.  Sovereign immunity. The parties hereto agree that the city has not waived its sovereign immunity by entering into and performing its obligations under this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-39, § 1, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 2013-86, 10-28-13) 
Section 12. - Effective date and term. 
    This franchise ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its final passage and approval by the City Council of the City of McAllen and the acceptance hereof in writing by grantee as herein provided. This franchise ordinance shall continue and remain in full force and effect for a period of ten years, subject to an automatic five-year extension unless either party provides notice to the other of an intent to terminate the agreement at least 90 days prior to December 31, 2023. 
(Ord. No. 2013-39, § 1, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 2013-86, 10-28-13) 
Section 13. - Acceptance by grantee. 
    Grantee shall, within 60 days from the approval of this franchise ordinance signed by the mayor, file in the office of the city clerk its consent to and written acceptance of provisions and conditions of this franchise ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-39, § 1, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 2013-86, 10-28-13) 
ARTICLE IV. - TELEPHONE 
DIVISION 1. - SOUTHWESTERN BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY[9] 
ORDINANCE NO. 1991-73 
AN ORDINANCE WHEREBY THE CITY OF McALLEN, TEXAS, AND SOUTHWESTERN BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY AGREE THAT, FOR THE PURPOSE OF OPERATING ITS TELECOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS, THE TELEPHONE COMPANY SHALL MAINTAIN AND CONSTRUCT ITS POLES, WIRES, ANCHORS, FIBER, CABLES, MANHOLES, CONDUITS AND OTHER PHYSICAL PLANT AND APPURTENANCES IN, ALONG, ACROSS, ON, OVER, THROUGH, ABOVE AND UNDER ALL PUBLIC STREETS, AVENUES, HIGHWAYS, ALLEYS, SIDEWALKS, BRIDGES OR PUBLIC WAYS IN SAID CITY; PRESCRIBING THE ANNUAL COMPENSATION DUE THE CITY UNDER THIS ORDINANCE; PRESCRIBING THE CONDITIONS GOVERNING THE USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND THE PERFORMANCE OF CERTAIN CONSTRUCTION WORK ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR THE TELEPHONE COMPANY'S TELECOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS. 
    WHEREAS, Southwestern Bell Telephone Company (hereinafter referred to as the "telephone company") is now and has been engaged in the telecommunications business in the State of Texas and in furtherance thereof, has erected and maintained certain items of its physical plant in the City of McAllen, Texas (hereinafter referred to as the "city") for many years pursuant to such rights as have been granted it by and under the laws of the State of Texas, and subject to the reasonable exercise of the police powers granted by and under said laws to the city; and 
    WHEREAS, the telephone company has operated its telecommunications business in the city under successive ordinances of the city, the last of which was the ordinance adopted April 3, 1940, which provided compensation to the city for the superintendence of that agreement based upon a percentage of gross receipts received by the telephone company from certain local services rendered within the corporate limits of the city; and 
    WHEREAS, it is recognized by the parties that changes in the telecommunications industry, changes in technology, changes in state and federal law, and changes in the accounting practices mandated by the Uniform System of Accounts promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), along with regulatory requirements of the Texas Public Utility Commission (PUC), have caused the traditional method of determining the amount of compensation to municipalities to become administratively impractical and obsolete for telecommunications utilities. In order to resolve these issues in a manner satisfactory to both the city and the telephone company, the city and the telephone company have chosen the method of determining the amount of compensation provided for in this ordinance to eliminate the expense and time related to audits, to achieve administrative simplicity, to provide the city with predictable revenues and an opportunity for growth and to avoid the expense and delays of litigation which could be necessary to resolve any issues in controversy between the parties; and 
    WHEREAS, it is to the mutual advantage of both the city and the telephone company that an agreement should be entered into between the telephone company and the city establishing the conditions under which the telephone company shall maintain and construct its physical plant in the city in the future; 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF McALLEN, TEXAS, THAT: 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1991-73, §§ 1-18, enacted Sept. 23, 1991, amended the Code by enacting a new telephone franchise. Such ordinance was codified as superseding former app. E, art. V, div. 1, which pertained to similar subject matter. 

Section 1. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to the laws of the State of Texas, the city Charter and this ordinance, the telephone company has the nonexclusive right and privilege to use the public rights-of-way in the city for the operation of a telecommunications system subject to the restrictions set forth herein. The telephone company may use such rights-of-way for its telecommunications facilities. The telephone company's facilities and transmission media used in or incident to the provision of telecommunications service and to the maintenance of a telecommunications business by the telephone company in the city shall remain as now constructed, subject to such changes as under the conditions prescribed in this ordinance may be considered necessary to the public health and safety by the city in the exercise of its lawful police powers and such changes and extensions as may be considered necessary by the telephone company in the pursuit of its telecommunications business. The terms of this ordinance shall apply throughout the city, and to all operations of the telephone company within the city, and shall include all operations and facilities used in whole or in part in the provision of telecommunications services in newly annexed areas upon the effective date of any annexation. 
Section 2. - Additional authority required. 
    The telephone company is not authorized to provide cable television service in the city under this ordinance, but must first obtain a separate agreement from the city for that purpose, under such terms and conditions as may be required by law. This section does not preclude the telephone company from providing its tariffed services to cable television companies. 
Section 3. - Definitions. 
    Whenever used in this ordinance, the following words and terms shall have the definitions and meanings provided in this section: 
(a)  Facilities: All telephone company duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways, and other equipment, structures and appurtenances and all associated transmission media. 
(b)  Use: Any telephone company acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance or operation of any facilities in, over, under, along, through or across the public rights-of-way for any purpose whatsoever. 
(c)  City: The City of McAllen, Texas. 
(d)  Rights-of-way: All present and future streets, avenues, highways, alleys, bridges and public property within the city limits of the city. 
(e)  Direction of the city: All ordinances, laws, rules, regulations, and Charter provisions of the city now in force or that may hereafter be passed and adopted which are not inconsistent with this ordinance. 
(f)  Transmission media: All telephone company cables, fibers, wires or other physical devices used to transmit and/or receive communication signals, whether analog, digital or of other characteristics, and whether for voice, data or other purposes. 
(g)  Nonexclusive: No rights agreed to in this ordinance by the city shall be exclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant franchises, licenses, easements or permissions to use the public rights-of-way within the city to any person or entity as the city, in its sole discretion, may determine to be in the public interest. 
(h)  Telephone company: Southwestern Bell Telephone Company. 
Section 4. - Term. 
    This ordinance shall be in force and effect from January 1, 1997, through December 31, 1997, unless earlier terminated pursuant to Section 16. 
(Ord. No. 1996-76, § I, 11-11-96) 
Section 5. - Supervision by city of location of poles and conduits. 
    All poles placed shall be of sound material and reasonably straight, and shall be set so that they will not interfere with the flow of water in any gutter or drain, and so that the same will not unduly interfere with ordinary travel on the streets or sidewalks. The location and route of all poles, stubs, guys, anchors, conduits, fiber and cables placed and constructed by the telephone company in the construction and maintenance of its telecommunications system in the city shall be subject to the lawful, reasonable and proper control and direction of the city. 
Section 6. - Attachments to poles and space in ducts. 
    Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to require or permit any pole attachments for electric light or power wires or communications facilities or systems not provided by the telephone company to be attached to the telephone company's poles or other physical plant or placed in the telephone company's conduit. If the city desires pole attachments for electric light or power wires or communications facilities or systems not provided by the telephone company, or if the city desires to place communications facilities or systems not provided by the telephone company in any telephone company duct, then a further separate, noncontingent agreement shall be prerequisite to such attachment(s) or such use of any duct by the city. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall obligate or restrict the telephone company in exercising its rights voluntarily to enter into pole attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with light and/or power companies or with other wire-using companies which are authorized to operate within the city. 
Section 7. - Streets to be restored to preexisting condition. 
    The surface of any public street, avenue, highway, alley or public place disturbed by the telephone company in the construction or maintenance of its telecommunications system shall be restored within a reasonable time after the completion of the work to as good a condition as before the commencement of the work. Should the city reasonably determine, within one year from the date of such restoration, that such surface requires additional restoration work to place it in as good a condition as before the commencement of the work, the telephone company shall perform such additional restoration work to the reasonable satisfaction of the city. No public street, avenue, highway, alley or public place shall be encumbered for a longer period than shall be reasonably necessary to execute all work. 
Section 8. - Temporary rearrangement of aerial wires. 
    Upon request, the telephone company shall remove or raise or lower its aerial wires, fiber or cables temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting them, and the telephone company may require payment in advance. The telephone company shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary rearrangements. 
Section 9. - Tree trimming. 
    The right, license, privilege and permission is hereby granted to the telephone company, its contractors and agents, to trim trees upon and overhanging the streets, avenues, highways, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the aerial wires, fiber or cables of the telephone company, and when so directed by the city, said trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city or of any city official to whom said duties have been or may be delegated. 
Section 10. - Indemnity. 
    The telephone company shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from all costs, expenses (including attorney's fees) and damages to persons or property arising directly or indirectly out of the construction, maintenance or operation of the telephone company's facilities located within the public rights-of-way found to be caused solely by the negligence of the telephone company. This provision is not intended to create a cause of action or liability for the benefit of third parties but is solely for the benefit of the telephone company and the city nor is this provision intended to abrogate the common law or statutory rights of either the city or the telephone company to indemnity or contribution from the other. 
Section 11. - Administration of ordinance. 
(a)  The city may, at any time, make inquiries pertaining to this ordinance and the telephone company shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis. 
(b)  Copies of petitions, applications, communications and reports submitted by the telephone company to the Federal Communications Commission or the public utility commission of Texas shall be provided to the city upon request. 
(c)  The city may establish, after reasonable notice, such rules and regulations as may be appropriate for the administration of this ordinance and the construction of the telephone company's facilities on city property to the extent permitted by law. 
Section 12. - Compensation to the city. 
(a)  As compensation for the use, occupancy, oversight, supervision and regulation of the city's rights-of-way, and in lieu of and in full compensation for any lawful tax or license or charge or right-of-way permit fee or inspection fee, whether charged to the telephone company or its contractor(s), or any right-of-way easement or street or alley rental or franchise tax or other character of charge for use and occupancy of the rights-of-way within the city, except the usual general ad valorem taxes, special assessments in accordance with state law or sales taxes now or hereafter levied by the city in accordance with state law, the city hereby imposes a charge upon the gross receipts (as hereinafter defined) of the telephone company. The amount of the charge for the first year this ordinance is in effect shall be $546,800.00. In no event shall such charge be less than the above amount for each year this ordinance is in effect, except as provided in the case of disannexation as set forth in subsection 12(e), or as provided in section 16 herein. 
    The telephone company will, according to tariff, bill such charge to the customers billed the customer service charges included within the term "gross receipts," as defined herein. Gross receipts, for purposes of this charge, shall include only customer service charges which meet all four of the following conditions: 
(1)  Such charges are for telephone company services provided within the city; 
(2)  Such charges are billed through the telephone company's customer records information system (CRIS); 
(3)  Such charges are the recurring charges for the local exchange access rate element specified in the telephone company's tariffs filed with the PUC; 
(4)  Such charges are subject to an interstate end user common line (EUCL) charge as imposed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
For the second and subsequent years while this ordinance remains in effect, the above charge is subject to adjustment by application of the growth factor set out in subsection 12(c). This adjustment for the growth factor will be made effective as of each anniversary date of this ordinance. 
    The telephone company shall adjust its billings to customers to account for any undercollection or overcollection for the prior year. 
(b)  The charge for each year shall be paid in four equal installments on May 31, August 31, November 30 and February 28 except for the final installment for the last year which shall be due as hereafter provided. This final installment for the year in which this ordinance expires, after making any necessary adjustment for the balance of any overcollection or undercollection of the charge to or from the telephone company's customers, shall be paid to the city within 150 days following the date of expiration of this ordinance. In the event of any overcollection balance from customers at the expiration of this ordinance, the telephone company may make a pro rata one-time credit to the customer billing for affected customers who are billed for a service included within gross receipts, as defined in subsection 12(a); provided, however, if it is impractical to credit such overcollection to customers, then such overcollection shall be paid to the city. 
(c)  The growth factor shall be calculated by dividing the telephone company's revenues within the corporate limits of the city subject to the state telecommunications sales tax ("sales tax revenues") applicable to services rendered within the corporate limits of the city for the 12-month period ending three months prior to the next anniversary date of this ordinance by the sales tax revenues for the 12-month period ending three months prior to either the initial effective date or the preceding anniversary date of this ordinance as applicable. The growth factor calculated by the method set forth in the preceding sentence, if greater than one, shall be multiplied by the current year's charge to determine the dollar amount of the charge for the next year. If the growth factor calculated above is one or less, the charge for the next year shall be equal to the current year's charge. The telephone company will adjust its customer billing to account for the growth factor calculated above. 
    Stated another way, for example, the charge and growth factor for the first three years of an ordinance shall be calculated as follows: 
    Example: Charge and Growth Factor for an Ordinance Effective October 1, 1991: 
Payment year 1 Oct. 1, 1991- 
Sept. 30, 1992 Charge for the first payment year = First year charge Payment year 2 Oct. 1, 1992- 
Sept. 30, 1993 First year charge × growth factor, if any (sales tax revenues for 12-month period ending three months prior to Oct. 1, 1992 ("STR") ° by sales tax revenues for 12-month period ending three months prior to Oct. 1, 1991 ("STR")) = Second year charge Payment year 3 Oct. 1, 1993- 
Sept. 30, 1994 Second year charge × growth factor, if any (sales tax revenues for 12-month period ending three months prior to Oct. 1, 1993 ("STR") ° by sales tax revenues for 12-month period ending three months prior to Oct. 1, 1992 ("STR")) = Third year charge  
    Once the growth factor calculation is completed, the telephone company will provide the city with the sales tax revenues upon which the growth factor calculation was based. 
    The city agrees to rely upon audits by the Texas comptroller of public accounts of state telecommunications sales taxes as reported by the telephone company which are performed in compliance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 151.023 and 151.027 (Vernon's 1982). 
_____
(d)  Such payments shall not relieve the telephone company from paying all applicable municipally owned utility service charges. Should the city not have the legal power to agree that the payment of the foregoing charge shall be in lieu of the taxes, licenses, charges, rights-of-way permit or inspection fees, rentals, rights-of-way easements or franchise taxes aforesaid, then the city agrees that it will apply so much of such payments as may be necessary to the satisfaction of the telephone company's obligation, if any, to pay any such taxes, licenses, charges, rights-of-way permit or inspection fees, rentals, rights-of-way easements or franchise taxes. 
(e)  In the event that either: 
(1)  Territory within the boundaries of the city shall be disannexed and a new incorporated municipality created which includes such territory; or 
(2)  An entire, existing incorporated municipality shall be consolidated or annexed into the city; then notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, the charge shall be adjusted. To accomplish this adjustment, within 30 days following the action effecting a disannexation/annexation as described above, the city shall provide the telephone company with maps of the affected area(s) showing the new boundaries of the city. 
    In the event of an annexation as described above, the charge for the city will be adjusted to include the amount of the payment by the telephone company to the existing incorporated municipality being annexed. In the event that the annexed municipality had no ordinance imposing a charge or in the event of a disannexation, then the adjustment to the charge will be calculated using the effective date of the imposition of local sales taxes as determined by the Texas comptroller of public accounts. The adjustment shall be the per cent increase/decrease in the telephone company's gross receipts as defined herein for the city for the first calendar month following the local sales tax effective date compared to the last month prior to such effective date. This adjustment to the charge will be made on the first day of the second month following the local sales tax effective date and the adjusted charge shall be prorated from that date through the remainder of the payment year. The charge as adjusted shall be used for all future calculations required by this ordinance. 
Section 13. - Assignment of ordinance. 
    This ordinance and any rights or privileges hereunder shall not be assignable to any other entity without the express consent of the city. Such consent shall be evidenced by an ordinance which shall fully recite the terms and conditions, if any, upon which such consent is given. 
Section 14. - Mutual releases. 
    The city hereby fully releases, discharges, settles and compromises any and all claims which the city has made or could have made arising out of or connected with the ordinance adopted April 3, 1940, and renewed or extended from time to time thereafter, and its predecessor ordinances, if any (hereinafter referred to collectively as "1940 ordinance"). This full and complete release of claims for any matters under the 1940 ordinance shall be for the benefit of Southwestern Bell Telephone Company; its parent; its affiliates; their directors, officers and employees; successors and assigns; and includes any and all claims, actions, causes of action and controversies, presently known or unknown, arising directly or indirectly out of or connected with the telephone company's obligations to the city pursuant to the provisions of the 1940 ordinance. Southwestern Bell Telephone Company, its parent, its affiliates, successors and assigns hereby fully release, discharge, settle and compromise any and all claims, actions, causes of action or controversies heretofore made or which could have been made, known or unknown, against the city, its officers or its employees, arising out of or connected with any matters under the 1940 ordinance. 
    It is the intent of the city and the telephone company to enter into the foregoing mutual releases in order to reach a compromise that is acceptable to both the city and the telephone company. This ordinance and the mutual releases set forth in this section represent a compromise of each party's claims as well as each party's defenses, and is not intended to be and is not an admission of liability or vulnerability by either party to the other with respect to either the claims or the defenses asserted against the other. 
Section 15. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances and agreements. 
    The ordinance adopted April 3, 1940, is hereby repealed; provided, however, such repeal shall take effect at 11:59 p.m. on the day immediately preceding the effective date specified in the section of this ordinance entitled "Acceptance of agreement and effective date." All other ordinances and agreements and parts of ordinances and agreements in conflict herewith are also repealed, which repeal shall take effect at the time and on the date specified in the preceding sentence. 
Section 16. - Future contingency. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this ordinance to the contrary, in the event that: 
(1)  This ordinance or any part hereof; 
(2)  Any tariff provision by which the telephone company seeks to collect the charge imposed by this ordinance; or 
(3)  Any procedure provided in this ordinance; or 
(4)  Any compensation due the city under this ordinance, becomes, or is declared or determined by a judicial, administrative or legislative authority exercising its jurisdiction to be excessive, unrecoverable, unenforceable, void, unlawful or otherwise inapplicable, in whole or in part; 
the telephone company and city shall meet and negotiate a new ordinance that is in compliance with the authority's decision or enactment and, unless explicitly prohibited, the new ordinance shall provide the city with a level of compensation comparable to that set forth in this ordinance provided that such compensation is recoverable by the telephone company in a mutually agreed manner permitted by law for the unexpired portion of the term of this ordinance. 
(b)  Both parties agree that the extension of this ordinance is an interim arrangement and is not intended to be used, and will not be cited or referred to by either party, as evidence of what is in compliance with the requirements of Section 3.2555 of the revised PURA. Telephone company and city both hereby reserve all arguments and/or positions as to the appropriate interpretation and application required by the revised PURA. 
(c)  Further, notwithstanding anything contained in this ordinance to the contrary, both city and telephone company agree that either city or telephone company may terminate this ordinance upon a minimum of 30 days notice to the other party on or after the date that: (1) any entity applies for an original of, or an amendment to, a consent, franchise or permit with the city for use of the rights-of-way in the city for the provision of any telecommunications service; or (2) any entity with an existing consent, franchise, or permit for use of the rights-of-way in the city files an application with the Public Utility Commission of Texas for a certificate of operating authority or a service provider certificate of operating authority which includes any geographic area which is wholly or partially within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1996-76, § II, 11-11-96) 
Section 17. - Governing law. 
(a)  This ordinance shall be construed in accordance with the city Charter and City Code(s) in effect on the date of passage of this ordinance to the extent that such Charter and Code(s) are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas. 
(b)  This ordinance shall be construed and deemed to have been drafted by the combined efforts of the city and the telephone company. 
Section 18. - Acceptance of agreement and effective date. 
    The city shall deliver a properly certified copy of this ordinance to the telephone company within three working days of its final passage. The telephone company shall have 30 days from and after the final passage of this ordinance to file its written acceptance of this ordinance with the city secretary. This ordinance shall become effective beginning the first day of the quarter not less than 45 days after its final passage by the city. 
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE RATES 
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE RATES OF THE SOUTHWESTERN BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY IN THE CITY OF McALLEN, TEXAS. 
    WHEREAS, the schedule of rates for telephone service now charged in the City of McAllen has not been increased during the past 20 years, and 
    WHEREAS, during the same period of time the costs of labor and materials have increased to the point where the revenue produced from the current schedule of rates is no longer sufficient to cover the increased cost of furnishing telephone service in McAllen, and 
    WHEREAS, the telephone company has applied to the city commission for relief from this condition by an adjustment of its rates for service, and 
    WHEREAS, under the conditions, said proposed schedule of rates appears to the city commission as reasonable and just, and necessary to insure continued expansion and improvement of telephone service to the citizens of McAllen, and 
    WHEREAS, the city commission recognizes the right of the telephone company to earn a fair return on the fair value of its property devoted to the rendition of telephone service within the City of McAllen. 
    NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF McALLEN, 

Section 1. - [Rate schedules.] 
    That the Southwestern Bell Telephone Company is hereby authorized to place into effect October 1, 1974, or after the approval of the rates herein set by the other cities in the McAllen area exchange, whichever date is later and to be ap-plied uniformly throughout the McAllen area exchange, the following schedule of rates: 
BASIC SCHEDULE 
EXTENDED AREA SERVICE 
McALLEN, TEXAS 
Class of Service Rates   
Business one party flat rate ..... $17.85   
Business one party measured rate .....  10.20 (a) 
Semipublic coin service .....   7.15 (b) 
Residence one party flat rate .....   7.05  
Residence two party flat rate .....   5.40  
Extension business flat .....   1.80  
Extension business semipublic: 
Coin equipped .....   1.80  
Non-coin equipped .....   1.30  
Extension business measured .....   1.80  
Extension residence flat .....   1.30  
Private branch exchange-Commercial: 
Stations .....   1.80  
Trunks .....        (c) 
Private branch exchange-Hotel: 
Stations .....   1.30  
Trunks .....        (d) 
Notes: 
(a) Additional local messages over 100, $0.05 each. 
(b) The rate for flat rate semipublic coin telephone service is 40% of the rate for one party business flat rate service. 
(c) The rate for flat rate PBX trunk is 13/4 times the rate for one party business flat rate service. 
(d) Minimum local message revenue guarantee equal to business one party flat rate for each trunk. 
    Rates and charges for miscellaneous service and equipment shall be as set forth in "Schedule of Miscellaneous Rates and Charges XI" dated May 10, 1973, copy of which marked exhibit "A" [10] is attached hereto and made a part hereof for all purposes; provided, however, that Southwestern Bell Telephone Company shall have the right to file from time to time with the city clerk different rates and charges for such miscellaneous service and equipment, such different rates and charges to become effective 30 days after filing, unless otherwise ordered by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1974-50, § 1, 9-3-74) 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Exhibit "A" is not included herein but is on file in the office of the city secretary. 

Section 2. - [Regulation of rates, power of city.] 
    That nothing in this ordinance contained shall be construed as in any manner, now or hereafter, limiting or modifying the right and power of the city commission under the law to regulate the rates charged by the Southwestern Bell Telephone Company for its service within the City of McAllen. 
(Ord. No. 1974-50, § 2, 9-3-74) 
    PASSED AND APPROVED this the 1st day of March, 1948. 
_____
Mayor, City Commission 
City of McAllen, Texas ATTEST: _____
City Secretary  
DIVISION 3. - GRANTS EASEMENT 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A REVOCABLE EASEMENT AND AUTHORIZING THE CITY MANAGER OF THE CITY OF McALLEN, TEXAS TO EXECUTE A REVOCABLE EASEMENT TO SOUTHWESTERN BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY TO INSTALL, OPERATE, MAINTAIN, REPAIR, AND REMOVE A ONE-INCH TELEPHONE TRANSMISSION CABLE ON CERTAIN MILLER INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT PROPERTY DESCRIBED MORE FULLY HEREIN, AS FURTHER DESCRIBED IN THE REVOCABLE EASEMENT ATTACHED HERETO AND MADE A PART HEREOF, MARKED EXHIBIT "A," UPON THE PAYMENT OF THE CONSIDERATION THEREIN STATED; AND ORDAINING OTHER MATTERS RELATED TO THE FOREGOING. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY OF McALLEN, TEXAS THAT: 

Section 1. - [Execution of easement by city manager.] 
    The city manager of the City of McAllen, Texas is hereby authorized to execute and deliver, for and on behalf of the City of McAllen, Texas, an instrument of revocable easement to the Southwestern Bell Telephone Company to lay, construct, operate, maintain, repair and remove a one-inch telephone transmission cable within the Miller International Airport, as further described in the revocable easement, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part hereof for all purposes, marked exhibit "A," [11] upon payment of the consideration therein stated. 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Exhibit "A" is not set out herein but is on file in the office of the city secretary. 

Section 2. - [Publication of caption.] 
    The city secretary of the City of McAllen, Texas is hereby authorized and directed to cause a true and correct copy of the caption of this ordinance to be published in a newspaper having general circulation within the City of McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas. 
Section 3. - [Publication of section 1.] 
    The city secretary of the City of McAllen, Texas is further authorized and directed to cause a true and correct copy of section 1 of this ordinance to be published in the Code of Ordinances of the City of McAllen, Texas. 
    CONSIDERED, PASSED, and APPROVED at a regular meeting of the board of commissioners of McAllen, Texas at which a quorum was present and which was held in accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. 
    SIGNED this, the 14th day of December, 1981. 
/s/  _____
Othal E. Brand, Mayor 
City of McAllen ATTEST: /s/  _____
Natividad Sanchez, City Secretary  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law. 
Vernon's Ann. 
Civ. Stat. 
Article Section  Section  
this Code 6701d-11 46-96 13 Char., Art. 1, § 1 46c-1-46e-15 Ch. 18 1115 106-26 4413(29bb) 42-42 4477-9a Ch. 46, Art. IV 46-121 5.01 46-96 5.01 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. IV, Div. 2 5.08 46-97 5.09 46-98 46-100-46-102 46-104, 46-105 5.10 46-106 5069-51.01 86-26 5221f Ch. 122 6004-6066d Ch. 46, Art. VI 6243-101 22-140 15 Ch. 22, Art. IV 6243e 10A(d) 82-60 10A-2 82-58 6252-17 2-80 6252-17a 82-81 6675a-5e.1 10(a)(b) 102-242 6701d Ch. 102 22 102-62 27(a)(1) Ch. 102, Art. VI 27(a)(2) Ch. 102, Art. IV 102-60 31 Ch. 102, Art. IV 32 102-127 38 et seq. Ch. 102, Art. III 49 102-130 54 et seq. Ch. 102, Art. V 65 et seq. Ch. 102, Art. V, Div. 2 95 102-226 96 102-231 145 et seq. 102-62 166 102-187, 102-188 166 et seq. Ch. 102, Art. V, Div. 3 169 102-188 8861 9 Ch. 22, Art. VI  
Vernon's Ann. 
C.C.P. 
Article Section  
this Code 45.01 Ch. 34 45.01 et seq. 34-8 45.03 34-5 53.01 34-15 62.001(5) 70-25 103.0031 102-243  
V.A.T.S. 
Insurance Code 
Article Section  
this Code 5.43-4 Ch. 50, Art. IV ch. 151 90-122  
V.T.C.A. 
Agriculture 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code 251.002 22-201  
V.T.C.A. 
Alcoholic Beverage 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1.01 et seq. Ch. 6 ch. 25 6-2 ch. 28 6-2 ch. 32 6-2 ch. 69 6-2 ch. 74 6-2 109.33 6-2  
V.T.C.A. 
Civil Practices and Remedies 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code tit. 2 98-97 16.061 98-97  
V.T.C.A. 
Education 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code 61.003 98-92  
V.T.C.A. 
Election Code 
Section Section  
this Code 41.001 Char., Art. 3, § 3  
V.T.C.A. 
Family Code 
Section Section  
this Code ch. 31 70-22 33.01-33.03 74-112 ch. 41 66-6 ch. 51 70-24 51.03 70-23 ch. 52 70-24 52.01 70-23  
V.T.C.A. 
Government Code 
Section Section  
this Code 29.001 et seq. Char., Art. 6 Ch. 34 29.003 34-2 29.007(g) 34-3 29.010, 29.011 34-4 311.011 et seq. 1-2 ch. 551 2-4 82-50 138-413 551.001 et seq. 2-38 2-80 50-45 74-52 App. D, Art. II, 
Div. 1, § VII App. D, Art. III, 
Div. 2, § IV App. D, Art. IV, 
Div. 3, § 3 551.043(a) 2-36 ch. 552 2-4 552.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2 Ch. 2, Art. VII 24-39 552.012 2-4 802.202 et seq. 82-73 851.001 et seq. Ch. 82, Art. II, 
Div. 2 82-43 82-45 82-57 82-62 853.101 82-38 853.105 82-38 853.401(d) 82-44 853.401-853.403 82-44 854.102(b) 82-45 854.202(b) 82-45 854.202(g) 82-50  
V.T.C.A. 
Health and Safety 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code 191.0045(d), (h) 2-341 191.0045(e) 2-341 342.001 46-27 342.001 et seq. 2-251 46-38 342.003 46-27 342.004 46-29 342.006 46-30, 46-31 342.007 46-38 342.007(e) 46-39 342.021 46-32 361.001 et seq. Ch. 90 365.011 90-80 365.012 90-80 366.002 22-201 382.001 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. V 418.001 Ch. 38 431.001 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. II 481.134 70-25 ch. 773 42-78 751.001 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II 756.001 70-1 756.021 22-32 ch. 771 136-52 ch. 772 136-52 821.001 et seq. Ch. 14 ch. 822 14-81 822.041 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. III 826.001 et seq. 14-10  
V.T.C.A. 
Human Resources 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code ch. 42 54-66 42.002 6-2  
V.T.C.A. 
Local Government 
Code 
Section       Section  
this Code 9.001 et seq. Char., Art. 2 42.001 et seq. 2-314 43.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 43.021 Char., Art. 1, § 3 2-311 43.021 et seq. 2-316 43.022 Char., Art. 1, § 3 52.013 2-56 53.001 et seq. 1-1 54.001 1-14 102.001 2-216 ch. 143 82-126, 82-127 143.014 82-128 ch. 171 2-2 174.021 Charter, Art. 4, § 3 174.63, 174.64 Charter, Art. 4, § 3 174.153 Charter, Art. 4, § 3 ch. 176 2-2 201.001 et seq. 62-78 203.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII, 
Div. 2 203.021 et seq. 2-352 203.022 2-352 203.025 2-352 203.041, 203.042 2-353 ch. 204 2-355 204.011 62-81 211.001 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2 211.001 et seq. Ch. 138 211.008 138-41 211.008-211.011 138-42 211.009 et seq. 138-43 211.013(c) 138-2 212.001 et seq. Ch. 134 134-4 134-47 212.001(1) 134-1 212.002 134-9 216.902 130-5 241.001 et seq. App. A 241.001-241.044 App. A, § 1 241.032, 241.033 App. A, § 2 241.041-241.043 App. A, § 11 241.901-241.903 App. A, § 1 252.001 et seq. 2-286 ch. 284 94-38 284.102 94-37 284.102(1) 94-37 284.105 94-38 284.107 94-40 341.003 et seq. Ch. 62 342.012 22-1 351.101 98-87 362.001 et seq. Ch. 62, Art. III 62-51 371.001 et seq. Char., Art. 8 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3 ch. 380 22-246 380.001 22-246 ch. 395 134-10 ch. 552, subch. C 106-223  
V.T.C.A. 
Occupation Code 
Section Section  
this Code ch. 2001 54-128 ch. 1301 22-138 1301.552 22-138 ch. 1302 22-192 1903.053 22-201 1903.251 22-201  
V.T.C.A. 
Penal Code 
Section Section  
this Code tit. 7 86-41, 86-42 21.02 70-25 21.11 70-25 22.011 70-25 22.021 70-25 22.09 Ch. 54, Art. II 30.05 70-14 32.42 Ch. 54, Art. II 33.021 70-25 42.08 62-1 43.25 70-25 43.26 70-25 48.01 Ch. 54, Art. V 62.001(5) 70-25  
V.T.C.A. 
Tax Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1.05 2-272 1.001 et seq. Ch. 98 6.01 Char., Art. 7, § 1 6.22 Ch. 98 6.30 Char., Art. 7, § 2 6.41 Char., Art. 7, § 3 11.13(d) Ch. 98, Art. II, 
Div. 2, Subdiv. 3 11.13(d)-(f) Ch. 98, Art. II, 
Div. 2, Subdiv. 2 11.24 98-68 11.43 98-48 98-63 98-70 11.181 98-72 11.431 98-48 98-63 34.01 et seq.       Char., Art. 7, §§ 4, 5 111.053(b) 98-92 151.023 App. D, Art. IV, 
Div. 1, § 12 151.027 App. D, Art. IV, 
Div. 1, § 12 151.0103 136-36 152.001 98-92 156.101 98-96 156.103(a)-(d) 98-96 156.151 98-97 182.021-182.026 App. D, Art. III, 
Div. 3, § 8 182.081 App. D, Art. III, 
Div. 3, § 8 182.082 App. D, Art. III, 
Div. 3, § 8 321.210(a), (b) 98-1 351.004 98-97  
V.T.C.A. 
Transportation Code 
Section Section  
this Code chs. 541-552 102-281 545.424 102-160 545.425 102-1 102-160 644-202 102-203 ch. 681 102-241 ch. 681, subtit. H 102-241 683.071 46-96  
V.T.C.A. 
Utilities Code 
Section Section  
this Code 104.112 App. D, Art. III, 
Div. 3, § 2 ch. 122 App. D, Art. III, 
Div. 3, § 8 183.003 App. D, Art. III, 
Div. 3, § 8  
V.T.C.A. 
Water Code 
Section Section  
this Code 7.251 106-193 401.006 22-201  
