
Meadows Place, TX Code of Ordinances


CITY OF MEADOWS PLACE, TEXAS
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2018 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2018-30, passed 10-23-2018




 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 2011-15



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF MEADOWS
PLACE, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF MEADOW PLACE DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY.



   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of
Meadows Place are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient
in form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the city for the proper conduct of its
affairs; and



   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Texas empower and
authorize the City of Meadows Place to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and



   WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Meadows Place has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the
Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication of
such ordinance in book form; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the City of Meadows Place that this
ordinance take effect at the earliest possible date;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
MEADOWS PLACE, TEXAS:



   1.   The general ordinances of the City of Meadows Place as revised,
amended, restated, codified and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the City of Meadows
Place” - see Code attached hereto as Exhibit “A”.



   2.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds
or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to
public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
Code.



   3.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the City Council and the City Secretary of the City
of Meadows Place is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code
of Ordinances in the Office of the City Secretary.



   4.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 5, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and
places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same
is properly signed, attested, recorded and approved and that any public
hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been given.



   5.   This ordinance shall take effect at the earliest date provided
by law.



   PASSED and APPROVED this, the 24th day of May 2011.



                           Charles D. Jessup   
    /s/   
                           Charles D. Jessup, IV,
Mayor
                           City of Meadows Place



ATTEST:



Elaine Herff          /s/     
Elaine Herff, City Secretary



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY




CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



   10.19   Altering or tampering with code



   10.20   Incorporation by reference



   10.21   Police power extended to city property



   10.22   Penalty not exclusive



   10.23   Permitting, aiding, assisting or employing in violation



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Meadows Place,
Texas, shall be designated as the "Code of Meadows Place" or "this code" and
may be so cited.



Statutory reference:



   Authority of municipality to codify ordinances, see Tex. Local
Government Code Ch. 53



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY.  The City of
Meadows Place, Texas.



      CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the city.



      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code
as modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.



      COUNTY.  The County of Fort Bend, Texas.



      DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever a provision appears in this
code requiring an officer of the city to do some act or make certain
inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the officer to designate,
delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the
required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section expressly
designate otherwise.



      EASEMENT. A right, liberty, privilege or advantage, without
profit, which the owner of one parcel of land may have in the lands of
another. A right in the owner of one parcel of land, by reason of that
ownership, to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent
with a general property right in the owner.



      IN THE CITY.  Includes any territory within the corporate limits
of the city and the police jurisdiction thereof, and any other territory over
which regulatory power has been conferred on the city by general or special
act,  except as otherwise specified.



      JOINT AUTHORITY. Words purporting to give authority to three or
more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to
a majority of the officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise
specifically declared.



      LAW. Any statute, ordinance or regulation promulgated by the
United States, the state, the county, the city or any agencies thereof, as
well as the rules and regulations of other bodies politic that may be
appropriate.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      NUMBER. Any word importing the singular NUMBER shall include the
plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR
and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission or department of this municipality
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



      OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND THE LIKE. Whenever
reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other
agencies of the city by title only, i.e., "Mayor," "Clerk," "Manager," "Chief
of Police" and the like, it shall be deemed to refer to the officials,
employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of this city.



      OWNER.  When applied to a building or land, include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or
tenant by the entirety or the whole or of a part of the building or land.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver.  Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes money, goods, chattels, evidences
of debt, things in action  and any other species of property, except real
property.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      PROPERTY.  Includes real, personal and mixed property.



      PUBLIC PLACE. Any public way, park, cemetery, school yard or open
space adjacent thereto; any public lake or stream; and any place or business
open to the use of the public in general, open to public view, or to which
the public has access.



      PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk or other public thoroughfare.



      REAL PROPERTY. Include lands, tenements and hereditaments.



      REASONABLE TIME. In all cases where any section of this code or
city ordinance shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time  or
reasonable notice to be given, the REASONABLE TIME or notice shall be deemed
to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the
duty, or compliance with the notice.



      RESIDENCE. The place adopted by a person as his or her place of
habitation, and to which, whenever he or she is absent, he or she has the
intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at
another, the place where the person sleeps shall be deemed his or her
RESIDENCE.



      ROADWAY. That portion of a street improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIDEWALK. Any portion of the street between the curb, or the
lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the
use of pedestrians.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of Texas.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading.  Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      STREET.  Includes public streets, avenues, boulevards, highways,
roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges, public ways and approaches thereto
and other public thoroughfares in the city devoted to public use.



      TENANT, OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, shall mean any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such a building or land, whether
alone or with others.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



(Prior Code, § 1-2)



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the governing body or of the context of the same ordinance.



   (A)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written "and/or," if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, the requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



   (E)   When § 10.05 does not apply.  The rules of construction and
definitions set forth in § 10.05 shall not be applied to any section of this
code or city ordinance which shall contain any express provision excluding
that construction or definition, or when the subject matter or context of the
provisions or ordinances may be repugnant thereto.



(Prior Code, § 1-3)



   (F)   Reference to code, conflicts.  In addition to the rules of
construction and definitions specified in this chapter, the following rules
shall be observed in the construction of this code.



      (1)   All references to chapters, articles or sections are to
the chapters, articles and sections of this code unless otherwise specified.



      (2)   If the provisions of different chapters of this code
conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall
prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of
the chapter.



      (3)   If conflicting provisions be found in different sections
of the same chapter, the provisions of the section which is last in numerical
order shall prevail unless the construction would be inconsistent with the
meaning of the chapter.



(Prior Code, § 1-7)



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in a section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   (A)   The official time, as established by applicable state and
federal laws, shall be the official time within this municipality for the
transaction of all municipal business.



   (B)   The term OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD means whenever certain hours
are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight savings
time as may be in current use in the city.



(Prior Code, § 1-2)



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of that act or the giving of that notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication, including but not limited to the following types of ordinances:



      (1)   Any ordinance guaranteeing or promising the payment of
money for the municipality or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the
municipality or any evidence of the municipality's indebtedness;



      (2)   Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for
an annual budget or prescribing salaries for municipal officers and employees;



      (3)   Any ordinance annexing territory to the municipality or
discontinuing territory as a part of the municipality;



      (4)   Any ordinance designating or otherwise relating to
municipal depositories;



      (5)   Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other
right;



      (6)   Any ordinance approving, prescribing or otherwise
relating to rates to be charged by private utility companies;



      (7)   Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise
relating to any contract or agreement;



      (8)   Any ordinance accepting, dedicating, vacating or
otherwise relating to any easement; and



      (9)   Any ordinance establishing or amending the zoning
designation of land.



   (B)   All such ordinances mentioned in division (A) are hereby
recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if
set out at length herein.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the governing body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.  Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect
from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force, unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



   (D)   All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this
code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section
number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be.



(Prior Code, § 2-54)



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   Amendments.  If the governing body shall desire to amend any
existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be
specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired
amendment, substituted in its place.



   (B)   New material.  Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the
existing code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the
arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In
addition to such indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed
ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the
ordinance.



   (C)   Effect. Any and all additions and amendments to this code,
when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to
make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this code
so that reference to the "code of ordinances of the City of Meadows Place,
Texas" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments.



(Prior Code, § 2-50)



   (D)   Language; amendments. Amendments to any of the provisions of
this code should be made by amending the provisions by specific reference to
the section of this code in substantially the following language:  "That
section _____ of the code of ordinances of the City of Meadows Place, Texas,
is hereby amended to read as follows: ..." The new provisions shall then be
set out in full as desired.



(Prior Code, § 2-52)



   (E)   Language; new material.



      (1)   For amendments to the code, the following language may
be used: "that the code of ordinances of the City of Meadows Place, Texas, is
hereby amended by adding thereto a section (or article, chapter or other
designation as the case may be), to be numbered ____, which reads as
follows:  ..." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.



      (2)   In lieu of division (E)(1) above, when the City Council
desires to enact and incorporate into the code, an ordinance of a general and
permanent nature embracing a subject not previously included herein, the
following language may be made part of the ordinance: "It is the intention of
the City Council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this
ordinance shall become and be made part of the code of ordinances of the City
of Meadows Place, Texas, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered
to accomplish that intention."



(Prior Code, § 2-53)



   (F)   Subject to general penalty.  If the City Council amends any
section of this code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty
provision of § 10.99 shall apply to the section as amended. However, if an
amendment contains provisions for which a penalty is provided in another
section of the same chapter, the penalty shall relate to the amended section,
unless the amendment specifies that that penalty shall not apply.



(Prior Code, § 2-55)



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any,
are listed following the text of the code section.  Example: 



(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed
1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute.  Example: 



(Tex. Local Government Code § 54.001)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory
reference" following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



§ 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.



Statutory reference:



   Inspection of public records, see Tex. Local Government Code §§
552.001 et seq.



§ 10.19  ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH CODE.



   It shall be an offense for any unauthorized person to change or amend,
by addition or deletion, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or
delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or to tamper with this code in
any manner whatsoever which will cause a law of the city to be misrepresented
thereby.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 10.20  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   All standard codes, rules, regulations and other subject matter herein
or hereafter properly incorporated by reference, together with subsequent
amendments thereto pursuant to state law, and future incorporation by
reference shall be kept and preserved in the office of the City Secretary.



(Prior Code, § 1-4)



§ 10.21  POLICE POWER EXTENDED TO CITY PROPERTY.



   The police power of the city is hereby extended to include all lands or
property owned or leased by the city or any agency of the city, and the
general ordinances of the city shall be applicable to that property.



(Prior Code, § 1-8)



§ 10.22  PENALTY NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   (A)   The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this code
shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of any license, franchise or
permit issued or granted under the provisions of this code.



   (B)   In the event any violation of this code is designated as a
nuisance under the provisions of this code, the nuisance may be summarily
abated by the city in addition to the imposition of a fine or imprisonment.



(Prior Code, § 1-11)



§ 10.23  PERMITTING, AIDING, ASSISTING OR EMPLOYING IN VIOLATION. 



   Any person or corporation who permits, aids, assists or employs another
person or corporation in doing any act or failing to do any act as shall be
required in this code shall be deemed in violation of the chapter or section
prohibiting or requiring that act as if the person or corporation had
actually committed the act or failed to actually perform the act as herein
required. The person or corporate representative need not be actually present
at the time of violation; and a person or corporation may be deemed in
violation of the chapter or section whether the act of permitting, aiding,
assisting or employing occurs before or after the violation.



(Prior Code, § 1-12)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act
is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in the code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by:



      (1)   A fine not to exceed $2,000 in all cases arising under
municipal ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning, and public health and
sanitation;



      (2)   A fine not to exceed $2,000, if a motor vehicle is used
in illegal dumping or an offense under the law or city ordinance violated by
the illegal dumping; or



      (3)   A fine not to exceed $500 in all other cases; provided,
however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided
for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state.



   (B)   Each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.  In the event that any such
violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, the
nuisance may be summarily abated by the city.



Statutory reference:



   Municipal penalties, see Tex. Local Government Code § 54.001



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   COUNCIL AND OFFICIALS





         31.   CITY DEPARTMENTS AND ORGANIZATIONS





         32.   ELECTIONS





         33.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT





         34.   MUNICIPAL COURT





         35.   TAXATION





         36.   CITY POLICIES





         37.   SCHEDULE OF FEES




CHAPTER 30: COUNCIL AND OFFICIALS



Section




General Provisions




   30.01   Oath of elected officers



   30.02   Oath of appointed officers



   30.03   Official newspaper



   30.04   Official bulletin board



   30.05   Emergency action



   30.06   Indemnification of elected officials and city employees



   30.07   Notice of claim required



   30.08   Permitting sale of personal property at public auction



City Council



   30.15   Time and place for Council meetings



   30.16   Consent agenda



Officials



   30.30   City Treasurer; bond



   30.31   Payment of debts and obligations



   30.32   Mayor; setting schedule of fees and charges



   30.33   Office of Marshal abolished; appointment of Police
Commissioner



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.01  OATH OF ELECTED OFFICERS.



   The following oath shall be taken by the elected officers of the city
before they enter upon the respective duties of their offices, unless an oath
for the officers is otherwise prescribed by law.



   OATH OF OFFICE



   I,_________________, do solemnly swear (or affirm), that I will
faithfully execute the duties of the office of ______________________ of the
City of Meadows Place, Texas, and will to the best of my ability preserve,
protect, and defend the Constitution and laws of the United States and of
this state and the ordinances of this city; and I furthermore solemnly swear
(or affirm), that I have not directly nor indirectly paid, offered, or
promised to pay, contributed, nor promised to contribute any money, or
valuable thing, or promised any public office or employment, as a reward for
the giving or withholding a vote at the election at which I was elected. So
help me God.



(Prior Code, § 2-1)



Constitutional law reference:



   Tex. Const., Art. XVI, § 1



§ 30.02  OATH OF APPOINTED OFFICERS.



   The following oath shall be taken by the appointed officers of the city
before they enter upon the respective duties of their offices, unless an oath
for the officers is otherwise prescribed by law:



   OATH OF OFFICE



   I,________________, do solemnly swear (or affirm), that I will
faithfully execute the duties of the office of______________________of the
City of Meadows Place, Texas, and will to the best of my ability preserve,
protect, and defend the Constitution and the laws of the United States and of
this state and the ordinances of this city; and I furthermore solemnly swear
(or affirm), that I have not directly nor indirectly paid, offered, or
promised to pay, contributed, nor promised to contribute any money or
valuable thing, or promised any public office or employment, as a reward to
secure my appointment or the confirmation thereof. So help me God.



(Prior Code, § 2-2)



Constitutional law reference:



   Tex. Const., Art. XVI, § 1



§ 30.03  OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER.



   The following newspapers are designated as official newspapers of the
city: The Fort Bend Star and the Fort Bend Herald.



(Prior Code, § 2-4)  (Ord. 93-11, passed 3-23-1993; Ord. 94-13, § 1,
passed 4-14-1994; Ord. 97-13, § 1, passed 5-27-1997; Ord. 98-10, § 1,
passed 2-24-1998; Ord. 2011-09, passed 2-22-2011; Ord. 2015-23, passed
12-8-2015; Ord. 2016-14, passed 8-23-2016)



§ 30.04  OFFICIAL BULLETIN BOARD.



   The official bulletin board of the city shall be located at the main
entrance of the City Hall at One Troyan Drive, Meadows Place, Texas. All
notices and other postings that are required to be made by law shall be made
on the official bulletin board of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-5)  (Ord. 84-13, §§ 1, 2, passed 2-6-1984; Ord. 92-31,
§ 3, passed 7-28-1992)



§ 30.05  EMERGENCY ACTION.



   Every officer, agent or employee of the city, while responding to
emergency calls or reacting to emergency situations, is hereby authorized to
take such action as is deemed necessary by him or her to most effectively
deal with the emergency. This provision shall prevail over every other
ordinance of the city and, to the extent to which the city has the authority
to so authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in
conflict with this section. Neither the city nor the officer, agent or
employee shall be liable for any failure to use a non-emergency standard of
care in such emergency.



(Prior Code, § 2-10)  (Ord. 85-038, § 1, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 30.06  INDEMNIFICATION OF ELECTED OFFICIALS AND CITY EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   The city shall indemnify and hold harmless all elected and
appointed officers, including volunteers appointed by the city and employees
of the city, whether the city employees be regular salaried employees or
compensated on an hourly or per diem basis, from any and all claims, demands,
causes of action and judgments that may be brought or rendered against them
in the performance of their duties, including the taking of any action or the
failure to take any action in the capacity in which they serve the city.



   (B)   In addition, the city shall indemnify and hold harmless those
individuals from any cost that may be incurred in the defense of any claim or
lawsuit that may be filed. The city shall, however, have the right to
designate legal counsel for the purpose of providing representation for the
persons under the terms and provisions of this section. Nothing shall prevent
the person or persons from employing outside legal counsel or securing legal
advice from attorneys other than the attorneys that the city may provide.
However, in doing so, the person shall not have an absolute right to the
benefits of this section, and the same may be reviewed by the City Council as
to the reasonableness of the expenses incurred, the appropriateness and
adequacy of any defense offered, as well as all other factors relating to the
handling of any such claim or cause of action.



   (C)   The city shall have no obligation for payment of any damages
or expenses incurred by reason of willful and intentional acts and conduct
which are designed to be injurious to the city or other officers or employees
of the city or by reason of any actions taken by the officials or employees
which are illegal or unlawful.



(Prior Code, § 2-11)  (Ord. 85-039, § 1, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 30.07  NOTICE OF CLAIM REQUIRED.



   (A)   The city shall never be liable for any claim for property
damage or for personal injury, whether the personal injury results in death
or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his or her
behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons
who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of the death or
injury, shall, within 60 days, or within six months for good cause shown,
from the date the damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to
the Mayor and City Council of the following facts:



      (1)   The date and time when the injury occurred and the place
where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was
received;



      (2)   The nature of the damage or injury sustained;



      (3)   The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained;



      (4)   A specific and detailed statement of how and under what
circumstances the damage or injury occurred;



      (5)   The amount for which each claimant will settle;



      (6)   The actual place of residence of each claimant by
street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented;



      (7)   In the case of personal injury or death, the names and
addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of
the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and
the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is
committed; and



      (8)   In the case of property damage, the location of the
damaged property at the time the claim was submitted, along with the names
and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any
part thereof.



   (B)   No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or
maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein shall aver and prove
that previous to the filing of the original petition, the plaintiff applied
to the City Council for redress, satisfaction, compensation or relief, as the
case may be, and that the same was, by vote of the City Council, refused.



   (C)   All notices required by this section shall be given by serving
the same upon the City Secretary at the City Hall at One Troyan Drive,
Meadows Place, Texas 77477; and all such notices shall be effective only when
actually received in the office of the City Secretary.



(Ord. 92-31, § 4, passed 7-28-1992)



   (D)    Neither the Mayor, a member of City Council, nor any other
officer or employee of the city shall have the authority to waive any of the
provisions of this section.



   (E)   The written notice required herein shall be sworn to by the
person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him or her
to do so on his or her behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required
herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so
verify the notice may be considered by the City Council as a factor relating
to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the
allegations contained therein.



(Ord. 87-040, § 1, passed 12-15-1987)



(Prior Code, § 2-12) 



§ 30.08  PERMITTING SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY AT PUBLIC AUCTION.



   (A)   Personal property initially purchased by the city. Personal
property of the city may be sold at public auction conducted by a licensed
auctioneer or auction house as may from time to time be directed by the Mayor
or the City Council.



   (B)   Property acquired by the city through abandonment, criminal
seizure, criminal investigation or inquiry. Personal property of the city
acquired through seizure, criminal investigation or inquiry may be disposed
of as follows.



      (1)   If the property has a fair market value of $500 or more
and the owner is unknown, the Mayor shall cause to be published once in an
official newspaper of the city a notice containing the description of the
property held, the name of the owner, if known, the name and address of the
officer in the city holding the property and a statement that if the owner
does not claim the property within 90 days from the date of publication, the
property will be sold and the proceeds of the sale, after deducting
reasonable expenses of keeping the property and the cost of sale, placed in
the treasury of the city. The notices herein required shall be published once
at least three weeks prior to the date of the proposed sale in an official
newspaper of the city stating where the sale is to take place, the
description of the property, the names of the owners, if known, and the date
and place the sale will occur.



      (2)   If the property has a fair market value of less than
$500 and the owner or address of the owner is unknown, the Mayor of the city
or the City Council may authorize the sale or donation of the property. The
proceeds of the sale shall be deposited in the treasury of the city after
deducting reasonable expenses of keeping the property and the cost of sale.



(Prior Code, § 2-13)  (Ord. 94-09, § 1, passed 3-22-1994)



CITY COUNCIL



§ 30.15  TIME AND PLACE FOR COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   The City Council shall hereafter meet at the City Hall, located at One
Troyan Drive, Meadows Place, Texas, in regular meetings at 6:30 p.m., on the
fourth Tuesday of each month; except that when the fourth Tuesday shall be a
legal holiday, then the City Council shall meet in regular meeting, in lieu
thereof, on the next business day thereafter.



(Prior Code, § 2-3)  (Ord. 92-31, § 2, passed 7-28-1992; Ord. 2018-07,
passed 3-27-2018)



§ 30.16  CONSENT AGENDA.



   (A)   The Mayor and/or City Council may, from time to time,
designate and establish, as a part of the agenda for regular and/or special
meetings of the City Council, a portion of the agenda, which shall be labeled
"Consent Agenda." This Consent Agenda may consist of any and all business
regularly coming before the City Council of the city.



   (B)   All items set out in the Consent Agenda may be voted on at one
time, upon motion duly made, seconded and carried by a majority vote of the
members of the City Council, moving the adoption of the Consent Agenda. Upon
passage, all items on the Consent Agenda shall be deemed passed, and the City
Secretary is authorized to affix to all ordinances therein set out,
consecutive numbers beginning with the first number available for new
ordinances. No further action shall be deemed necessary, and all such items
appearing thereon, upon the passage of the motion, shall be deemed adopted as
if voted upon separately and as if the caption and/or body of any ordinance
therein set out shall have been read in full.



   (C)   Upon motion duly made, seconded and passed, any item on the
Consent Agenda may be withdrawn for separate consideration.



(Prior Code, § 2-30) 



OFFICIALS



§ 30.30  CITY TREASURER; BOND.



   The City Treasurer shall post a bond payable to the order of the city,
indemnifying the city for the faithful performance of all duties, obligations
and undertakings, as are required by law, in the amount of $10,000. This
bond, when posted, shall be kept and maintained in the office of the City
Secretary.



(Prior Code, § 2-6)  (Ord. 84-025, § 1, passed 2-28-1984)



§ 30.31  PAYMENT OF DEBTS AND OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   The Mayor of the city and the City Treasurer are hereby
jointly authorized to pay, without further consideration or action by the
City Council, the debts and obligations of the city which fall into the
following described categories:



      (1)   All debts and obligations which arise under contracts
previously approved by the City Council, which contracts provide for payments
to be made at specified intervals;



      (2)   All debts and obligations for which payment is required
by law;



      (3)   All debts and obligations due and owing to utility
companies serving the city; and



      (4)   Any other debt or obligation not otherwise specified
herein, provided that the amount of the debt or obligation shall not exceed
the sum of $5,000.



   (B)   Any and all other debts and obligations of the city shall only
be paid upon consideration of the same by the City Council at a public
meeting of the City Council held pursuant to notice thereof given in
accordance with law and upon motion duly made and passed by an affirmative
vote of a majority of the members of the City Council, approving and
authorizing payment of the debts and obligations.



   (C)   The payment to any vendor for supplies, materials or equipment
received or for services rendered is due and payable on the date the
supplies, materials or equipment are received or the date the services are
rendered, whichever is later. This date shall be called the "demand date."



   (D)   The City Treasurer and/or the City Council, as the case may
be, shall consider payment of all invoices, bills or demands for payment that
are properly rendered not later than the forty-fifth calendar day after the
date on which the city received the supplies, materials or equipment, or the
date on which the performance of services was completed or the date on which
the city received the invoices for supplies, materials, equipment or
services, whichever is later.



   (E)   Either the City Council or the Mayor of the city shall be
authorized to notify the vendor of the materials, supplies and equipment
and/or the vendor of the services that a legitimate dispute exists as to
payment and what mechanism or procedure will be provided for the resolution
thereof. The parties thereto, by contract or otherwise, may provide for such
mechanism as may be appropriate for the resolution of disputes that may exist.



   (F)   The requirements as herein provided for timely payment shall
not be applicable if notification of dispute has been given.



(Prior Code, § 2-7)  (Ord. 84-033, § 1, passed 4-9-1984; Ord. 94-08, § 1,
passed 3-22-1994)



§ 30.32  MAYOR; SETTING SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   The Mayor of the city is hereby authorized and directed to
establish a schedule of fees and charges to be assessed by the city for the
issuance of permits and licenses and for other administrative services
rendered by the city. The Mayor, in consultation with the departments of the
city, shall establish a schedule of fees and charges which shall be fair and
equitable.



   (B)   The Mayor shall file the schedule of fees and charges with the
City Secretary, and the fees and charges shall go into effect when so filed.
The schedule of fees and charges may be amended at any time by the Mayor's
filing of an amended schedule with the City Secretary.



   (C)   Upon filing of the schedule of fees and charges, or any
amendment thereto, the City Secretary shall promptly advise the members of
the City Council of the existence of new fees and charges. Upon review, the
City Council may, by a vote of the majority of all members of the City
Council, suspend or set aside the fee schedule or provide a differing
schedule by ordinance duly adopted.



(Prior Code, § 2-8)  (Ord. 85-08, § 1, passed 2-26-1985)



§ 30.33  OFFICE OF MARSHAL ABOLISHED; APPOINTMENT OF POLICE COMMISSIONER.



   (A)   The Office of the City Marshal is abolished and there shall be
appointed by the City Council a Police Commissioner who shall serve at the
pleasure of the City Council and whose term shall be deemed continuing until
the appointment is revoked or canceled by ordinance duly adopted.



   (B)   The Police Commissioner shall not perform police duties, nor
shall that person be required to be a licensed or certified peace officer in
the state, but the person shall act as liaison between the Police Department
and the City Council as needed and desired by the Mayor and the Chief of
Police, and shall in addition make such recommendations and conduct such
studies as deemed desirable and necessary by the Chief of Police and/or the
Mayor. The Police Commissioner may in addition, at the discretion of the City
Council, act as sergeant-at-arms during meetings of the City Council and
shall take such action as shall be deemed necessary, desirable and
appropriate to ensure order is maintained and the directions of the Mayor are
followed during any and all meetings of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-9)  (Ord. 85-012, § 1, passed 4-23-1985; Ord. 85-015, §
1, passed 5-28-1985)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY DEPARTMENTS AND ORGANIZATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Provisions relating to assignment, execution and garnishment



Police



   31.15   Establishment of Police Department



   31.16   Compensation



   31.17   Tenure; bond



   31.18   Powers



   31.19   Police Reserve Force



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  PROVISIONS RELATING TO ASSIGNMENT, EXECUTION AND GARNISHMENT.



   The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be
liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ or execution or cost bill.
The funds belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, firm or
corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment or sequestration;
nor shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe
or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the
city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such
writ or garnishment on any account whatsoever. The city shall not be
obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees,
agents or contractors.



(Ord. 2002-25, passed 10-22-2002)



POLICE



§ 31.15  ESTABLISHMENT OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   The City Police Department is hereby created, and the Office of Chief
of Police is hereby established. The Chief of Police shall be the highest law
enforcement officer of the city. The Chief of Police shall recommend to the
Mayor and the City Council, for appointment, such persons or individuals
found to be competent and qualified, under the terms and provisions of law,
to serve in the capacity of police officer of the city.



(Prior Code, § 25-1)  (Ord. 84-21, § 1, passed 2-23-1984)



§ 31.16  COMPENSATION.



   The City Council shall establish a compensation to be paid to the Chief
of Police and any police officers in the city, from time to time, either in
conjunction with the approval of the budget of the city or at such other
times as the City Council might desire or direct.



(Prior Code, § 25-2)  (Ord. 84-21, § 2, passed 2-23-1984)



§ 31.17  TENURE; BOND.



   The Chief of Police and any police officers appointed shall serve at
the pleasure and discretion of the City Council, and no formal bond shall be
required of the Chief or officers; however, the City Council reserves the
right, at any time, to require a bond in conjunction herewith.



(Prior Code, § 25-3)  (Ord. 84-21, § 3, passed 2-23-1984)



§ 31.18  POWERS.



   (A)   Police officers shall have all powers, rights, authority and
jurisdiction as are granted by the statutes and laws of the state to police
officers and/or peace officers, as well as all powers, rights, authority and
jurisdiction as are vested by law in the Police Chief. All police officers of
the city may  serve all process issuing out of the Municipal Court of the
city anywhere in the county.



(Prior Code, § 25-4)  (Ord. 84-21, § 4, passed 2-23-1984)



   (B)   Any peace officer of the state and/or officer of any
municipality shall be and the same is hereby authorized to exercise all of
the powers and duties of a police officer in the city.



(Ord. 84-07, § 1, passed 1-31-1984)



   (C)   All officers authorized to function within the city pursuant
to the provisions of division (B) of this section shall serve under the
supervision and control of the Mayor and/or the Police Chief and/or their
designees.



(Ord. 84-07, § 2, passed 1-31-1984)



(Prior Code, § 25-4)



§ 31.19  POLICE RESERVE FORCE.



   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of Tex. Loc. Government Code §
341.012, a Police Reserve Force for the city is hereby established.



   (B)   The Police Reserve Force may consist of any number of officers
as shall be appointed by the Chief of Police, provided such officers meet the
qualifications as provided for by law and this section.



   (C)   Any person appointed as a member of the Police Reserve Force
of the city shall act under the supervision of the Chief of Police when
discharging official duties as a duly constituted police officer.



   (D)   Any person appointed as a member of the Police Reserve Force
of the city shall hold at least such basic police certifications shall be
required by the provisions of law.



   (E)   Persons appointed to the Police Reserve Force may carry
weapons only at such times as authorized by the Chief of Police and only when
discharging official duties as duly constituted police officers in the city.



   (F)   The members of the Police Reserve Force shall serve without
compensation, and these appointments may be terminated at any time by the
Chief of Police or the City Council.



   (G)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed,
whenever it is deemed necessary by him or her, to request the City Treasurer
to reimburse any member of the Police Reserve Force for uniform expenses, and
the City Treasurer is authorized to approve such requests for reimbursement
when the requests have been properly made.



   (H)   It is hereby provided that members of the Police Reserve Force
of the city shall be covered by hospital and medical assistance insurance,
covering injuries or losses sustained by them during the discharge of their
duties. In addition, the city shall provide such other insurance coverages as
are currently required, and/or as may be from time to time required, by the
provisions of law.



(Prior Code, § 25-5)  (Ord. 84-23, § 1-8, passed 2-23-1984)



CHAPTER 32:  ELECTIONS



Section



   32.01   Laws governing; qualifications of electors



   32.02   Officers to perform duties of county officers; Council to
call



   32.03   When held; vote required



   32.04   Election by place system



   32.05   Qualifications of candidates



   32.06   Procedure for getting name on ballot



§ 32.01  LAWS GOVERNING; QUALIFICATIONS OF ELECTORS.



   All elections pertaining to municipal affairs in the city shall be
governed by the laws of the state, and the ordinances of the city to the
extent that they are not in conflict with those laws. Only qualified voters
resident within this city shall be qualified to vote.



(Prior Code, § 2-80)



§ 32.02  OFFICERS TO PERFORM DUTIES OF COUNTY OFFICERS; COUNCIL TO CALL.



   In all city elections, the Mayor, City Secretary, Chief of Police and
the governing body shall do and perform each act in other elections required
to be done and performed respectively by the County Judge, the County Clerk,
Sheriff or the Commissioners Court. In all elections, the City Council shall
order the election, order notice to be given and appoint election officers to
hold the election.



(Prior Code, § 2-81)



§ 32.03  WHEN HELD; VOTE REQUIRED.



   All general elections for officers shall be held on the first Saturday
in May of each year. At such elections, the candidates receiving the highest
number of votes cast for each place subject to election shall be deemed
elected. Newly elected officers may enter upon their duties on the fifth day
after the election; and all elected officers must qualify within 30 days
after the election, or the position to which they have been elected shall be
deemed vacant.



(Prior Code, § 2-82)  (Ord. 92-31, § 5, passed 7-28-1992)



§ 32.04  ELECTION BY PLACE SYSTEM.



   As authorized pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 21.001, it is
hereby provided that at any and every regular city election held in the city
after the effective date of this section, the Aldermen of the city shall be
elected by the place system.



(Prior Code, § 2-83)  (Ord. 84-03, § 1, passed 1-31-1984; Ord. 92-31, §
6, passed 7-28-1992)



§ 32.05  QUALIFICATIONS OF CANDIDATES.



   All candidates must possess the qualifications as provided for by law.
The Mayor must be a qualified elector and a resident of the city for a period
of 12 months next preceding the election. An Alderman must be a qualified
elector and a resident of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-84)



§ 32.06  PROCEDURE FOR GETTING NAME ON BALLOT.



   Any eligible and qualified person may have his or her name printed upon
the official ballot as a candidate for the Office of Mayor or Alderman by
filing his or her sworn application with the City Secretary at least 30 days
prior to the election day and no sooner than 60 days prior to the election
day. Each candidate shall specify the office which he or she seeks, such as:
"Alderman, Place No. 2." The form of the sworn application shall be
substantially as follows:



   To the City Secretary of the City of Meadows Place, Texas:



   I,______________, hereby make application to have my name printed on
the official ballot as a candidate for the Office of _________________, to be
voted upon at the city election to be held on the ___________ day of ______,
20____, and I hereby certify that I am qualified to make this application and
that I am legally qualified to hold such office, if elected. My occupation
is_____________________. I reside in Fort Bend County, Texas. I am __ years
old; my post office address is_________________________, Meadows Place, Texas
(zip code); and I intend to run for the office for which I am a candidate.
The statements contained in this application are true.



                        (Signed)_______________________
__________



   SUBSCRIBED and sworn to before me, this, the __________ day
of____________, 20___.



                        _______________________________
________



                        Notary Public in and for



                        Fort Bend County, Texas



   SEAL



(Prior Code, § 2-85)



CHAPTER 33:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



National Programs



   33.01   National Incident Management System (NIMS) adopted



Emergency Management



   33.15   Organization



   33.16   Emergency Management Director; powers and duties



   33.17   Emergency Management Plan



   33.18   Interjurisdictional program



   33.19   Override



   33.20   Liability



   33.21   Commitment of funds



   33.22   Offenses



   33.23   Limitations



   33.99   Penalty



NATIONAL PROGRAMS



§ 33.01  NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS) ADOPTED.



   The National Incident Management System dated March 1, 2004, is hereby
adopted by reference as if set out in full herein.



(Ord. 2005-30, passed 8-23-2005)



EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



§ 33.15  ORGANIZATION.



   There exists the Office of Emergency Management Director of the city,
which shall be held by the Mayor in accordance with state law.



   (A)   An Emergency Management Coordinator may be appointed by and
serve at the pleasure of the Director.



   (B)   The Director shall be responsible for a program of
comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the
duties and responsibilities set forth in this subchapter. He or she may
delegate authority for execution of these duties to the Coordinator, but
ultimate responsibility for their execution shall remain with the Director.



   (C)   The operational emergency management organization of the city
shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the
Director in the Emergency Management Plan, as well as organized volunteer
groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed
among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the
Emergency Management Plan.



(Ord. 2005-15, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 33.16  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management Director
shall include the following:



   (A)   Surveying actual or potential hazards that threaten life and
property within the city and identifying and requiring or recommending the
implementation of measures that would tend to prevent the occurrence or
reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur;



   (B)   Supervision of the development and approval of an Emergency
Management Plan for the city and shall recommend for adoption by the City
Council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation
of the Plan;



   (C)   Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The
declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven
days except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster
shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with
the City Secretary;



   (D)   Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives
which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this subchapter. These
proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by
means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public
and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede,
promptly filed with the City Secretary;



   (E)   Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency
management organization as well as the training of emergency management
personnel;



   (F)   Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility
that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city;



   (G)   Maintenance of the liaison with other municipal, county,
district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations;



   (H)   Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies
from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions
of the Emergency Management Plan;



   (I)   Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid
agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other
local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if
deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is
located in and with other municipalities within the county, for the
county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts;



   (J)   Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of
all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private
contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency
management within the city;



   (K)   Authorizing of agreements, after approval of the City
Attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes;



   (L)   Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment,
supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for
herein; and



   (M)   Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act
(Tex. Government Code Chapter 418).



(Ord. 2005-15, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 33.17  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   A comprehensive Emergency Management Plan shall be developed and
maintained in a current state. The Plan shall set forth the form of the
organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and
employees to carry out the provisions of this subchapter. As provided by
state law, the Plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by
the Governor's Division of Emergency Management of the state. Insofar as
possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to
the recommendations of the Governor's Division of Emergency Management. When
approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the
functions assigned by the Plan and to maintain their portion of the Plan in a
current state of readiness at all times. The Emergency Management Plan shall
be considered supplementary to this subchapter and have the effect of law
during the time of a disaster.



(Ord. 2005-15, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 33.18  INTERJURISDICTIONAL PROGRAM.



   The Mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judge of Fort
Bend County and the mayors of other cities in the county in the formation of
interjurisdictional emergency management program for the county, and shall
have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an interjurisdictional
Emergency Management Plan as well as have all powers necessary to participate
in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as the program may
affect the city.



(Ord. 2005-15, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 33.19  OVERRIDE.



   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and
promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall be in effect, they shall
supercede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations
insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith.



(Ord. 2005-15, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 33.20  LIABILITY.



   This subchapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental
functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and
neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any
individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee,
nor any of the agents thereof in good faith carrying out, complying with or
attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant
to the provisions of this subchapter shall be liable for any damage sustained
to persons as the result of the activity. Any person owning or controlling
real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation,
grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to
inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of the real estate
or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending
or practice enemy attack or natural or human-made disaster shall, together
with his or her successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the
death of, or injury to, any person on or about the real estate or premises
under the license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage
to, the property of the person.



(Ord. 2005-15, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 33.21  COMMITMENT OF FUNDS.



   No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city
in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this
subchapter without prior approval of the City Council, nor shall any person
have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without
prior and specific approval of the City Council unless during a declared
disaster. During a declared disaster, the Mayor may expend and/or commit
public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection
of health, life or property.



(Ord. 2005-15, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 33.22  OFFENSES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct,
hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the
enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this subchapter.



   (B)   It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or
display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a
member of the emergency management organization of city, unless authority to
do so has been granted to that person by the proper officials.



(Ord. 2005-15, passed 2-22-2005)  Penalty, see § 33.99



§ 33.23  LIMITATIONS.



   This subchapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state
or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation.



(Ord. 2005-15, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 33.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Convictions for violations of the provisions of §§ 33.15
through 33.23 shall be punishable by fine not to exceed $1,000.



(Ord. 2005-15, passed 2-22-2005)



CHAPTER 34:  MUNICIPAL COURT



Section



   34.01   Municipal Court divisions created



   34.02   Jurisdiction



   34.03   Rules of practice and procedure



   34.04   Judge; generally



   34.05   Judge; appointment



   34.06   Judge; oaths



   34.07   Clerks; appointment



   34.08   Clerks; powers and duties



   34.09   Fines and special expenses



   34.10   Court costs collection fee



§ 34.01  MUNICIPAL COURT DIVISIONS CREATED.



   There is hereby created a Municipal Court in and for the city.



(Prior Code, § 21-1)



§ 34.02  JURISDICTION.



   The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction within the city, with the
power to hear and determine all cases of violation of this code, the
ordinances of the city and all other cases of which municipal courts are
given jurisdiction by state law.



(Prior Code, § 21-2)



§ 34.03  RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE.



   The rules of practice and procedure for the Municipal Court shall be as
set forth by state law governing trials in the Municipal Court; and the City
Council or the person occupying the Office of Judge of the Municipal Court
may prescribe such additional rules of practice and procedure as may not be
inconsistent with state law or this code.



(Prior Code, § 21-3) (Am. Ord. 2013-18, passed 9-24-2013)



§ 34.04  JUDGE; GENERALLY.



   There is hereby created the Office of Judge of the Municipal Court,
which may be known as the presiding judge, and all judges appointed to that
office by the City Council shall have the power and authority as granted by
and shall perform the duties as required by state law.



(Prior Code, § 21-4) (Am. Ord. 2013-18, passed 9-24-2013)



§ 34.05  JUDGE; APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   (1)   The City Council shall appoint an individual to fill
the Office of Judge and may appoint an Associate Judge or Judges as needed to
the Municipal Court.



      (2)   If the presiding Judge and associate Judge(s) are
temporarily unable to act, the City Council may appoint one or more persons
to sit for those Judges.  The appointee has all the powers and duties of the
office and is entitled to compensation as set by the City Council.



   (B)   Each Judge, except a temporary Judge, shall serve for a term
of office of two years; however, in the event the City Council shall not act
to reappoint or remove a Judge previously appointed by the ninety-first day
following the expiration of a term of office, the persons appointed as Judges
shall, absent action by the City Council, continue to serve for another terms
of office beginning on the date the previous term of office expired.



(Prior Code, § 21-5)  (Ord. 94-06, § 1, passed 2-22-1994; Am. Ord.
2013-18, passed 9-24-2013)



§ 34.06  JUDGE; OATHS.



   Each Judge, prior to taking office, shall take the requisite oaths of
office required by the Constitution and state law.



(Prior Code, § 21-6) (Am. Ord. 2013-18, passed 9-24-2013)



§ 34.07  CLERKS; APPOINTMENT.



   The City Council authorizes the City Secretary to appoint a deputy
court clerk or clerks, as needed from time to time, to serve the Municipal
Court.



(Prior Code, § 21-7) (Am. Ord. 2013-18, passed 9-24-2013)



§ 34.08  CLERKS; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Clerks of the Municipal Court shall perform all of the
duties and have all of the powers bestowed upon clerks of municipal courts by
state law. Any clerks or deputy clerks so appointed may act as the official
Clerks of the Municipal Court and perform all acts incident to that office.



   (B)   The Clerks of the Municipal Court shall keep the minutes of
the proceedings of the Court, administer oaths, issue all process and perform
all of the duties of the clerk of a court as prescribed by law for a county
court, insofar as the same are applicable to the Municipal Court.



(Prior Code, § 21-8) (Am. Ord. 2013-18, passed 9-24-2013)



§ 34.09  FINES AND SPECIAL EXPENSES.



   (A)   The Clerks of the Municipal Court are authorized to receive
payment of window fine amounts in the Clerk’s office during regular
business hours from defendants who elect to waive trial,  plead guilty or
nolo contendere, and pay the fines in addition to statutory costs of court
when the payments are tendered either by mail or in person prior to the trial
time and date. The presiding Judge shall set the window fine amounts;
however, nothing herein shall restrict any Judge from increasing or
decreasing the window fine amounts.  A copy of the current schedule of
window fine amounts shall be on file in the Office of the Clerk of the
Municipal Court at all times.



   (B)   The Judge of the Municipal Court may, after conviction, assess
upon the defendant a special expense, not to exceed the maximum amount
established by state law, for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest
for an offense under Tex. Penal Code Ann. § 38.10 or under Tex. Transp. Code
§ 543.009, or any other applicable state law.  The Judge also may assess
the special expense as authorized by Chapter 17 of the Tex. Code Crim. Proc.
or any other applicable state law.



(Ord. 86-001, § 1, passed 1-28-1986)



   (C)   The Judge of the Municipal Court is authorized to assess an
administrative fee in an amount not to exceed $10 from each defendant as
authorized by Chapter 45 of the Tex. Code Crim. Proc.



(Ord. 87-019, § 1, passed 7-28-1987)



   (D)   The Clerk of the Municipal Court, in accordance with Tex. Code
Crim. Proc. Art. 102.0172, is authorized and directed to establish a
Municipal Court Technology Fund and is further authorized and directed to
collect an additional $4 fee, as a cost of court, from every person convicted
of a misdemeanor in the Municipal Court. The fee shall be assessed against
any person duly convicted where a sentence is imposed, the person is placed
in community supervision, including deferred adjudication or deferred
disposition, or the court defers final disposition of the person’s case.



      (1)   The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall collect the cost
and pay to the Treasurer of the city the amount of money as herein provided
to be deposited into a fund known as the Municipal Court Technology Fund. In
accordance with law, the Fund designated herein may be used to purchase
technology enhancements for the Municipal Court including but not limited to
computer systems, computer network, computer hardware, computer software,
imaging systems, electronic kiosks, electronic ticket writers and docket
management systems, or any other technology allowed by state law. The
Municipal Court Technology Fund shall be administered as a part of the budget
of the city in accordance with the decisions made by the City Council in
accordance therewith.



(Prior Code, § 21-9)  (Ord. 1999-30, passed 9-28-1999)



   (E)   (1)   The clerk of the Municipal Court, in accordance with
Tex. Code Crim. Proc. Art. 102.017, is authorized and directed to collect an
additional $3 fee, as a cost of court, from every person convicted of a
misdemeanor in the Municipal Court. The fee shall be assessed against any
person duly convicted where a sentence is imposed, the person is placed in
community supervision, including deferred adjudication or deferred
disposition, or the court defers final disposition of the person's case.



      (2)   The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall collect the cost
and pay to the Treasurer of the city the amount of money herein provided to
be deposited into a fund known as the Municipal Court Building Security Fund.
In accordance with law, the fund designated herein may be used for the
purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems, handheld metal
detectors, walkthrough metal detectors, identification cards and systems,
electronic locking and surveillance equipment, bailiffs during times when
they are providing appropriate security services, signage, confiscated weapon
inventory and tracking systems, locks, chains or other security hardware, or
any other expense allowed by state law. The Municipal Court Building Security
Fund shall be administered as a part of the budget of the city in accordance
with the decisions made by the City Council in accordance therewith.



      (3)   The fee as herein imposed shall be collected on any
cases that are commenced after September 1, 2001, and after the adoption of
this division (E) by the City Council.



(Ord. 2001-18, passed 7-24-2001; Ord. 2013-18, passed 9-24-2013)



§ 34.10  COURT COSTS COLLECTION FEE.



   In accordance with Article 103.0031 of the Tex. Code of Criminal
Procedure, there is hereby imposed an additional fee of 30% on all debts and
accounts receivable, i.e.: fines, fees, court costs, restitution, and other
debts that are more than 60 days past due and have been referred to a private
firm for collection.



(Ord. 2015-06, passed 2-24-2015)



CHAPTER 35:  TAXATION



Section



   35.01   Freeport property not exempt from taxation



   35.02   Tax on personal property in transit



   35.03   Penalty for delinquent property taxes



§ 35.01  FREEPORT PROPERTY NOT EXEMPT FROM TAXATION.



   The provisions of Article VIII, § 1-j of the Constitution of the State
of Texas provide that goods, wares, cars and merchandise can qualify for a
freeport tax exemption under the requirements and provisions therein set out
and further provide that the city can opt to continue taxing freeport
property.  Pursuant to Article VIII, § 1-j of the Constitution of the State
of Texas, the city declares that all of that property described in the Texas
Constitution shall be fully taxable in the city on and after January 1, 1990.



(Prior Code, § 2-31) (Ord. 89-033, § 1, passed 12-21-1989)



§ 35.02  TAX ON PERSONAL PROPERTY IN TRANSIT.



   The goods-in-transit, as defined in Tex. Tax Code 11.233(a)(2), as
amended by Senate Bill 1, enacted by the 82nd Texas Legislature in Special
Session, shall remain subject to taxation by the city.



(Ord. 2011-29, passed 12-20-2011)



§ 35.03  PENALTY FOR DELINQUENT PROPERTY TAXES.



   The city adopts and ratifies the additional 20% penalties to defray the
costs of collection of delinquent taxes, as authorized by Tex. Tax Code §§
33.07 and 33.08 and under preceding state law, for the 2002 tax year, and for
each succeeding year thereafter.



(Ord. 2003-12, passed 5-27-2003)



CHAPTER 36:  CITY POLICIES



Section



Records Management



   36.01   Records Management Officer



Municipal Retirement System



   36.15   Participation in Texas Municipal Retirement System; adopted
by reference



Smoking Policies



   36.30   Smoking in buildings owned, leased, or occupied by the city



RECORDS MANAGEMENT



§ 36.01  RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.



   (A)   The City Secretary is designated as the Public Records
Management Officer of the city as provided for by the Local Government
Records Act of 1989 being Tex. Government Code Ch. 552.



   (B)   In the event of the absence in the office of the City
Secretary or vacancy in the Office of the City Secretary, the Mayor shall
serve in the capacity as Records Management Officer for the city.



   (C)   The Records Management Officer designated in this section of
the code of ordinances of the city shall perform such duties and have such
responsibilities as shall be from time to time provided for in the laws of
the state.



(Prior Code, § 2-100)  (Ord. 90-07, § 1, passed 5-8-1990)



MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM



§ 36.15  PARTICIPATION IN TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM; ADOPTED BY
REFERENCE.



   Ordinances affecting the plan for participation in the TMRS, employee
contributions, updated service credits, increases in benefits and retirement
annuities, increases in rate of deposits, and any other applicable
legislation of the city and state are adopted by reference into this code of
ordinances as if fully set forth herein and shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 2003-35, passed 10-28-2003; Ord. 2003-36, passed 10-28-2003; Ord.
2005-43, passed 11-29-2005; Ord. 2009-36(a), passed 12-21-2009;  Ord.
2011-27, passed 11-22-2011; Ord. 2012-37, passed 11-27-2012; Ord. 2015-19,
passed 11-24-2015; Ord. 2016-29, passed 10-25-2016)



SMOKING POLICIES



§ 36.30  SMOKING IN BUILDINGS OWNED, LEASED, OR OCCUPIED BY THE CITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of a burning
tobacco product, electronic cigarette, e-cigarette, or liquid nicotine or to
smoke tobacco, electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine in any
building owned, leased, or occupied by the city. Smoking of tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine is prohibited within
50 feet of outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of
enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited by this section.



(Ord. 2014-19, passed 11-25-2014)



CHAPTER 37:  FEES



Section



   37.01   Schedule of fees



§ 37.01  SCHEDULE OF FEES.



 




SCHEDULE OF FEES




TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS




Chapter 51:  Water and Sewers



§ 51.01  Monthly Charges for Water Service and Sanitary Sewer Service
 
(1)   Single-family residential user.


   (a)   Each water connection within or outside of the city limits:


      Base charge - $17 for up to 4,000 gallons.


      From 4,001 to 10,000 gallons - $1.20 per 1,000 gallons.


      From 10,001 to 20,000 gallons - $1.40 per 1,000 gallons.


      Over 20,000 gallons - $1.54 per 1,000 gallons.


   (b)   Sewer charges:


      Base charge of $24 for water consumption up to 4,000 gallons.


      Over 4,000 gallons - $1.15 per 1,000 gallons up to a maximum of
15,000 gallons.


      No additional charge for above 15,000 gallons.


(2)   Non single-family residential users (including but not limited to
commercial establishments, places of worship, institutional use such as
schools and multi-family dwelling units), within the city limits:


   (a)   Each water connection:


      Base charge - $30 up to 4,000 gallons.


      From 4,001 gallons to 10,000 gallons - $1.20 per 1,000 gallons.


      From 10,001 to 20,000 gallons - $1.40 per 1,000 gallons.


      Over 20,000 gallons - $1.60 per 1,000 gallons.


   (b)   Sewer charges:


      $37 for water consumption up to 4,000 gallons.


      Over 4,000 gallons - $1.36 per 1,000 gallons.


(3)   Municipal irrigation users:


   Base charge of $16.75 per customer plus $1 per 1,000 gallons.


   No minimum or limit on the number of meters used.


(4)   All other users who are non-single-family residential users
(including but not limited to commercial establishments, places of worship,
institutional use such as schools and multi-family dwelling units) outside
the city limits:


   (a)   Each water connection outside city limits:


      Base charge of $640.86 for up to 50,000 gallons.


      Over 50,000 gallons - $1.64 per 1,000 gallons.


   (b)   Sewer charges:


      Base charge of $640.86 for up to 50,000 gallons.


      Over 50,000 gallons - $1.64 per 1,000 gallons.


(5)   Sewer services provided to Park Meadows Townhouses and billed to
City of Houston;


   Sewer charges: $4,168.


(6)   All users with inoperative water meter:


   Charge for average daily consumption as shown by meter when it is
operative.


(7)   All users: surface water conversion fee:


   $2.18 per 1,000 gallons.


§ 51.02  Single family and non-single family application and deposit for
water and sewer service
 
(B)   (1)   New service to owner occupied single-family residences -
$150 deposit for water and sewer service.


 
(B)   (2)   New service to non-owner occupied single-family residences
- $200 deposit for water and sewer service.


(B)   (3)   Single family residences that have been disconnected - $50
reconnect fee. Additionally, a $150 deposit (owner occupied) if no deposit on
file or $200 deposit (non-owner occupied) if no deposit on file. If deposit
on file with the city, then an additional $150, not to exceed $350 per
account, prior to service being restored.


(C)   (1)   New service to non-single-family residential customers -
$250 deposit for water and sewer service.


(C)   (2)   Non-single family residential customers that have been
disconnected - $50 reconnect fee plus an additional $150 deposit, not to
exceed $350 per account, prior to service being restored.


(D)   Water meter reinstallation fee: $100 plus an additional deposit as
set forth in (B)(3) or (C)(2), as applicable.


§ 51.07  Tap Fees
 
(A)   Single family residential user: $750 per connection.


 
(B)   Non single family residential user:


   (1)   Five-eighths inch water meter - three times the cost of
installing the tap, meter and any necessary service lines and the cost of
repairing or restoring any yards, sidewalks, streets or other improvements
affected by the installation shall be paid to the city.


   (2)   One-inch water meter - three times the cost of installing the
tap, meter and any necessary service lines and the cost of repairing or
restoring any yards, sidewalks, streets or other improvements affected by the
installation shall be paid to the city.


   (3)   Larger than one inch - three times the cost of installing the
tap, meter and necessary service lines and the cost of repairing or restoring
any yards, sidewalks, streets or other improvements affected by the
installation shall be paid to the city.


      User to pay the installation costs, plus 20%, prior to the
installation of the tap.


§ 51.08  Temporary Water Service
 
(B)   Temporary water service:


   Fee: $100 base fee plus $1.82 per 1,000 gallons, plus $1,000 deposit.


§ 51.11  Late Payment Fee and Disconnection of Water Service and Sanitary
Sewer Service
 
(A)   Late payment fee of 10%.


§ 51.12  Returned Check Charge
 
$25 fee for each returned check


Appendix A - Prohibition Against Cross-Connection and Unacceptable Plumbing
Practices
 
Regulations apply to all users of the city’s potable water distribution
system.


(C)   (1)   $100 fee for testing backflow prevention assemblies prior
to installation if the test is performed by the city’s operator or its
subcontractor.


      Fee for each retest is $100.


(D)   Customer service inspections:


   $75 - single-family residential users, if performed by the city’s
operator.


   $150 - non-single-family residential users, if performed by the
city’s operator.



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS




Chapter 91:  Garbage, Trash and Weeds; Nuisances




Garbage and Trash



§ 91.015(C)  Fee for Solid Waste Collection
 
$18.10


Road Maintenance Fee (Ord. 2013-26)
 
$5



Chapter 92:  Alarm Systems




Automated Burglar/Theft Alarm Protective Services



§ 92.03  Permit Required; Annual Renewal Required
 
Application and permit fee for new or late renewal - $40.


Permit fee for one-time renewal - $30.


§ 92.16  Fees and Charges for False Alarms
 
After five false alarms in 12 months - $50 fee.


§ 92.17  Appeal Fee
 
$25


§ 92.18 Reinstatement of Revoked Permit
 
$1,000 performance bond required



Chapter 94:  Parks and Recreation




Park Pavilion, Community Center and Swimming Pool



§ 94.15  Provisions Applicable to the Park Pavilion Use and Rental Only
 
(A)   Rental fee - $25


   Deposit - $25


§ 94.16  Provisions Applicable to the Community Center Use and Rental Only
 
(A)   (1)   Rental and cleaning fee


      Food/no alcohol - $275


      Food & alcohol - $375


      Non-residents add $175


(A)   (2)   Damage deposit -


      Food/no alcohol - $200


      Food & alcohol - $300


      Non-residents add $175


§ 94.17  Provisions Applicable to the Swimming Pool Use and Rental Only
 
(A)(1)(a)   Seasonal wristbands - Up to $10 per person


(A)(2)      One-day access - Up to $10 per person

(A)(3)      Concession punch card - $10 each


(B)(1)      Swimming pool rental fee -

      Residents - $350

      Non-residents add $175


§ 94.19  Provisions Applicable to Barbeque Pit Rentals
 
(A)   Rental fee - $25/per day (McDonald Park)


   Deposit - $25


(B)   Rental fee - $25/per day (Mobile)


   Deposit  - $25


§ 94.20  Provisions Applicable to Kayak Rentals
 
(B)   Weekday Rental fee - $10/per day/per kayak.


   Weekend Rental (Friday - Monday morning) $25 per kayak.


§ 94.21  Provisions Applicable to Tennis Court Rental
 
(A)   Tennis court access card - $50 each, maximum to two per family.



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS




Chapter 111:  Peddlers and Solicitors



§ 111.22  Bond
 
$1,000 surety bond


§ 111.23  Fee
 
License fee - $90


Additional $25 for each agent or employee.



Chapter 113:  Amusements




Regulation of Coin-Operated Machines



§ 113.47  License Fee
 
50 or fewer machines - $100


51 to 200 machines - $200


Over 200 machines - $250


§ 113.50  Sealing Machine for Non-Payment
 
$5 for release of any machine sealed under this section for non-payment of tax



Chapter 115:  Food Service



§ 115.15  Application and permit fee for food service establishment permit
(includes all required annual inspections, but not re-inspection fees)
 
$400


§ 115.15  Application and permit fee for temporary food service
establishments permit (includes required inspection, but not re-inspection
fee)
 
$50


§ 115.15  Renewal application and permit fee for food service establishment
permit (includes all required annual inspections, but not re-inspection fees)
 
$400


Re-inspection fee
 
$125



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES




Chapter 130:  Miscellaneous Offenses



§ 130.35  Fireworks
 
(C)   (4)   (j)   Fireworks display permit fee  $125



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE




Chapter 150:  Buildings



§ 150.03  Fees
 
 


Building

Includes all new buildings, additions and/or improvements to existing
buildings and property including residential and/or commercial - preparation,
issuance and signing of application
 
 

$50


Building permit, foundation work, roof work, and demolition - total valuation
of improvement
 
 


   $1 to $10,000
 
$92.30


   $10,001 to $25,000
 
$130 for the first $10,001, plus $10.08 for each additional thousand or
fraction thereof, up to and including $25,000.


   $25,001 to $50,000
 
$281.70 for the first $25,001, plus $7.27 for each additional thousand or
fraction thereof up to and including $50,000.


   $50,001 to $100,000
 
$463.50 for the first $50,001, plus $5.04 for each additional thousand or
fraction thereof, up to and including $100,000.


   $100,001 to $500,000
 
$715.50 for the first $100,001, plus $4.03 for each additional thousand or
fraction thereof, up to and including $500,000.


   $500,001 to $1,000,000
 
$2,328.30 for the first $500,001, plus $3.42 for each additional thousand or
fraction thereof up to and including $1,000,000.


   $1,000,001 and up
 
$4, 038.30 for the first $1,000,001, plus $2.27 for each additional thousand
or fraction thereof.


Plan-Checking Fees
 
 


When a plan is required to be submitted, a plan-checking fee shall be paid to
the Building Official at the time of submitting plans and specifications for
checking.
 
Equal to one-half of the building permit fee. Plan-checking fee is in
addition to the building permit fee.


Reinspection
 
 


Each inspection on any permit
 
$75


Total Valuation of Replacement
 
 


$1 to $10,000
 
$92.30


$10,001 to $25,000
 
$130.50 for the first $10,001, plus $10.08 for each additional 1,000 or
fraction thereof, up to and including $25,000.


$25,001 to $50,000
 
$281.70 for the first $25,001, plus  $7.27 for each additional thousand or
fraction thereof, up to and including $50,000.


$50,001 to $100,000
 
$463.50 for the first $50,001, plus  $5.04 for each additional thousand or
fraction thereof, up  to and including $100,000.


$100,001 to $500,000
 
$715.50 for the first $100,001, plus  $4.03 for each additional thousand or
fraction thereof up  to and including $500,000.


$500,001 to $1,000,000
 
$2,328.30 for the first $500,001, plus $3.42 for each additional thousand or
fraction thereof.


$1,000,000 and up
 
$4,038.30 for the first $1,000,001, plus $2.27 for each additional thousand
or fraction thereof.


Plumbing
 
 


Application fee
 
$50


First 3 fixtures
 
$25


Each additional fixture after the 3rd fixture - each
 
$3


Water and sewer
 
$35


Backflow preventer
 
$25


Storm sewer (plus each inlet $5)
 
$60


Water distribution piping (connections separate)
 
$75


Any other work not listed
 
$75


Each reinspection
 
$75


Gas
 
 


Application fee
 
$50


Gas line reconnect
 
$25


Gas test (GTO/pressure test 1-3 openings)
 
$50


Temporary gas cut-in letter required
 
$50


All other gas related installations
 
$25


Emergency same day gas test
 
$100


Any other work not listed
 
$75


Each reinspection
 
$75


Irrigation
 
 


Application fee
 
$50


Plan review/permit
 
$100


Each reinspection
 
$75


Electrical
 
 


Application fee
 
$50


Emergency inspection
 
$115


Meter loop and service to 50kW
 
$75


Meter loop and service 51kW to 250kW
 
$80


Meter loop and service 251kW and greater
 
$85


Each additional outlet
 
$0.50


Lighting fixture, each
 
$0.50


Range receptacle, each
 
$2.50


Clothes dryer, each
 
$2.50


Cooking top, each
 
$2.50


Oven, each
 
$2.50


Garbage disposal, each
 
$2.50


Dishwasher, each
 
$2.50


Heaters/generators to 1kW
 
$2.50


Heaters/generators over 1kW to 10kW
 
$7.50


Heaters/generators over 10kW
 
$7.50


   Each additional kW, plus
 
$0.50


Window air conditioner receptacle, each
 
$2.50


Temporary saw pole
 
$60


Temporary cut in
 
$75


Reconnect fee
 
$95


TCI letter
 
$25


Subpanels - 2 plus circuits each
 
$6


Any other work not listed
 
$75


Each reinspection
 
$75


Motors - Person Must Apply for, Pay For, and Receive Electrical Permit
 
 


Up to but not including ½ HP each
 
$5


½ HP and less than 100 HP, each
 
$15


100 HP and less than 150 HP, each
 
$25


150 HP and over, each
 
$35


X-ray machines, each
 
$10


Transformers up to 1 KVA, each
 
$2


Transformers 1-10 KVA, each
 
$7


Transformers over 10 KVA
 
$7


   Each additional KVA, plus
 
$1


Signs - Electrical Permit
 
 


Application fee
 
$50


Shop inspections, incandescent electrical sign and gas or vacuum tube 0-5 KVA
 
$60


   Each additional KVA over 5KVA, plus
 
$6


Site inspection and plan review
 
$75


Incandescent and vacuum tube signs, per KVA
 
$6


Sign installation inspection
 
$75


Signs - application fee
 
$50


Sign fees are calculated under Building Fees
 
 


Each reinspection
 
$75


Miscellaneous
 
$25


Air Conditioning/Mechanical
 
 


Application fee
 
$50


Additions/alterations (plus tonnage)
 
$25


Per ton, each
 
$4


Toilet exhaust, each
 
$5


Any duct work system (plus $1 per vent)
 
$25


Unit heaters (1st unit)
 
$25


   Each additional unit, plus
 
$5


Commercial/residential exhaust hood
 
$25


Any other work not listed
 
$75


Each reinspection
 
$75


Annual Fire Prevention Operations Permit
 
 


Application fee
 
$50


Annual Operational

Annual fire inspection
 
 

$75


Combustible stock & high pile stock
 
$250


Places of assembly
 
$200


Auto repair garage
 
$150


Paint spray booth
 
$250


Compressed gas cylinder/vessel
 
$300


Flammable liquid storage
 
$300


Hazardous chemicals (with chemical inventory list)
 
$500


Temporary flammable liquid storage tank
 
$250


Foster care home
 
$100


Adult personal care (overnight accommodations with on-site care)
 
$300


Health care/dialysis center/clinic/doctor’s office
 
$400


Child day care facility
 
$200


Lumberyard/roofing (outside stock storage)
 
$300


Dry cleaners
 
$150


Per Use
 
 


Carnivals, fairs, special events
 
$50


Tent use
 
$125


Explosives (storage)
 
$1,300


Hot work (asphalt roofs)
 
$200


Helicopter (public/general access)
 
$1,250


Gates/barriers blocking access
 
$50


Fire Permit Application Construction Fees
 
 


Application Fee
 
$50


Plan review
 
$100


Fire sprinkler system (1st 10,000 sf)
 
$200


Fire sprinkler system (each additional 10,000 sf) is $100 plus:
 
 

$225


Add/relocate 1-20 sprinkler heads plus hydrostatic test
 
 

$200


Add/relocate more than 20 sprinkler heads plus hydrostatic test
 
 

$275


Underground hydrostatic test
 
$100


Sprinkler hydrostatic test
 
$100


Smoke control system test
 
$100


Fire pump test
 
$200


Fire alarm system test
 
$200


Other Fire Fees
 
 


Each reinspection (commercial)
 
$75


Reinspection (final inspection)
 
$400


After hours inspection (after 5:00 p.m. and weekends)
 
 

$300


After hours inspection - no show
 
$400


Any other work not listed
 
$100


Double Fees
 
 


Where work for which a permit is required is started prior to obtaining a
permit, the fees specified shall be doubled, but the paying of such doubled
fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements
in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed in the
code. City may charge double fee for use of alarm without permit.


§ 150.07  Registration of Contractors:  General, irrigation, sign,
mechanical, fencing, fire alarm/sprinkler, drain, homeowner and roofing
 
(D)   Annual registration fee - $100


§ 150.09  Occupancy Permit Required; Fee
 
(B)   Residential occupancy permit fee - $75; commercial occupancy permit
fee - $100


§ 150.13  Mold Remediation Work Permit Required; Fee
 
(G)   Mold remediation work permit fee - $50


§ 150.14 Residential Rental Property Licensing and Inspection
 
(C)   License application fee - $100


   Landscape Development Requirements for Commercial Development


§ 150.62  Fees and Inspections
 
(B)   $10 per square foot of required landscaping not in place to ensure
that the required landscaping shall be installed.



Chapter 153 - Planning and Zoning




Zoning Districts and Regulations of General Applicability



§ 153.064  Temporary Uses
 
(C)   Permit required.  Fee for issuance of a temporary use permit - $100



Amendatory Procedure




§ 153.127  Application for Amendment to Written Text of Official Zoning
District Map

 
(A)   Application fee - $300


§ 153.128  Application for Planned Development Amendment
 

(A)   Application fee - $1,500



§ 153.129  Application for Specific Use Amendment
 

(A)   Application fee - $1,500




§ 153.155  Variances

 

(E)   Application fee - $300




§ 153.156  Special Exceptions

 

(D)   Application fee - $300




§ 153.158  Appeals

 

(B)   Application fee - $300




Banners and Pennants




§ 153.196  Prohibited Signs

 

(E)(2)(a)  Permit fee - None




(E)(2)(b)  Permit fee - $75





 



((Ord. 2012-28, passed 6-26-2012; Ord. 2014-09(A), passed 5-27-2014; Ord.
2014-17, passed 11-25-2014; Ord. 2015-11, passed 4-29-2015; Ord. 2015-18,
passed - -2015; Ord. 2016-12, passed 7-26-2016; Ord. 2016-26, passed
9-27-2016; Ord. 2016-31, passed 12-20-2016; Ord. 2017-15, passed 4-25-2017;
Ord. 2017-22, passed 4-25-2017; Ord. 2018-18, passed 8-28-2018) Penalty, see
§ 10.99



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY





         51.   WATER AND SEWERS




CHAPTER 50:  UTILITIES GENERALLY



Section



General Provisions



   50.01   Non-fee permits



   50.02   Scope



   50.03   Failure of a franchise utility to comply with the code of
ordinances



   50.04   Violation of this code



   50.05   Service to comply with technical provisions



   50.06   Interpretation, rules and regulations



   50.07   Permit required



   50.08   City not liable for actions of utilities



Utility Poles



   50.30   Aboveground utility poles, lines and property prohibited
without permit



   50.31   Application for pole placement permit



   50.32   No vested rights



   50.33   Underground cables, conduits and facilities



   50.34   City Council exclusive right to determine



   50.35   Specific prohibitions



   50.36   Emergency replacement of utility poles



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  NON-FEE PERMITS.



   (A)   All franchise utilities, which are exempt from the payment of
permit fees for work performed in the city, shall, prior to the beginning of
any work, file such plans, specifications, documentation, drawings and other
designations as shall be required under this code of ordinances of the city
to obtain a permit for the type and nature of the work sought to be
performed. The permit as herein provided shall be issued without fee.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any franchise utility, agent,
contractor, employee or worker to perform any work upon any property in the
city without having first obtained a permit as herein provided.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to
emergency work or work performed by a utility company in response to an
emergency condition, condition of public calamity or a condition of urgency;
however, the franchise utility that shall have performed the work in such a
circumstance or condition shall, as soon as practicable, notify the Mayor or
Building Official of the city that the work has been performed and shall
provide such additional information, documentation, drawings, sketches or
plans as may be reasonably requested by the Mayor and/or Building Official
relating to all the work that has been completed.



(Prior Code, § 29-1)  (Ord. 96-25, §§ 1 & 2, passed 7-23-1996; Ord.
97-16, § 1, passed 5-27-1997)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.02  SCOPE.



   (A) This chapter shall be applicable to all utilities, franchise
utilities, utility companies and non-utility companies providing utility
service or services within the city or utilities, franchise utilities and
utility companies transmitting or conveying utility products from points
either in the city or outside the city to customers outside the city or
points of distribution outside the city and shall be deemed to control the
conduct of business of all utilities, franchise utilities, utility companies
and non-utility companies. Additionally, this chapter shall be applicable to
all network providers, as that term is defined by Tex. Local Government Code
Chapter 284.



   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CONDUCTING BUSINESS. The sale, transportation, dissemination or
conveyance of any electrical, gas, water, cable television, wireless service,
or other utility product or service intended for sale, distribution,
dissemination or conveyance for sale and distribution to utility customers
both in and out of the city.



      UTILITY. Includes electric, gas, water, sewer, cable television,
wireless service, or any other utility that has as its business the sale of
utility products or services intended for sale, distribution, dissemination
or conveyance for sale and distribution to utility customers both in and out
of the city.



(Prior Code, § 29-2)  (Ord. 96-25, §§ 1 & 2, passed 7-23-1996; Ord.
97-16, § 1, passed 5-27-1997; Ord. 2018-06, passed 3-27-2018)



§ 50.03  FAILURE OF A FRANCHISE UTILITY TO COMPLY WITH THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES.



   The City Council shall have the exclusive right at any time to
determine whether or not a utility has fully complied with the terms and
provisions of the code of ordinances of the city, and in the event the City
Council shall determine after public hearing that compliance has not
occurred, the City Council shall be empowered to take such action as shall be
deemed appropriate, including but not limited to conditioning, limiting or
canceling any prior right or authority to operate, conduct business or convey
utility products from points in or outside the city to points outside the
city. If the utility is found by the City Council, after full and adequate
hearing, to be in non-compliance and in violation of this code, the City
Council may amend, cancel, limit, condition or otherwise modify any right
previously granted to any utility to conduct business in the city. Even if no
formal authority had been previously required by this code or other law, the
City Council may prescribe regulations or limitations on the right of any
utility to conduct business within the city.



(Prior Code, § 29-4)  (Ord. 96-25, §§ 1 & 2, passed 7-23-1996; Ord.
97-16, § 1, passed 5-27-1997) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.04  VIOLATION OF THIS CODE.



   Failure of any person or utility or any employee, agent, contractor or
servant thereof to comply with the terms, provisions and intent of this code
and this chapter shall constitute a violation of this code and may be
punished as in the case of any violation of this code.



(Prior Code, § 29-5)  (Ord. 96-25, §§ 1 & 2, passed 7-23-1996; Ord.
97-16, § 1, passed 5-27-1997) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.05  SERVICE TO COMPLY WITH TECHNICAL PROVISIONS.



   Utility service furnished and the construction of utility service
improvements or installation of equipment and other properties in the city
shall at all times be in compliance with all applicable and technical
provisions of this code, federal and state law, and any city ordinances,
rules and regulations that may at any time be adopted and/or promulgated.



(Prior Code, § 29-6)  (Ord. 96-25, §§ 1 & 2, passed 7-23-1996; Ord.
97-16, § 1, passed 5-27-1997)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.06  INTERPRETATION, RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The City Council shall be the exclusive body to interpret the
terms and provisions of this chapter and other provisions of this code as the
same may relate to this chapter or the legal ability of any utility to
conduct business within the city. The City Council shall have the exclusive
authority to establish such rules, regulations, standards and specifications
as may be necessary for installation, construction or maintenance of any
utility, utility system or the conduct of business of any utility within the
city.



   (B)   Such rules, regulations, standards and specifications as shall
be adopted from time to time by the City Council in accordance with the
authority as herein granted shall remain on file at all times in the office
of the City Secretary and may be enforced as may be permitted by law.
Violation by any utility or employee, individual, servant, contractor or
subcontractor thereof of any such interpretation, rules or regulations shall
be deemed a violation of this code and may be prosecuted as herein provided
for any such violation of this code.



(Prior Code, § 29-7)  (Ord. 96-25, §§ 1 & 2, passed 7-23-1996; Ord.
97-16, § 1, passed 5-27-1997)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.07  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Notwithstanding provisions in franchise agreements that waive
the necessity for the payment of fees or costs, any utility authorized to
transact business within the city, or its contractors or other persons acting
for any utility, shall at all times be required to apply for a "non-fee
permit." The city shall be permitted, in accordance with the provisions of
this code and all interpretations, rules or regulations that may have been
previously adopted, to issue a permit if the application shall be in accord
with the provisions of this code and this chapter.



   (B)   A non-fee permit shall be applied for in accordance with the
customary application process, standards and guidelines that have been
established for the permit by the Mayor or City Council of the city.



(Prior Code, § 29-8)  (Ord. 96-25, §§ 1 & 2, passed 7-23-1996; Ord.
97-16, § 1, passed 5-27-1997) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.08  CITY NOT LIABLE FOR ACTIONS OF UTILITIES.



   The city shall not at any time be liable for any damage to a customer
of a utility service or of a franchise utility or of the city whether the
damage shall be as a result of negligence or intentional conduct to any
person, partnership or corporation. To this extent, and to the full extent
required or permitted by law, the city claims and its employees or agents
claim, for and on behalf of the city, absolute immunity from any claims
arising out of the conduct of business of any utility or franchised utility.



(Prior Code, § 29-9)  (Ord. 96-25, §§ 1 & 2, passed 7-23-1996; Ord.
97-16, § 1, passed 5-27-1997)



UTILITY POLES



§ 50.30  ABOVEGROUND UTILITY POLES, LINES AND PROPERTY PROHIBITED WITHOUT
PERMIT.



   No new or replacement utility poles, except a network node or pole
exempted from the requirements set forth herein by Tex. Local Government Code
Chapter 284 shall be located, built or relocated aboveground within the city
without the utility first having obtained a pole placement permit from the
city. For poles over six feet in length above ground, permits shall be issued
after application and hearing and a vote of at least three members of the
City Council. For poles less than six feet in length, a pole permit can be
issued in accordance with the provisions of this code by the Mayor of the
city. The term UTILITY POLE as herein set out shall not only include utility
poles but any other devices, apparatus, facilities, wires or other
improvements necessary to transmit utility service to utility customers or
utility customers' property, whether the customer be in the city or outside
the city.



(Prior Code, § 29-31)  (Ord. 96-25, §§ 1 & 2, passed 7-23-1996; Ord.
97-16, § 1, passed 5-27-1997; Ord. 99-06, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 2018-06,
passed 3-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.31  APPLICATION FOR POLE PLACEMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   Each person or utility desiring to erect or construct new or
relocate existing utility poles within the city shall first file an
application with the City Secretary which shall describe the proposed
location of the utility poles, the proximity of those poles to the nearest
residential structure, nearest street right-of-way, nearest utility service
provided by either the applicant or another utility company and the intended
date of construction or relocation. The application shall be filed at least
30 days prior to the intended construction and no application fee shall be
required.



   (B)   The application shall first be reviewed by the Mayor of the
city or his or her designee who shall determine its completeness and the need
for additional information. The Mayor shall have the right to request any
additional information, documentation, clarification or records as shall be
deemed necessary for the City Council to properly act upon the application as
filed and presented.



   (C)   The Mayor, after obtaining all necessary information, shall
forward the application to the City Council who shall conduct a hearing,
which shall occur at the earliest and most practicable time. At the hearing,
the City Council shall determine whether or not the proposed application and
erection or relocation of a utility pole constitutes either:



      (1)   An endangerment to the health, safety and well-being of
the residents and inhabitants of the city;



      (2)   An endangerment to property or property interests in or
adjacent to the city;



      (3)   The likely detriment to property values or property
interests because of the proximity of the pole(s) to current or contemplated
improvements and the unsightly nature of the utility poles; or



      (4)   The existence of any other conditions which, although
not enumerated herein, may cause the City Council to determine that the best
interests of the city and its citizens and inhabitants would be best served
by the relocation of the contemplated poles to another location or an
alternative method of installation of utility lines and other properties.



   (D)   If any application is found to be in violation of the criteria
as herein set out, the City Council shall reject the application and the
applicant shall be permitted to file an amended application in accord with
any decision of the City Council as may have been previously determined. No
application and/or permit shall be necessary if all devices, lines, apparatus
or other equipment is properly installed underground and no poles, devices or
apparatus is located aboveground.



   (E)   In addition to the other provisions as herein set out, the
Mayor will provide the City Council with a report describing all approvals
and permits that the city has issued or has pending from persons who received
or will receive service from the utility facilities covered by the
application, including copies of all agreements between property owners and a
utility to pay the additional cost of underground service. In accordance with
the findings as herein set out and the provisions of this chapter, the City
Council shall, in granting any application under the provisions of this
chapter:



      (1)   Modify the terms and conditions of any existing or
pending city permit or approval to be consistent with the pole placement
permit; or



      (2)   If the application for a pole placement permit is
denied, the City Council shall modify the terms and conditions of an existing
or pending permit or approval to be consistent with this code, including the
requirements of Chapter 150 of this code, requiring that an electrical permit
holder must first reach an agreement with the utility to pay the utility the
difference in cost between conventional overhead utility service and any
underground service.



   (F)   All other permits and approvals as may be required from time
to time by other provisions of this code or other municipal law shall be
issued conditionally and subject to final action by the City Council under
the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 29-32)  (Ord. 96-25, §§ 1 & 2, passed 7-23-1996; Ord.
97-16, § 1, passed 5-27-1997)



§ 50.32  NO VESTED RIGHTS.



   No utility, person, partnership or corporation shall at any time have a
vested or absolute right to the location of a utility pole or the
construction of the same unless a permit has been first issued by the City
Council as herein provided.



(Prior Code, § 29-32a)  (Ord. 96-25, §§ 1 & 2, passed 7-23-1996; Ord.
97-16, § 1, passed 5-27-1997)



§ 50.33  UNDERGROUND CABLES, CONDUITS AND FACILITIES.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to underground
cables, conduits or other facilities sought to be installed by any franchise
utility or other utility doing business in the city and the same may be
installed if in accordance with all other provisions of this code without
compliance with the terms and provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 29-33)  (Ord. 96-25, §§ 1 & 2, passed 7-23-1996; Ord.
97-16, § 1, passed 5-27-1997)



§ 50.34  CITY COUNCIL EXCLUSIVE RIGHT TO DETERMINE.



   The City Council shall be the body exclusively charged with issuing
pole permits within the city and to properly interpret this code or otherwise
determine the legislative intent of this code. No appeal shall lie to any
administrative or judicial body to review actions taken or not taken by the
City Council of the city, except such right of review as may be provided by
other law.



(Prior Code, § 29-34)  (Ord. 96-25, §§ 1 & 2, passed 7-23-1996; Ord.
97-16, § 1, passed 5-27-1997)



§ 50.35  SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No utility pole shall at any time be erected within the city
upon either public or private property, public street, right-of-way or
dedicated easement if the same shall be:



      (1)   Less than 500 yards from a residential structure;



      (2)   Less than 100 yards from a right-of-way of a public
street, highway or other public way; or



      (3)   In an area adjoining or reserved for public recreation,
including but not limited to a public park, private park, a park or
recreation area maintained by a school district or school authority, or other
area of public assembly or public gathering.



   (B)   The City Council in the proper case may hear and determine a
request for variance and may for good cause grant a variance as to the
distance restrictions as herein set out if the City Council finds and
determines that in granting such a variance the same does not constitute a
violation of any of the rules, regulations, and intent of this chapter or
such ordinances as may be from time to time duly adopted by the City Council.



   (C)   The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply to
a network node or pole expressly granted a right of access to the public
right-of-way by Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 284, as those terms are
defined by said chapter, provided that approval of a permit application is
obtained, if required.



(Prior Code, § 29-35)  (Ord. 96-25, §§ 1 & 2, passed 7-23-1996; Ord.
97-16, § 1, passed 5-27-1997; Ord. 2018-06, passed 3-27-2018)



§ 50.36  EMERGENCY REPLACEMENT OF UTILITY POLES.



   The provisions of this subchapter and the sections hereunder shall not
be applicable and shall not control in the case of a bona fide emergency
and/or loss or threatened loss of utility service to utility customers, and
all previously existing utility poles may be replaced without complying with
this subchapter so long as any work relating to replacement is in accordance
with all other provisions of this code.



(Prior Code, § 29-36)  (Ord. 96-25, §§ 1 & 2, passed 7-23-1996; Ord.
97-16, § 1, passed 5-27-1997)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER AND SEWERS



Section



Billing and Charges for Water Service and Sanitary Sewer Service



   51.01   Charges for water service and sanitary sewer service



   51.02   Single family and non-single family application and deposit
for water and sewer service



   51.03   Unauthorized interference with water meter



   51.04   Obtaining water by methods not provided herein



   51.05   Administrative regulations



   51.06   Water service and sanitary sewer service due dates and times



   51.07   Tap fees



   51.08   Temporary water service



   51.09   Quality of sewage



   51.10   Maintenance and repair



   51.11   Late payment fee and disconnection of water service and
sanitary sewer service



   51.12   Returned check charge



   51.13   Pressure of water



   51.14   No free service



   51.15   Rule prohibiting discharges into storm sewers



   51.16   Rule prohibiting obstruction of storm sewer easements



 



   51.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Prohibition against cross-connection and unacceptable
plumbing practices



BILLING AND CHARGES FOR WATER SERVICE AND SANITARY SEWER SERVICE



§ 51.01  CHARGES FOR WATER SERVICE AND SANITARY SEWER SERVICE.



   Customers shall pay charges for water service and sanitary sewer
service as set forth by City Council in a schedule of fees.



(Ord. 2012-16, passed 6-26-2012)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.02  SINGLE FAMILY AND NON-SINGLE FAMILY APPLICATION AND DEPOSIT FOR
WATER AND SEWER SERVICE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection to
the city’s water or sewer system without first submitting a water and sewer
application which shall state at a minimum the uses for which water and sewer
service is desired, providing the name of the owner of the property, the
number of lots and block, and the address. Upon payment of the tapping fee
and other fees as set by ordinance and receiving a permit, the city shall
make the necessary connections and furnish appropriate devices for water and
water metering.



   (B)   Single family residential customers:



      (1)   All new owner occupied residential customers shall pay a
water and sewer deposit (non-interest bearing) as set forth by City Council
in a schedule of fees. The deposit shall be applied to the last month’s
water and sewer charges and any remaining amounts shall be refunded within 45
days of the disconnect date.



      (2)   All new non-owner occupied residential customers shall
pay a water and sewer deposit (non-interest bearing) as set forth by City
Council in a schedule of fees. The deposit shall be applied to the last
month’s water and sewer charges and any remaining amounts shall be refunded
within 45 days of the disconnect date.



      (3)   Residential customers that have water or sewer service
disconnected for non-payment or for a violation of law shall pay a reconnect
fee as set forth by City Council in a schedule of fees. Additionally, if the
residential customer does not have a deposit with the city, the customer also
shall pay a deposit as set forth in subsection (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this
section, as applicable, prior to the city reconnecting water and sewer
service. If the residential customer does have a deposit with the city and
has service disconnected, then the customer also shall pay an additional
deposit as set forth by City Council in a schedule of fees.



   (C)   Non-single family residential customers including but not
limited to commercial businesses, places of worship, schools, institutions,
and multifamily customers:



      (1)   All new non-single family residential customers shall
pay a water and sewer deposit (non-interest bearing) as set forth by City
Council in a schedule of fees. The deposit shall be applied to the last
month’s water and sewer charges and any remaining amounts shall be refunded
within 45 days of the disconnect date.



      (2)   For non-single family residential customers that have
water or sewer service disconnected for non-payment or for a violation of
law, a reconnect fee and an additional deposit as set forth by City Council
in a schedule of fees shall be paid prior to the city reconnecting water and
sewer service.



   (D)   In the event that the city or its authorized agent,
representative, or contractor removes a customer’s water meter due to
disconnection of service, the customer shall pay to the city a water meter
reinstallation fee and any deposit as required by subsection (B)(3) or
(C)(2), as applicable, prior to water service and sanitary sewer service
being restored.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006; Ord. 2007-09, passed 4-24-2007; Ord.
2016-11, passed 7-26-2016; Ord. 2016-22, passed 9-27-2016)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.03  UNAUTHORIZED INTERFERENCE WITH WATER METER.



   All water meters, whether privately owned or belonging to the water
works system, shall be set by employees of the system only. It shall be
unlawful for any person, other than designated employees of the city, to
remove any water meter that has been placed or to in any manner interfere
with or tamper with any water meter.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.04  OBTAINING WATER BY METHODS NOT PROVIDED HEREIN.



   It shall be a violation of this code for any person through any device,
tool, apparatus or arrangement to obtain city water by methods other than
provided for herein.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.05  ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.



   The City Council shall, from time to time, have the power to cause to
be made or to make necessary administrative rules and regulations to ensure
proper collection of water service accounts and sanitary sewer service
accounts due and the maintaining of proper reports and reporting provided
that the rules and regulations are not in conflict with the provisions of
this section or the code of ordinances. City Council adopts the initial
administrative rules included in Appendix A to this chapter.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 51.06  WATER SERVICE AND SANITARY SEWER SERVICE DUE DATES AND TIMES.



   (A)   Each water service and sanitary sewer service invoice shall be
paid and received by the city on or before the close of City Hall on the
twentieth day of the month following the billing period (due date). If the
twentieth day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or official city holiday, then the
water service and sanitary sewer service invoice shall be paid and received
by the city no later than the next business day, on or before 9:00 a.m., that
the city is open.



   (B)   A customer that disputes the water service and sanitary sewer
service invoice shall submit to the City Secretary, before the invoice due
date and time, a written notice explaining why the invoiced amounts are
disputed. The city shall investigate the disputed invoiced amounts within 14
days and respond, in writing, to the customer informing them that the
original invoice is correct or that the city has amended the invoice. The
customer shall pay the full original invoice or the full amended invoice, as
applicable, no later than seven days after the date the city mails or
personally delivers its determination to the customer.



   (C)   If a customer fails to pay the full water and sanitary sewer
invoice by the dates and times set forth in this section, then the
customer’s account shall be deemed delinquent, and the city shall assess a
late payment fee and take any lawful action including disconnecting water
service and sanitary sewer service to the customer as set forth in § 51.11
of this chapter and the schedule of fees.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006; Ord. 2016-23, passed 9-27-2016)



§ 51.07  TAP FEES.



   (A)   Single-family residential user. Prior to connection to the
city's water system, a tap fee as set forth herein shall be paid to the city
to cover the cost of making the connection and cost of providing the water
meter. For every water meter for single-family residential use the charge
shall be a flat rate of $750 per connection.



   (B)   Non-single-family residential user.



      (1)   In the case of a five-eighths inch water meter, prior to
connection to the city water system, a tap fee equal to three times the cost
to the city of installing the tap, meter and any necessary service lines and
the cost of repairing or restoring any yards, sidewalks, streets or other
improvements affected by the installation shall be paid to the city.



      (2)   In the case of a one-inch water meter, a tap fee equal
to three times the cost to the city of installing the tap, meter and any
necessary service lines and the cost of repairing or restoring any yards,
sidewalks, streets or other improvements affected by the installation shall
be paid to the city.



      (3)   In the case of a water meter larger than one inch, a tap
fee equal to three times the city's actual cost of installing the tap, meter
and necessary service lines, and repairing or restoring any yards, sidewalks,
streets or other improvements affected by the installation shall be paid to
the city (the "installation costs"). The city's operator will provide an
estimate for the installation costs. The user shall pay the installation
costs, plus 20%, prior to the installation of the tap. If the actual
installation costs are greater than the estimated installation costs paid by
the user, the difference must be paid by the user before the city will
provide service to the user. If the actual installation costs are less than
the estimated installation costs paid by the user, a refund for the
difference shall be issued to the user.



      (4)   Connections to the city's water system shall not be
allowed prior to an approved sewer inspection, and all the connections shall
be inspected by the district's operator or its subcontractor.



      (5)   Connections to the city water system shall not be
allowed prior to an approved sewer inspection, and all the connections shall
be inspected by the city's operator.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.08  TEMPORARY WATER SERVICE.



   (A)   The city or its authorized agent, representative, or
contractor shall be authorized to make a temporary water connection to any
fire hydrant or flushing valve upon receipt of a written request for
temporary water services and approval by the Public Works Director. This
temporary service shall be supplied only through a city issued meter.



   (B)   Any person or entity applying for temporary water service
(“temporary customer”) shall pay to the city a water usage fee and a
deposit in the amount set forth by City Council in a schedule of fees. Upon
receipt of full payment for temporary water used and return of the meter in
good condition, the city shall refund to the temporary customer the deposit
no later than 30 days after the meter is disconnected, except as set forth in
division (C) of this section.



   (C)   If any unpaid water usage is outstanding or if the water meter
is not returned to the city in good condition, the city shall deduct such
amounts owed to the city from the deposit and return any remaining portion of
the deposit, if any, to the temporary customer no later than 30 days after
the meter is disconnected. If the amounts owed to the city exceeds the
deposit, the city shall invoice the temporary customer any outstanding
amounts.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006; Ord. 2016-24, passed 9-27-2016)



§ 51.09  QUALITY OF SEWAGE.



   (A)   Domestic waste. Only ordinary liquid and water-carried waste
from domestic activities that is amenable to biological treatment and that is
discharged from sanitary conveniences of buildings connected to a public
sanitary sewer system shall be discharged into the city's sanitary sewer
lines. Waste resulting from any process of commerce or industry may not be
discharged into the city's sanitary sewer lines except as authorized pursuant
to division (B) below.



   (B)   Commercial and industrial waste. All discharges other than
waste described in division (A) above are prohibited unless the user has
applied to and received written authorization from the city for the discharge.



      (1)   The applicant must file a statement with the city
containing the following information:



         (a)   Name and address of applicant;



         (b)   Type of industry, business, activity or other
waste-creative process;



         (c)   Quantity of waste to be discharged;



         (d)   Typical analysis of the waste;



         (e)   Type of pretreatment proposed; and



         (f)   Such other information as the city may request in
writing.



      (2)   The city shall have the right to reject any application
for discharge of non-domestic waste into the city's sanitary sewer lines if
the city determines in its sole discretion that the proposed discharge may be
harmful to the city's sanitary sewer system or the environment. The city also
shall have the right in approving any application for the discharge of
non-domestic waste to impose any limitations on the discharge that the city
determines in its sole discretion to be necessary to protect the city's
sanitary sewer system or the environment.



   (C)   National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. If a user is
subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard pursuant to
regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency under § 307
of the Federal Clean Water Act being 33 USC 1317, the user is prohibited from
discharging pollutants into the city's sanitary sewer system in violation of
applicable categorical pretreatment standards.



   (D)   City testing; pretreatment. The city shall have the right to
sample and test any user's discharge at the discretion of the city's
operator, with no limit as to the frequency of the tests, and to charge the
user for the city's cost of the sampling and testing. The city also shall
have the right to require pretreatment, at the user's expense, of any
discharge of nondomestic waste if the city determines in its sole discretion
that pretreatment of the waste is necessary to protect the city's sanitary
sewer system or the environment, even if pretreatment is not otherwise
required pursuant to division (C) above.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 51.10  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.



   It shall be the responsibility of each user to maintain the water and
sewer lines from the point of connection to the city's water and sewer system
to the building served.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 51.11  LATE PAYMENT FEE AND DISCONNECTION OF WATER SERVICE AND SANITARY
SEWER SERVICE.



   (A)   The city shall invoice customers for water service and
sanitary sewer service monthly. If a customer fails to pay the water service
and sanitary sewer invoice as set forth in § 51.06 of this chapter, then
customer shall pay to the city a late payment fee as set forth by City
Council in a schedule of fees.



   (B)   If customer does not pay the water and sanitary sewer invoice,
including any late payment fees, by the fifth day of the month following the
due date, the city may, in its discretion, disconnect water service and
sanitary sewer service to the customer; provided, that prior to disconnecting
services, the city shall send a disconnection notice to the customer by
United States mail. The written notice shall inform the customer of the past
due amounts owed to the city, including any late payment fees. The notice
also shall inform the customer when water service and sanitary sewer service
will be disconnected if full payment is not made to the city.



   (C)   The city shall credit all payments received by customer in the
following order; any past due amounts owed to the city, any outstanding late
payment fees owed to the city, any current invoiced amounts due and owed to
the city, and any deposits owed to the city. Customer shall pay city with
cash, cashier’s check, money order, or credit card.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006; Ord. 2016-25, passed 9-27-2016)



§ 51.12  RETURNED CHECK CHARGE.



   The city will charge a $25 fee to any customer for each check given to
the city for payment that must be returned for any reason. Payments attempted
to be made by check which is returned shall be considered delinquent unless
cash or certified funds are presented to the city for payment within the time
period required by the previous section.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 51.13  PRESSURE OF WATER.



   The city agrees to use all reasonable efforts to supply to any user
adequate pressure of water. The city does not and will not guarantee to any
user a specific quantity or pressure of water for any purpose whatsoever. The
city is required only to furnish a connection to its system and in no case
shall the city be liable for the failure or refusal to furnish water or any
particular amount of pressure of water; however, the city shall use
reasonable efforts to supply water to all users at an acceptable minimum
pressure.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 51.14  NO FREE SERVICE.



   No free service shall be granted to any user for services furnished by
the city's system, whether the user be a charitable or eleemosynary
institution, a political subdivision or municipal corporation, and all
charges for service shall be made as required herein.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 51.15  RULE PROHIBITING DISCHARGES INTO STORM SEWERS.



   The adequate and sufficient flow of storm waters is necessary to
protect public safety and the welfare of city residents. The city hereby
adopts a rule that no discharges, including without limitation of grass
clippings, sand or mud, shall be made into the city's storm sewer system,
other than storm sewer runoff. Violation of the preceding rule shall be
considered a violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 51.16  RULE PROHIBITING OBSTRUCTION OF STORM SEWER EASEMENTS.



   The adequate and sufficient flow of storm waters is necessary to
protect public safety and the welfare of city residents. The city hereby
adopts a rule that persons are prohibited from blocking, obstructing or
impeding any storm sewer easement owned or controlled by the city and any
storm sewer easement in which city storm sewer facilities are located. For
purposes of this rule, BLOCKING, OBSTRUCTING or IMPEDING shall include,
without limitation, constructing, placing or maintaining a fence (or a
portion thereof) or any other structure in such a storm sewer easement such
that the flow of storm waters within the easement, and/or the use of the
city's facilities within the easement, are blocked, obstructed or impeded.
Violation of the preceding rule shall be considered a violation of this
subchapter. If such a violation occurs or continues, the city may, in
addition to other remedies available to it, including those remedies set out
in this subchapter, terminate water service to the person.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, corporation or other entity who violates any of
the following divisions (B)(1) through (B)(6) shall be subject to a penalty
of $200 for each breach of the foregoing provisions. Each day that a breach
of any provision hereof continues shall be considered a separate breach:



      (1)   Violates any section of this chapter;



      (2)   Makes unauthorized use of city services or facilities;



      (3)   Causes damage to city facilities by using the facilities
in a manner or for a purpose contrary to the purpose for which the facilities
were designed, including but not limited to dumping of any material or matter
into storm drains or sanitary sewer drains;



      (4)   Uses or permits the use of any septic tank or holding
tank within the city;



      (5)   Violates the city's rules and regulations governing
sewer lines and sewer connections; or



      (6)   Constructs facilities or buildings which are not
included in the approved plans for development.



   (C)   Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits another
to violate any provision of § 51.01 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$500. Each occurrence of any such violation of § 51.01 shall constitute a
separate offense. Each day on which any such violation of § 51.01 occurs
shall constitute a separate offense.



   (D)   Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits another
to violate any provision of § 51.02 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$500 unless such violation implicates fire safety, zoning, or public health
and sanitation including dumping of refuse in which case the fine amount
shall not be more than $2,000. Each occurrence of any such violation of §
51.02 shall constitute a separate offense. Each day on which any such
violation of this section occurs shall constitute a separate offense.



   (E)   Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits another
to violate any provision of § 51.03 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$500 unless such violation implicates fire safety, zoning, or public health
and sanitation including dumping of refuse in which case the fine amount
shall not be more than $2,000. Each occurrence of any such violation of §
51.03 shall constitute a separate offense. Each day on which any such
violation of this section occurs shall constitute a separate offense.



   (F)   Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits another
to violate any provision of § 51.06 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction there of, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$500 unless such violation implicates fire safety, zoning, or public health
and sanitation including dumping of refuse in which case the fine amount
shall not be more than $2,000. Each occurrence of any such violation of §
51.06 shall constitute a separate offense. Each day on which any such
violation of this section occurs shall constitute a separate offense.



   (G)   This penalty shall be in addition to the other penalties
provided by the laws of the state and to any other legal rights and remedies
of the city as may be allowed by law.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006; Ord. 2012-16, passed 6-26-2012; Ord.
2016-11, passed 7-26-2016; Ord. 2016-23, passed 9-27-2016; Ord. 2018-16,
passed 7-24-2018)



APPENDIX A: PROHIBITION AGAINST CROSS-CONNECTION AND UNACCEPTABLE PLUMBING
PRACTICES



   The city adopts the following plumbing regulations, which apply to all
users of the city's potable water distribution system. These regulations, if
in conflict with other regulations or ordinances of the city or of the
plumbing codes adopted by the city, then those ordinances or codes supersede
these regulations.



   (A)   Plumbing fixtures. A user is not permitted to install any
plumbing fixture which is not in compliance with a state-approved Plumbing
Code and the plumbing code, if any, required by the city in whose
jurisdiction the city is located.



   (B)   Prohibition against water contamination. No direct connection
between the city's potable water distribution system and a potential source
of contamination is permitted. Potential sources of contamination shall be
isolated from the city's potable water distribution system by the
installation of an air-gap or an appropriate backflow prevention device in
accordance with state plumbing regulations. In addition, all pressure relief
valves and thermal expansion devices must be in accordance with state
plumbing codes and the plumbing code, if any, required by the city in whose
jurisdiction the city is located.



   (C)   Backflow prevention assemblies. All sprinkler systems, spas
and pools must have backflow prevention assemblies installed by the user at
the user's sole cost and expense. In addition, the city, in its sole
discretion, may require a non-single-family residential user to install a
backflow prevention assembly at any meter(s) servicing such a user's
property. The city, in its sole discretion, also may require any user to
install other backflow prevention assemblies at any fixture in order to
prevent contamination of the city's potable water distribution system or if
the user's plumbing system poses a high health hazard. A HIGH HEALTH HAZARD
is defined by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality ("TCEQ") as a
"cross-connection, potential cross-connection, or other situation involving
any substance that could cause death, illness, spread of disease, or has a
high probability of causing such effects if introduced into the potable
drinking water supply." If the city determines that a user must install a
backflow prevention assembly as a protection against a high health hazard,
the backflow prevention assembly used must comply with a state approved
plumbing code and the plumbing code, if any, required by the city in whose
jurisdiction the city is located, and must be tested and certified at least
annually by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester. A list of
certified backflow prevention assembly inspectors can be obtained from the
local office of the TCEQ.



      (1)   The user is responsible for insuring that all backflow
prevention assemblies are tested upon installation by a recognized backflow
prevention assembly tester. If this test is performed by the city's operator
or its subcontractor, the cost will be $100, which is due and payable prior
to the test. The user is solely responsible for the cost of this test. If the
city requires the installation of a backflow prevention assembly in order to
prevent a serious threat to the city's public water supply, then the city, in
its sole discretion, may immediately terminate service to the user. In that
event, service will not be restored until the backflow prevention assembly
has been installed and tested and a signed and dated original of a "Backflow
Prevention Assembly Test and Maintenance Report" in the form attached to this
Rate Order as Exhibit "B," which is hereby adopted by reference as if set out
in full herein, has been provided to the city's operator. Each retest will be
charged at the same $100 rate.



      (2)   If the city determines that a backflow prevention
assembly must be installed pursuant to this Rate Order for reasons other than
to eliminate a serious threat to the city's public water system, the user
must install the backflow prevention assembly within five working days after
receipt of notice from the city that the installation is required. In
addition, the user must provide the city's operator with a signed and dated
original of a "Backflow Prevention Assembly Test and Maintenance Report" in
the form attached to this Rate Order as Exhibit "B" within three working days
of the installation of the backflow prevention assembly and within three
working days of any subsequent repair, maintenance or testing of the
assembly. If the user fails to provide the testing certificate within this
time, the city, in its discretion, may terminate service to the user pursuant
to the terms of this Rate Order. The city's operator will retain the reports
for a minimum of three years.



   (D)   Customer service inspections.  A customer service inspection
is required prior to the time the city provides continuous water service to
new construction, provides water service to private plumbing facilities that
have been added to existing construction or materially improved or corrected,
or  continues service to a user when the city has reason to believe that
cross-connections or other unacceptable plumbing practices exist. The cost of
the customer service inspection will be the sole responsibility of the user.
Only those individuals allowed and qualified by law may perform the
inspection. If the customer service inspection is performed by the city's
operator, the cost will be $75 for single-family residential users and $150
for non-single-family residential users, and will be determined on an
individual basis for other users. All fees relating to the customer service
inspection shall be paid by the user prior to the inspection, and if the
inspection is made in connection with new construction, the fee will be
collected with the tap fee.



   (E)   Prohibition against cross-connections.  No cross-connection
between the city's potable water distribution system and. A private water
system is permitted.



      (1)   Where an actual air gap is not maintained between the
public water supply and a private water supply, an approved reduced
pressure–zone backflow prevention assembly must be properly installed and
the assembly must be annually inspected and tested by a certified backflow
prevention device tester. A list of certified backflow prevention device
testers may be obtained from the local office of the TCEQ. By accepting
service from the city, all users agree to allow the annual inspection and
testing of backflow prevention assemblies to take place during normal
business hours. If any user refuses to allow the annual inspection and
testing, service to the user will be discontinued until the inspection and
testing is completed.



      (2)   No connection which allows water to be returned to the
city's potable water distribution system is permitted. This includes but is
not limited to any device pursuant to which water is removed from the city's
potable water distribution system, circulated through a user's system for
condensing, cooling and heating of fluids or industrial processes, including
but not limited to a heat exchange system, and routed back to the city's
potable water distribution system.



   (F)   Notice of unacceptable plumbing practices. The city shall
notify the user in writing of any cross-connection or other unacceptable
plumbing practice which has been identified during the customer's service
inspection, the final plumbing inspection, any periodic reinspection, or any
other inspection. At its sole cost and expense, the user shall immediately
correct any unacceptable plumbing practice on its premises and properly
install, test and maintain any backflow prevention device required by the
city within two working days of receipt of notice of the improper
cross-connection. The user shall provide copies of all testing and
maintenance records on such devices to the city within three working days of
the testing or maintenance. If the user fails to correct the noted
unacceptable plumbing practice, the city may immediately terminate water
service or, at the user's sole cost and expense, eliminate the
cross-connection or correct the unacceptable plumbing practice.



   (G)   Penalty for violation. The failure of a user to comply with
the terms of this section will be considered a violation of this Rate Order.
If such a violation occurs, or if the city determines the existence of a
serious threat to the integrity of the city's water supply, the city, in its
sole option, may, in addition to all other legal remedies available to it,
including those remedies set out in this Rate Order, immediately terminate
service or, at the user's sole cost and expense, install the plumbing
fixtures or assemblies necessary to correct the unacceptable plumbing
practice. If the city terminates service in order to preserve the integrity
of the city's water supply, service will be restored only when the source of
the potential contamination no longer exists or until paid by the user, the
difference must be paid by the user before the city will provide service to
the user. If the actual installation costs are less than the estimated
installation costs paid by the user, a refund for the difference shall be
issued to the user.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 5-23-2006)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS





         71.   PARKING REGULATIONS





         72.   PARKING SCHEDULES





         73.   TRUCK TRAFFIC




CHAPTER 70:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   Office of the Traffic Engineer



   70.02   Installation of traffic-control devices



Speed Limits



   70.15   General regulations



   70.16   School zone hours



 



   70.99   General penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  OFFICE OF THE TRAFFIC ENGINEER.



   There is hereby established the Office of the Traffic Engineer of the
city.



(Prior Code, § 30-1)  (Ord. 84-024, § 1, passed 2-28-1984; Ord. 84-041, §
1, passed 5-22-1984)



§ 70.02  INSTALLATION OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   The following provisions are hereby adopted for the installation of
traffic-control devices, signals and signs within the city.



   (A)   All traffic-control devices, including signs, signals and
markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the purpose of
directing and controlling traffic within the city, shall conform to the Texas
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways
(hereinafter called "the Manual"), pursuant to Tex. Transp. Code Ch. 544. All
signs, signals and markings erected or used by the city shall be uniform and
be located, so far as practicable, according to the directions and
specifications shown in the Manual throughout the city. All existing
traffic-control devices, and those erected in the future pursuant to the
authority of this section, shall be consistent with the Manual, state law and
this section and shall be deemed to be official traffic-control devices.



   (B)   All traffic-control devices, signs and signals (hereinafter
called devices), existing prior to the date of adoption of this section,
shall be deemed to be valid, official traffic-control devices.



   (C)   All persons and operators of any vehicles of any type shall
obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device, sign, signal or
marking applicable thereto, placed in accordance with this section, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (D)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in
view of any highway, street or alley any unauthorized sign, signal, marking
or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic-control device or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
traffic-control device. No person shall maintain or allow to be maintained
any obstacle which interferes with or hides from view an official
traffic-control device.



      (2)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
authority permit, upon any highway, street or alley, any traffic sign or
signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. Any such prohibited sign,
signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and any officer
of the city is empowered to remove the same or cause the same to be removed
without notice.



   (E)   No person, except as shall be otherwise authorized by the
Traffic Engineer, shall attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock
down or remove any official traffic-control device, sign or signal.



   (F)   (1)   The City Council does hereby direct that the Traffic
Engineer shall have the duty of erecting or installing upon, over, along or
beside any highway, street or alley, traffic-control devices, signs, signals
and markings, or to cause the same to be erected, installed or placed in
accordance with this section and consistent with the Manual and the
provisions of law. These traffic-control devices shall be installed by the
Traffic Engineer as soon as practicable after he or she shall determine the
necessity for the same in accordance with the Manual.



      (2)   Whenever the Traffic Engineer has erected and installed
an official traffic-control device, sign or signal at any location in the
city, or has allowed such a traffic-control device, sign or signal to be
maintained as existing, or has caused the same to be done under his or her
direction in obedience to this section, a written report shall thereafter be
filed with the City Secretary, signed officially by the Traffic Engineer,
stating the type of traffic-control device, signal or sign and where the same
was erected or installed. In addition, he or she shall file, as a part of his
or her report, a certification that the traffic-control device, signal or
sign is in accordance with the warrants specified in the Manual, or in the
case where no warrants are specified or no provisions are contained in the
Manual, then in accordance with law.



(Prior Code, § 30-2)  (Ord. 84-06, § 2, passed 1-31-1984; Ord. 84-024, §
1, passed 2-28-1984; Ord. 84-041, § 1, passed 5-22-1984)  Penalty, see §
70.99



SPEED LIMITS



§ 70.15  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the
Manual and specifications as approved by the State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation.



(Ord. 2004-31, passed 10-25-2004)



§ 70.16  SCHOOL ZONE HOURS.



   Speed limits in all designated school zones shall be 20 miles per hour
between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m. and 3:15 p.m. and 3:45 p.m.



(Ord. 2004-31, passed 10-25-2004; Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-2011; Ord.
2016-18, passed 9-6-2016)



§ 70.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever in this title an act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in this
title the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is otherwise provided in
this code of ordinances, the violation shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500, provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less
than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense of the laws of
the state.



   (B)   Any person violating any provision of § 70.16 shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $1
nor more than $200.



(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-2011; Ord. 2016-18, passed 9-6-2016) 



   (C)   Each day a violation of this code or of any ordinance
continues shall constitute a separate offense.



CHAPTER 71:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   71.01   General regulations



   71.02   Liability of owner and/or operator of illegally parked
vehicle



   71.03   Parking for the disabled



   71.04   No parking zones



 



   71.99   Penalty



§ 71.01  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or
the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:



      (1)   On a sidewalk;



      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;



      (3)   Within an intersection;



      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



      (5)   On a crosswalk;



      (6)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction, when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; or



      (7)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street.



   (B)   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or alley in
such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten
feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.



   (C)   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
purpose of:



      (1)   Storing the vehicle for a period of more than 48 hours,
without the prior written consent of the Chief of Police, the Traffic
Engineer or the Mayor;



      (2)   Displaying the vehicle for sale; or



      (3)   Greasing or repairing the vehicle, except such emergency
repairs as may be necessary to enable the vehicle to be moved off the roadway
at the earliest possible moment.



   (D)   No person shall park any vehicle that is not displaying
current valid motor vehicle registration numbered plates and a current valid
motor vehicle safety inspection sticker upon any street or alley within the
city limits of the city.



   (E)   No person shall park any trailer, which shall be any type of
wheeled device that may be pulled by a motor vehicle, upon any public roadway
within the city limits of the city.



   (F)   No person shall park an oversized vehicle upon a public
roadway within the city limits between the hours of 20 minutes after sunset
and 20 minutes before sunrise, without the written approval of the Chief of
Police, the Traffic Engineer or the Mayor. As used herein, the term OVERSIZED
VEHICLE shall be defined as that:



      (1)   Which is eight feet or more in width;



      (2)   Which is 20 feet or more in length;



      (3)   Which is 14 feet or more in height;



      (4)   Which weighs 10,000 pounds or more;



      (5)   Which is a truck tractor;



      (6)   Which is a truck tractor and trailer combination; or



      (7)   Which is any other commercial vehicle.



   (G)   No person shall park or store any vehicle in a commercial
parking lot within the city limits between the hours of 20 minutes after
sunset and 20 minutes before sunrise, without the written authorization of
the commercial parking lot owner.



(Prior Code, § 30-20)  (Ord. 2004-16, passed 6-8-2004)  Penalty, see §
71.99



§ 71.02  LIABILITY OF OWNER AND/OR OPERATOR OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person having registered in his
or her name, owning, operating or being in charge of any motor vehicle, to
knowingly allow or permit the same to stop, stand or be parked upon any
public street or commercial parking lot within the city in violation of any
provisions of this code or ordinance of the city regulating or controlling
parking.



   (B)   When any person is charged with having parked or left standing
a vehicle upon any street in the city, or upon a public passageway, where
parking of vehicles is prohibited, or with parking the vehicle upon a street
in a manner which violates the designated manner of parking a vehicle, or
with parking the vehicle for a length of time in excess of that allowed in
the space where the vehicle was parked, proof that the vehicle was, at the
time of the offense alleged, owned by the person charged with the offense,
shall constitute prima facie evidence that the vehicle was parked or left
standing at the place charged, by the owner. The owner of the vehicle shall
have the right to introduce evidence to show that the vehicle was not parked
by him or her as charged in the complaint.



   (C)   The owner and/or operator of any vehicle shall, in addition,
be liable for all charges and expenses incurred by the city in removal of the
vehicle to a storage facility, in addition to all costs and expenses assessed
by the storage facility. Any police officer of the city is authorized to
remove any vehicle parked in violation of this code to an approved public
compound or storage facility.



(Prior Code, § 30-21)  (Ord. 2004-16, passed 6-8-2004)  Penalty, see §
71.99



§ 71.03  PARKING FOR THE DISABLED.



   (A)   Any person or entity owning or having control of any property
or premises located within the incorporated limits of the City of Meadows
Place, Texas, may designate one or more of the parking spaces required for
the property for use by disabled persons. If the person or entity chooses to
do so, any parking spaces so designated shall conform to the rules
promulgated by the State Purchasing and General Services Commission under
subsection (c) of § 7.05 of the State Purchasing and General Services Act
(Tex. Rev. Stat. Art. 9102), relating to the identification and dimensions of
parking spaces for the disabled.



   (B)   The city hereby provides for the application of Tex. Transp.
Code § 681.011, which enumerates the specific categories of offenses which
may be charged for the unlawful use of parking spaces set aside for the
disabled, to all parking areas or spaces for the disabled on private property
within the city, which have been designated in compliance with the
identification requirements referenced in division (A) above.



(Prior Code, § 30-22)  (Ord. 84-041, § 2, passed 5-22-1984; Ord. 88-033,
§ 1, passed 8-23-1988)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Tex. Transp. Code § 681.009



§ 71.04  NO PARKING ZONES.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PARKING or PARK.  To stand, halt or locate an occupied or
unoccupied vehicle, other than temporarily while actively loading or
unloading passengers or property.



      VEHICLE.  A device that can be used to transport or draw persons
and/or property on a highway or street, including but not limited to a car,
truck, trailer, truck tractor or motorcycle.



   (B)   No parking zones and offense established. The location of the
no parking zones are set forth in Chapter 72, Schedule I. A person commits an
offense by violating any provision of this section.



   (C)   Signs.  The city shall be responsible for installing signs
and/or markings to properly notify the public of the location of the no
parking zone.



   (D)   Enforcement.  The no parking zone provided herein shall in no
way be obstructed and no parking shall occur therein. The Police Chief, or
his or her authorized representative(s), is authorized to issue citations
and/or remove or cause to be removed any material or vehicle obstructing the
no parking zone at the expense of the owner of the material or vehicle. The
city shall not be responsible or liable for any damage to any vehicle or
personal property removed from the no parking zone pursuant to this section
and shall not be responsible for any damage resulting from the failure to
exercise the authority granted under this section.



(Ord. 2009-10, passed 5-26-2009; Ord. 2009-11, passed 5-26-2009)  Penalty,
see § 71.99



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating § 71.04 shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum of not more
than $250. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it
pursuant to local, state and federal law.



(Ord. 2009-10, passed 5-26-2009; Ord. 2009-11, passed 5-26-2009)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   No parking zones



SCHEDULE I:  NO PARKING ZONES.



   No parking of a vehicle shall occur as follows:



 

Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed


Along the east and west side of:
 
Amblewood Drive between Dorrance Lane and Brighton Lane ("No Parking Zone")
 
2009-11
 
5-26-2009


Along the north side of:
 
Dorrance Lane from Amblewood Drive to a point located 300 feet west of the
intersection
 
2009-10
 
5-26-2009


Along the south side of:
 
Dorrance Lane from Amblewood Drive to Pender Lane ("No Parking Zone")
 
2009-10
 
5-26-2009


Along the west side of:
 
Mulholland Drive for a 110 ft stretch of road heading south from the
intersection of Mulholland and Brighton (Toward W. Airport) from 5 a.m. - 8
p.m.
 
2016-08
 
2-23-2016


 
 
 
 
 



 



Penalty, see § 71.99



CHAPTER 73: TRUCK TRAFFIC



Section



   73.01   Definitions



   73.02   Through truck traffic



 



   73.99   Penalty



§ 73.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY TRUCKS.  Fire department trucks, police trucks,
public ambulances for which permits have been issued by the State Board of
Health, emergency trucks of municipal departments or public service
corporations as are designated or authorized by the governing body of an
incorporated city, private trucks operated by volunteer firemen or certified
emergency medical volunteers while answering a fire alarm or responding to a
medical emergency, and trucks owned by the state or by a political
subdivision engaged in emergency utility repair or electric, water or
wastewater services.



   BUSINESS OR WORK RELATED DESTINATION.  The place where a truck
operator picks up or drops off cargo as part of its work related duties.



   LIGHT TRUCK.  Any truck with a manufacturer’s rated carrying
capacity of 2,000 pounds or less, including trucks commonly known as pickup
trucks, panel delivery trucks, and carryall trucks.



   TRUCK.  Any motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for
the transportation of property, including “truck tractors,” “road
tractors,” “trailers,” “semitrailers,” “pole trailers,” and
“special mobile equipment” as those terms are defined in the Texas
Transp. Code § 541.201.



   Terms not defined herein shall be construed in accordance with
customary usage.



(Ord. 2013-03, passed 2-26-2013)



§ 73.02 THROUGH TRUCK TRAFFIC.



   (A)   Regulation. A person commits an offense if the person operates
a truck upon a public street designated as a no through truck street.



   (B)   Affirmative defenses.  It is an affirmative defense to
prosecution under this section if:



      (1)   The truck was an authorized emergency truck;



      (2)   The truck was a bus or light truck;



      (3)   The truck was a moving van;



      (4)   The truck was a utility vehicle;



      (5)   The truck was operated by a government or political
subdivision;



      (6)   The truck was providing food carrier service; or



      (7)   The truck;



         (a)   Was being driven to fulfill a local commercial
obligation to a buyer or seller at a business or work related destination; and



         (b)   The prohibited public street was the only route to
such destination.



   (C)   Streets prohibited. Through truck traffic is prohibited on the
following streets:



 


Street

 

Extent



Dorrance
 
Bloomington west to Dairy Ashford



 



   (D)   The Traffic Engineer is directed to erect and place signs
designating the above streets as “No Through Trucks” streets.



(Ord. 2013-03, passed 2-26-2013) Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits another to violate
any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500. 
Each occurrence of any such violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense. Each day on which any such violation of this chapter occurs
shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2013-03, passed 2-26-2013)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS





         91.   GARBAGE, TRASH AND WEEDS; NUISANCES





         92.   ALARM SYSTEMS





         93.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION





         94.   PARKS AND RECREATION





         95.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS




CHAPTER 90:  ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Reserved



   90.03   Animal defecation on property of another



   90.04   Running at large prohibited



   90.05   Rabies inoculation required



   90.06   Number of dogs and cats limited



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AT LARGE.  Not confined within the owner’s premises, owner’s fence
or under the control of the owner or keeper or his or her agent at heel or by
means of a leash, chain, rope or cord not more than ten feet in length, and
of sufficient strength to control the conduct of the animal.



   CAT. Both male and female.



   DOG. Both male and female.



   INOCULATED. An injection of a type of rabies vaccine approved by the
State Veterinarian and applied by a veterinarian licensed under state law.



   OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping or harboring an animal.



(Prior Code, § 6-1)  (Ord. 84-049, § 1, passed 6-12-1984)



§ 90.02  RESERVED.



§ 90.03  ANIMAL DEFECATION ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of an
animal to allow such animal to defecate on any public property, including any
right-of-way, or private property, other than that of the owner of the
animal. If the animal was at large at the time it defecated on any property,
then that shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner or person in
control of the animal allowed the animal to so act.



   (B)   It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that
the owner or person in control of the animal immediately removed and cleaned
up such animal’s feces from the public or private property.



(Ord. 2016-28, passed 10-25-2016)



§ 90.04  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner to permit any dog to be at
large upon the streets, alleys or public grounds of the city, or upon the
premises of any person not the owner of the dog, unless the dog is under the
control of the owner or keeper or his or her agent by means of a leash,
chain, rope or cord not more than ten feet in length and of sufficient
strength to control the conduct of the dog.



   (B)   This section shall not be applicable wherein a dog is engaged
in an obedience school, dog show or similar activity, under the direct
supervision of the owner of the dog or at such times when the owner of the
dog is showing or exhibiting the dog in a recognized dog show or exhibition.



(Prior Code, § 6-4)  (Ord. 84-049, § 1, passed 6-12-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 90.05  RABIES INOCULATION REQUIRED.



   Dog and cat owners and keepers shall have the dog and cat inoculated
against rabies by a licensed veterinarian qualified to practice in the
state.  Dogs and cats shall have current rabies inoculation at all times. 
Each dog or cat inoculated shall wear a tag affixed to its collar at all
times showing it has been inoculated and the date of inoculation.



(Prior Code, § 6-5)  (Ord. 84-049, § 1, passed 6-12-1984; Am. Ord.
2012-17, passed 6-26-2012)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  NUMBER OF CATS AND DOGS LIMITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, possess,
maintain or allow to be kept, harbored, possessed or maintained more than
four dogs or four cats or a combination of such animals with the total number
not exceeding four, over four months old, upon or within any premises owned,
occupied or under the control of the person within the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, possess,
maintain or allow to be kept, harbored, possessed or maintained more than two
dogs or two cats or a combination of those animals with the total number
exceeding two, over four months old, upon any premises or within any
apartment or a multiple dwelling structure within the city. The animal
control officer shall have full authority to limit the number of dogs, cats,
and any and all other animals per apartment, in any specific area of the
complex, or in the multiple dwelling complex as a whole, and he or she shall
have the authority to enforce any such regulation as he or she may deem
necessary for the control of rabies and for the health and safety of the
people within the multiple dwelling complexes.



   (C)   The provision of this section limiting the number of dogs and
cats shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Veterinary hospitals;



      (2)   Pet shops;



      (3)   Kennels;



      (4)   Circuses; or



      (5)   Animal shelters.



   (D)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
prohibited animal was kept in a kennel, veterinary facility, pet store,
research facility or other nonresidential land use permitted by the city's
zoning regulations that provides for the keeping of the animal.



(Ord. 2003-19, passed 6-9-2003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits another to violate
any provision of § 90.05 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.  Each
occurrence of any such violation of § 90.05 shall constitute a separate
offense.  Each day on which any such violation of § 90.05 occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2012-17, passed 6-26-2012)



CHAPTER 91:  GARBAGE, TRASH AND WEEDS; NUISANCES



Section



General Provisions



   91.001   Scope



   91.002   Definitions



Garbage and Trash



   91.015   Collection by private contractor



   91.016   Hours of collection



   91.017   Collection requirements and limitations



   91.018   Sanitation



   91.019   Burning prohibited



   91.020   Depositing on public or private property; accumulations
prohibited



   91.021   Public trash receptacles



   91.022   Depositing garbage or trash without consent



   91.023   Transporting garbage or refuse into the city



   91.024   Tampering with container or receptacle



   91.025   Container or receptacle declared a nuisance



Weeds and Offensive Conditions on Private Property



   91.035   Nuisance declared; duty to abate



   91.036   Right to inspect



   91.037   Violations; notice; failure to abate



   91.038   Abatement by city; collection of costs



   91.039   Limitation on height of grass and weeds



   91.040   Discharge of sewage



Tree Stumps



   91.050   Removal of tree stumps



Junked Vehicles



   91.065   Definitions



   91.066   Nuisance declared



   91.067   Abatement



   91.068   Disposal of junked vehicles



   91.069   Exemptions



Abandoned Property and Vehicles



   91.080   Definitions



   91.081   Nuisance declared



   91.082   Removal of vehicles from streets and highways



   91.083   Impoundment of vehicles



   91.084   Removal of abandoned property from public property



   91.085   Notice of removal



   91.086   Storage and redemption of abandoned property



   91.087   Sale of abandoned property



   91.088   Disposition of proceeds of sale



   91.089   Worthless property



Nuisance



   91.100   Nuisance defined



   91.101   Specific applicability



 



   91.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.001  SCOPE.



   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply to the
accumulation, storage and collection of any solid waste, including garbage
and trash, and to the growth, accumulation, cutting and storage of grass,
weeds and any other vegetative material, upon property in the city, to the
end that property shall be maintained in a sanitary and healthful condition
for the benefit of all residents and citizens of the community.



(Prior Code, § 16-1)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)



§ 91.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BRUSH. All uncultivated shrubs, bushes and small trees.



   DEFACE. Writing, carving or scratching on the varnish, paint, plaster
or other surface of any trash receptacle or staining the receptacle with
paint or any other material which will produce a discoloration of the paint,
plaster or other surface thereon.



   EARTH AND CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS. Earth, rocks, concrete and similar
materials and waste materials resulting from construction or remodeling.



   GARBAGE. Rubbish, trash, kitchen and household waste, ashes, bottles,
cans, rags, paper, food, food containers, lawn trimmings, tree trimmings,
hedge trimmings, leaves, grass, weeds and refuse, not including sewage or
animal waste, swills, slops, toxic or corrosive materials, or any other
material which may be found to be harmful to garbage collection and handling
personnel or equipment.



   INJURE. Any and all character of physical damage, whether caused by
fire or force, and which shall be done or caused willfully by any person.



   LOT. In addition to land within the boundaries of the property lines,
all land adjacent to and extending beyond the property lines of any lot or
parcel of land to the curb lines or adjacent streets where curb lines have
been established or, where no curb lines have been established, to eight feet
beyond the property lines.



   PUBLIC TRASH RECEPTACLE. All cans, boxes, tubs or barrels placed on the
streets and sidewalks by the city or by anyone else under the direction of
the city or by contract or agreement with the city for placing receptacles
for trash or waste of the general public.



   REFUSE. See GARBAGE.



   RUBBISH. All refuse, rejected tin cans, old vessels of all sorts,
useless articles, abandoned pipe, discarded clothing and textiles of all
sorts, and in general all litter. The words "any and all objectionable or
unsanitary matters," not included within the meaning of the other terms as
herein used, mean those which are liable to produce or tend to produce an
unhealthy, unwholesome, or unsanitary condition to the general locality where
the same are situated.



   SOLID WASTE. Household garbage and refuse and commercial garbage and
refuse, brush cuttings and weeds.



   TRASH. See GARBAGE.



   UNWHOLESOME MATTER. All stagnant water, filth, carrion, impure matters
and any condition liable to produce disease.



   WEEDS. All rank and uncultivated vegetable growth or matter which is
liable to become an unwholesome or decaying mass or breeding place for flies,
mosquitoes or vermin.



(Prior Code, § 16-2)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)



GARBAGE AND TRASH



§ 91.015  COLLECTION BY PRIVATE CONTRACTOR.



   (A)   The city may enter into a contract with a private contractor
for the collection of all garbage throughout the city, which contract shall
provide, at a minimum, for regular collection twice weekly, for the type of
garbage containers to be used and for the placement of containers for
collection purposes.



   (B)   Any owner of non-single-family residential property (including
but not limited to commercial establishments, churches and multi-family
dwelling units) within the city may enter into a contract with a private
contractor for the collection of garbage upon the owner’s non-single-family
residential property.  Upon entry into such contract, the property owner
shall advise the city of the existence of the contract and that the owner
does not intend to utilize the garbage collection services provided by the
city, either directly or through contract with a private contractor.



   (C)   Any owner of single-family residential property within the
city shall be required to use the service offered by the city or the city’s
private contractor for the collection of garbage upon the owner’s
single-family residential property and shall be charged a fee therefor.



(Prior Code, § 16-11)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984; Ord. 2013-31,
passed 12-17-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.016  HOURS OF COLLECTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to perform the
service of trash or refuse collection within the city limits except between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. daily.



(Prior Code, § 16-12)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 91.017  COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS AND LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   To facilitate efficient collection and sanitary storage prior
to collection, all garbage shall be placed in containers or receptacles of a
type specified, or bundled in a manner specified, by administrative order of
the Mayor.



   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall place for regular
collection by the city or the city's private contractor any earth and
construction materials as defined in this chapter.



   (C)   No person, firm or corporation shall place for regular
collection by the city or the city's private contractor any automotive parts
or related materials.



   (D)   No person, firm or corporation shall place for regular
collection by the city or the city's private contractor any material not
included within the definition of the term "garbage" as set out in this
chapter.



   (E)   No broken glass, ashes or manure shall be placed in any
container or receptacle for collection by the city or the city's private
contractor without first wrapping the same securely in paper or other
combustible material.



   (F)   The Mayor may, by administrative order, establish dates for
special collection by the city or the city's private contractor at which
times certain items, as specified in the order and which are not otherwise
permitted to be placed for regular collection, will be collected.



(Prior Code, § 16-13)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 91.018  SANITATION.



   (A)   All reusable and disposable receptacles and containers and the
location in which they are stored shall be kept in a clean condition and free
of fly and other insect breeding.



   (B)   When reusable or disposable receptacles and containers are
placed at a common pickup location upon a lot or tract of property upon which
there are located multiple residential and/or nonresidential units, wherein
garbage and trash are generated by more than one unit for placement and
storage at the common pickup location, then it shall be the responsibility of
the owner or manager of the site to maintain the receptacles and area around
that location in a sanitary condition.



   (C)   Reusable receptacles and containers must be maintained in good
repair, free of holes, cracks and splits, and shall at all times be kept
covered with tightly fitting lids.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of every owner, manager, tenant and/or
occupant of any dwelling unit, building and/or premises to provide a
sufficient number of receptacles to contain the solid waste produced at the
dwelling unit, building and/or premises from one pickup time to the next
pickup time.



(Prior Code, § 16-14)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)



§ 91.019  BURNING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, tenant and/or occupant of
any dwelling unit, building and/or premises to burn solid waste on any
premises within the city.



(Prior Code, § 16-15)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 91.020  DEPOSITING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY; ACCUMULATIONS
PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, manager, tenant and/or
occupant of any lot, building or premises, in person or by his or her
servant, agent or employee, to cast, throw, drop, place, sweep, deposit or
allow to accumulate, or allow the same to be done in any manner whatsoever,
any solid waste, rubbish, weeds, brush, offal or other substance or thing
whatsoever of any offensive nature or deleterious to health, in or upon any
street, sidewalk, park, other public place, vacant lot or any yard space of
privately owned premises, or in or upon the waters of any canal, stream or
other watercourse or public waters, or in any drain, sewer or receiving basin
within the city, or in, upon or about any building or premises within the
city, except as herein provided.



(Prior Code, § 16-16)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 91.021  PUBLIC TRASH RECEPTACLES.



   Upon consent of the Mayor, it shall be lawful to place trash
receptacles of a design and construction approved by the Mayor, upon public
property within the city, upon the streets, plazas, parks and other public
property, for the reception of trash. The receptacles shall be placed for the
use and benefit of persons using such public areas within the city; and it
shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to transport garbage
and trash from private property to the site of a public trash receptacle for
the purpose of dumping garbage and trash or for the purpose of disposing of
garbage and trash in excess of that quantity of garbage and trash generated
during the person's, firm's or corporation's use of the public area.



(Prior Code, § 16-17)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 91.022  DEPOSITING GARBAGE OR TRASH WITHOUT CONSENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place or
deposit garbage, trash or refuse into any garbage can or receptacle or
garbage collection device located upon private property when the receptacle
or device is not owned by, rented or leased to or under the control of the
person, firm or corporation, without the consent of the owner or person
exercising control thereof.



(Prior Code, § 16-18)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 91.023  TRANSPORTING GARBAGE OR REFUSE INTO THE CITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to haul,
transport or carry rubbish, trash, kitchen and household waste, ashes, paper,
food, food containers, tree trimmings, hedge trimmings, leaves, grass, weeds
and refuse from any place outside the city limits to any place within the
city limits for the purpose of causing the same to be collected by the city
or the city's private contractor.



(Prior Code, § 16-19)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 91.024  TAMPERING WITH CONTAINER OR RECEPTACLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, molest, remove,
handle, displace, injure, deface, destroy, uncover, move or otherwise disturb
any garbage or trash container or receptacle, either upon public or private
property, or to in any manner remove, withdraw or disturb any part or portion
of the contents thereof; provided that this section shall not apply to any
person authorized by the city to collect garbage and trash or to any person
who owns or has responsibility for the placement and maintenance of the
container or receptacle.



(Prior Code, § 16-20)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 91.025  CONTAINER OR RECEPTACLE DECLARED A NUISANCE.



   Other than authorized public trash receptacles, containers and
receptacles for solid waste or trash which are permitted or suffered to be
and remain in or upon any street, sidewalk or public place in violation of
this chapter are declared to be public nuisances. The city shall have the
right to abate these nuisances by removing any container and receptacles
allowed to remain in any public place in violation of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 16-21)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)



WEEDS AND OFFENSIVE CONDITIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 91.035  NUISANCE DECLARED; DUTY TO ABATE.



   Whenever weeds, brush, rubbish and all other objectionable, unsightly
and unsanitary matter of whatever nature shall exist, covering or partially
covering the surface of any lots or parcels of any real estate situated
within the city, or when any of the lots or parcels of real estate as
aforesaid, shall have the surface thereof filled or partly filled with holes
or be in such condition that the same holds or is liable to hold stagnant
water therein, or if from any other cause shall be in such condition as to
cause disease, or produce, harbor or spread disease germs of any nature or
tend to render the surrounding atmosphere unhealthy, unwholesome or
obnoxious, or shall contain unwholesome matter of any kind or description,
the same is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, the prompt
abatement of which is hereby declared to be a public necessity. Any such
nuisance shall be removed from the property by the owner or other person in
possession or control of the property.



(Prior Code, § 16-41)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)



§ 91.036  RIGHT TO INSPECT.



   The Building Official or his or her representative is authorized to
inspect any property within the city limits, at any reasonable time, subject,
however, to the restrictions against such inspection and entry of private
residence for health inspection as provided for in the laws of the state.



(Prior Code, § 16-42)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)



§ 91.037  VIOLATIONS; NOTICE; FAILURE TO ABATE.



   (A)   In the event that the officer charged with enforcement of this
subchapter shall determine that a situation exists which immediately affects
the health, safety and well-being of the general public and that immediate
action is necessary, the officer may take such action as shall be necessary,
including issuing citations for violations of the terms and provisions of
this code to the owner or occupant of the property upon which the condition
exists, as may be deemed appropriate and necessary.



   (B)   However, where a condition is not judged to be an emergency or
a matter requiring immediate attention, a notice to correct a condition
described in this subchapter shall be given either in writing to the owner or
occupant by letter addressed to the owner or occupant at his or her post
office address or by publication in the official newspaper of the city twice
within ten consecutive days. If personal notice by letter may not be had or
the owner's address is not known, notice shall not be necessary.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section providing for notice, proof
that notice has actually been given shall not be a prerequisite for
prosecution under the terms and provisions of this code.



(Prior Code, § 16-43)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)



§ 91.038  ABATEMENT BY CITY; COLLECTION OF COSTS.



   Cumulative of the city's remedy by fine, as set forth in the preceding
section hereof, the city may do the work or cause the same to be done to
remedy the condition or remove the matter from the owner's premises at the
city's expense and may charge the same to the account of the owners of the
property and assess the same against the real estate or lot or lots upon
which the expense is incurred. Upon filing with the County Clerk a statement
by the Mayor of the expenses, the city shall have a privileged lien upon the
real estate or lot or lots, second only to tax liens and liens for street
improvements, to secure the expenditure so made and 10% interest on the
amount from the date of the payment so made by the city. The city may
institute suit and recover the expenses and foreclose the lien in any court
of competent jurisdiction, and the statement so filed with the County Clerk
or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended
in any such work or improvements to remedy the condition or remove any such
matter.



(Prior Code, § 16-44)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)



§ 91.039  LIMITATION ON HEIGHT OF GRASS AND WEEDS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy
any lot or lots in the city to allow weeds and/or grass to grow on the lot or
lots to a height of more than nine inches. Weeds and/or grass of a height
exceeding nine inches are declared a nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 16-45)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984) 



   (B)   The requirements of this section apply to any public
right-of-way or easement or portion thereof located on the real property or
portion thereof required to be cut, including specifically the areas of any
real property that extend to or abut upon any curb or paved portion of a
public street, the area between a public sidewalk and a public street or
highway, and ditches and drainage channels located thereon.



(Ord. 2004-42, passed 11-22-2004)



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.040  DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE.



   Any person who shall allow or permit sewage to discharge into the
ground or subsurface soil, which shall have the effect of causing odors,
obnoxious, unhealthy and unwholesome conditions to exist, is declared to have
caused a public nuisance and shall be in violation of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 16-46)  (Ord. 84-074, § 1, passed 11-8-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



TREE STUMPS



§ 91.050  REMOVAL OF TREE STUMPS.



   (A)   All premises and exterior of a property shall be maintained
free from tree stumps of any height. Upon the removal of the tree, all tree
stumps shall be ground or cut to ground level.



   (B)   Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of the
property to cut, destroy or grind the tree stump after service of notice of a
violation, he or she shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with the
city code and prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure
to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the
jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to
enter upon the property in violation and cut and grind the tree stump down,
and the cost of the removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible
for the property.



(Ord. 2005-22, passed 5-24-2005)



JUNKED VEHICLES



§ 91.065  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEMOLISHER. Any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle
into processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor
vehicles.



   JUNKED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is self-propelled and:



      (1)   Does not have lawfully attached to it both an unexpired
license plate, including annual registrations certificate, and a valid motor
vehicle inspection certificate issued by the proper authority under the laws
of the state; or



      (2)   Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled or
discarded; or has remained inoperable and not moved from the property upon
which it has been parked for more than 30 consecutive days. Movement shall
not be deemed to have occurred unless the vehicle is operated upon a public
street of the city for a distance of at least five miles, displaying a valid
license numbered plate, registration certificate and a valid Texas inspection
sticker.



(Ord. 97-20, passed 6-24-1997)



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to
the Texas Certificate of Title Act.



(Prior Code, § 18-16)  (Ord. 84-078, § 1, passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 91-22,
§ 6, passed 7-23-1991)



§ 91.066  NUISANCE DECLARED.



   (A)   Junked vehicles which are located in any place where they are
visible from a public place or public right-of-way are hereby declared to be
detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public. Such junked
vehicles tend to reduce the value of property, to invite vandalism, to create
fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the
health and safety of minors, and are detrimental to the economic welfare of
the city by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and
continuing development of the city. Such junked vehicles are hereby declared
to be a public nuisance.



   (B)   The covering of a motor vehicle by the use of a tarpaulin
(tarp) or other similar cover which is visible from a public place or public
right-of-way, and not in any fully screened enclosure, is prohibited, unless
that cover is made of a durable fabric, which is custom fitted to the
particular vehicle to which it is attached. The motor vehicle cover shall
have tailored mirror pockets, antennae grommets, and eyelets to allow the
cover to be pulled securely around the body of the vehicle. The motor vehicle
cover shall not obscure the vehicle’s license plate, motor vehicle
inspection certificate, or motor vehicle registration certificate. Clear
vinyl or cutouts shall be sewn into the cover to ensure the visibility of the
vehicle's license plate, inspection, and registration certificate.



   (C)   Motor vehicle covers shall be kept in good repair and free
from staining, rips, or other damage to the cover. Motor vehicle covers shall
be secured properly to the vehicle and shall not dangle loosely onto the
vehicle. Motor vehicle covers shall be a neutral color and shall not be a
color considered loud, obnoxious, or excessively bright.



   (D)   Motor vehicle covers shall not be used to cover a junked
vehicle as that term is defined in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 18-17)  (Ord. 84-078, § 1, passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 91-22,
§§ 1, 6, passed 7-23-1991; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 1-24-2012)



§ 91.067  ABATEMENT.



   The City Council hereby adopts the following procedures for the
abatement of the public nuisance defined in § 91.036 above, as authorized by
Tex. Transp. Code Ch. 683.



   (A)   Administration. This subchapter shall be administered by the
Chief of Police or any other regularly salaried, full-time employees of the
city designated by him or her. However, the removal of vehicles or parts
thereof from property may be performed by any other person designated in
writing by the Chief of Police.



   (B)   Notice to owner.



      (1)   For a nuisance on either private property or public
property, ten days' notice shall be given, which notice shall state:



         (a)   The nature of the public nuisance on private
property, on public property or on a public right-of-way;



         (b)   That the nuisance must be removed and abated
within ten days; and



         (c)   That a public hearing before the City Council may
be requested, provided that the request is filed, in writing, in the office
of the City Secretary prior to the expiration of the ten-day period.



      (2)   (a)   For a nuisance on private property, the notice
shall be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the
last known registered owner of the junked vehicle, any lienholder of record
and the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the public
nuisance exists.



         (b)   For a nuisance on public property, the notice
shall be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the
last known registered owner of the junked vehicle, any lienholder of record,
and the owner or occupant of the public premises or to the owner or occupant
of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public
nuisance exists.



      (3)   If any notice, as above required, is returned
undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate the
nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days after the date
of the return.



   (C)   Hearing. If a request for hearing is filed within ten days
after service of notice to abate the nuisance, a public hearing shall be held
before the City Council. Notice of the hearing shall be posted on the city's
official bulletin board in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Law, and a
copy of the notice shall be mailed to the party requesting the hearing at
least three days prior to the commencement of the hearing.



   (D)   Order.



      (1)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may,
by order, require the removal of the junked vehicle or part thereof. The
order shall specify the date by which removal shall be accomplished and shall
include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number
and the license number of the vehicle if the identification number and
license number are available at the site.



      (2)   If the City Council declines to enter such an order or
if no action is taken by the City Council, the proceedings shall be abated
and no further action shall be taken by the Chief of Police or his or her
designated employees with regard to the abatement of the public nuisance.



   (E)   Removal.



      (1)   When the owner or occupant has failed to abate a
nuisance within ten days after service of notice to abate the nuisance and no
request for hearing has been filed within the ten-day period, the city may
file a complaint in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking a declaration
of public nuisance and an order permitting the city to abate the same. Upon
order of the court or, in the case of hearing and order of the City Council,
when the owner or occupant has failed to abate any nuisance within the period
of time provided in the order, the Chief of Police or his or her designated
employee shall arrange for the removal of the junked vehicle or part thereof,
either by the city employee or by any other duly authorized person. The
junked vehicle or part thereof shall be removed to a location designated by
the Chief of Police.



      (2)   It is specifically provided that any junked vehicle or
part thereof which has been removed under the terms of this subchapter shall
not be reconstructed or made operable after the same has been removed.



   (F)   Notice to state. Notice of the removal shall be given by the
Chief of Police or other designated employee to the State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation not later than the fifth day after the
date of removal. The notice shall cite this subchapter and shall set forth
all identification numbers and description of the vehicle or parts thereof as
may be available at the site and shall request cancellation of the
certificate of the title to the vehicle, pursuant to the Certificate of Title
Act.



(Prior Code, § 18-18)  (Ord. 84-078, § 1, passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 91-22,
§ 6, passed 7-23-1991)



§ 91.068  DISPOSAL OF JUNKED VEHICLES.



   The Chief of Police or other designated city employee shall arrange for
the disposal of junked vehicles or parts thereof in accordance with Tex.
Transp. Code Ch. 683, providing for removal to a scrap yard, demolisher or
any suitable site operated by the city for processing as scrap or salvage.



(Prior Code, § 18-19)  (Ord. 84-078, § 1, passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 91-22,
§§ 2, 6, passed 7-23-1991; Ord. 92-31, § 8, passed 7-28-1992)



§ 91.069  EXEMPTIONS.



   This subchapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   A junked vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed
within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street
or other public or private property;



   (B)   A junked vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in
a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a
licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard; or



   (C)   An unlicenced, operable or inoperable antique or
special-interest vehicle stored by a collector on the collector's property,
if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so
that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from permanent
view by means of a permanently attached fence, rapidly growing trees,
shrubbery or any other means which is permanently attached or affixed to the
ground or the existing house structure as a fixture. No screening of the type
as herein provided shall occur beyond the outermost wall or surface of the
residential structure and the nearest abutting public street.



(Prior Code, § 18-20)  (Ord. 84-078, § 1, passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 91-21,
§ 1, passed 7-23-1991; Ord. 91-22, § 6, passed 7-23-1991)



ABANDONED PROPERTY AND VEHICLES



§ 91.080  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is inoperable and more
than eight years old and left unattended on public property for more than 48
hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for
a period of more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained on
private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the
property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle left unattended on the
right-of-way of a designated county, state or federal highway for more than
48 hours.



   ABANDONED PROPERTY, OTHER THAN A MOTOR VEHICLE. Any such property lying
and remaining unattended on any of the public streets, alleys, sidewalks,
parks, grounds or ways of the city for 48 hours.



(Prior Code, § 18-31)  (Ord. 84-078, § 1, passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 91-22,
§ 6, passed 7-23-1991)



§ 91.081  NUISANCE DECLARED.



   (A)   Abandoned motor vehicles and abandoned property are hereby
declared to be a detriment and a menace to traffic and a hazard to the
health, safety and well-being of the residents and citizens of the community,
and the same shall constitute a nuisance per se.



   (B)   The maintenance of any nuisance existing under this section
shall constitute a violation of this code and may be punished in accordance
with the provisions of this code, and the city may seek the abatement and/or
punishment for such a nuisance in any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 18-32)  (Ord. 84-078, § 1, passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 91-22,
§ 6, passed 7-23-1991)



§ 91.082  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   Whenever any vehicle, which is not disabled, is found standing
upon the paved, main-traveled portion of a street, when it is possible to
move the vehicle off the same, any police officer of the City Police
Department is hereby authorized to move the vehicle, or to require the driver
or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off
the paved, main-traveled portion of the street.



   (B)   Any police officer of the City Police Department is hereby
authorized to provide for the removal of any vehicle parked or standing in or
on any portion of a street or highway when, in the opinion of the police
officer, the vehicle constitutes a hazard or interferes with a normal
function of a governmental agency or, by reason of any catastrophe, emergency
or unusual circumstance, the safety of the vehicle is imperiled.



(Prior Code, § 18-33)  (Ord. 84-078, § 1, passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 91-22,
§ 6, passed 7-23-1991)



§ 91.083  IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   Pursuant to Tex. Transp. Code, Ch. 683, the City Police
Department may take into custody any abandoned motor vehicle found on public
or private property. Any police officer of the City Police Department is
further hereby authorized to provide for the removal of any vehicle from a
public street, alley, sidewalk, park, grounds or way, to a garage or place of
safety, under any of the following enumerated circumstances:



      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge,
viaduct or causeway or in any other public place where the vehicle
constitutes an obstruction to traffic;



      (2)   When any vehicle is illegally parked so as to block the
entrance to any private driveway and it is impracticable to move the vehicle
from in front of the driveway to another point on the street or highway;



      (3)   When any vehicle is found upon a street or highway and
it has been previously reported that the vehicle has been stolen or a
complaint has been filed and a warrant thereon issued charging that the
vehicle has been embezzled;



      (4)   When any police officer has reasonable grounds to
believe that any vehicle has been abandoned;



      (5)   When any vehicle upon a street is so disabled that its
normal operation is impossible or impracticable and the person or persons in
charge of the vehicle either are not in the immediate vicinity of the
disabled vehicle or are not so incapacitated by reason as to be unable to
provide for its removal and custody;



      (6)   When any police officer arrests any person driving or in
control of a vehicle for an alleged offense and the officer is required,
either by this code or other law, to take the person arrested immediately
before a magistrate; or



      (7)   When any vehicle is illegally parked in violation of any
ordinance of the city or any law of the state.



   (B)   For any vehicle impounded pursuant to the provisions of
division (A) of this section, the city and its Police Department shall comply
with all procedures specified in Article V of the Texas Litter Abatement Act,
Tex. Transp. Code, Ch. 683, pertaining to notification of owners and
lienholders and to storage, redemption and auction of abandoned motor
vehicles.



   (C)   (1)   The redemption of a vehicle and payment of all
charges, fees and costs incurred by the city in the impoundment of the same
shall not constitute a waiver or dismissal of any fine due for violation of
any ordinance or law by reason of the unlawful parking of the vehicle. If the
owner of the motor vehicle so desires, he or she may pay the fine established
for the offense at the time of payment of all other charges and costs herein,
and a receipt shall be issued therefor.



      (2)   In the event that the owner does not desire to pay the
fine and shall demand that the case be heard before the Municipal Court, he
or she may obtain the release of the motor vehicle by posting security in the
amount of all charges, fees and costs plus the amount of the fine. This
security shall be in the form of cash, cashier's check, certified check or
money order. The receipt for the security, to be signed by the owner and the
Chief of Police or his or her designee, shall authorize the city to apply the
security in satisfaction of the impounding charges specified above in the
event that the owner or person charged with the violation leading to the
impounding of the vehicle shall be found guilty of the charge or shall
forfeit any case security which may have been posted or if a warrant for the
arrest of the person has been issued because of his or her failure to appear
in Municipal Court. In the event that trial results in a finding of not
guilty or the charge is dismissed, the security tendered for the release of
the motor vehicle shall be refunded, and the city shall assume the obligation
to pay all impounding charges.



(Prior Code, § 18-34)  (Ord. 84-078, § 1, passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 91-22,
§ 6, passed 7-23-1991)



§ 91.084  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED PROPERTY FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   Any police officer of the City Police Department is hereby authorized
to provide for the removal of any abandoned property, as that term is defined
in this subchapter, from a public street, alley, sidewalk, park, any public
grounds or way, to a storage facility or place of safety.



(Prior Code, § 18-35)  (Ord. 84-078, § 1, passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 91-22,
§ 6, passed 7-23-1991)



§ 91.085  NOTICE OF REMOVAL.



   (A)   Whenever abandoned property is removed from a place, as
authorized in this subchapter, and it is possible to ascertain the name and
address of the owner thereof, notice of the removal shall be mailed, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner. The notice shall
contain a description of the property removed and shall state the reasons for
removal, the date of removal, the location from which the property was
removed and the location of the place to which the property has been removed.
The notice shall further state that the property may be redeemed at any time
within 60 days from the date of removal in accordance with the redemption
provisions of § 91.086.



   (B)   In the event that it is not possible to ascertain the name and
address of the owner of the property, no notice shall be required.



(Prior Code, § 18-36)  (Ord. 84-078, § 1, passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 91-22,
§ 6, passed 7-23-1991)



§ 91.086  STORAGE AND REDEMPTION OF ABANDONED PROPERTY.



   (A)   Abandoned property, removed from public property under this
subchapter, shall be stored by the city in a place of safekeeping for a
period of 60 days from the date of removal and first storage thereof.



   (B)   At any time within the 60-day period, the owner of any such
property may present himself or herself at the Police Department and demand
return of his or her property. An employee of the city on duty at the Police
Department shall first satisfy himself or herself that the person so claiming
the property is the true and lawful owner thereof and is entitled to
possession thereof. The employee may require the person claiming ownership to
produce proper identification and any reasonably available proof of
ownership, including but not limited to a bill of sale for the property in
question.



   (C)   Upon being so satisfied and obtaining payment from the owner
of all charges, fees and costs incurred by the city in the removal and
storage of the property, the employee shall cause the property to be released
to the owner. The owner shall execute a receipt therefor upon a form provided
by the city, and the city's employee shall issue a receipt to the owner for
the payment of the fees and charges so collected.



(Prior Code, § 18-37)  (Ord. 84-078, § 1, passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 91-22,
§ 6, passed 7-23-1991)



§ 91.087  SALE OF ABANDONED PROPERTY.



   (A)   Upon the expiration of 60 days from the date of removal and
storage of any abandoned property, the city may undertake to sell the
unredeemed property at public sale. The date and time of the public sale,
together with a description of the property to be sold, shall be advertised
in the official newspaper of the city at least three days prior to the date
of the sale; and at the sale, property shall only be sold for the highest and
best bid received.



   (B)   An accurate record of each piece of property sold, the name
and address of the purchaser, the price paid therefor, the date of sale and
any other pertinent information shall be made and kept on file in the office
of the City Secretary.



(Prior Code, § 18-38)  (Ord. 84-078, § 1, passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 91-22,
§ 6, passed 7-23-1991)



§ 91.088  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE.



   (A)   The proceeds from the sale of property under § 91.087 above
shall first be applied to payment of all costs of removal, storage and sale
as incurred by the city herein. The sum shall be placed in the General Fund
of the city and thereafter, shall be disbursed as the City Council shall
determine and direct.



   (B)   In the event that the proceeds exceed the total of the costs
referenced above, the excess shall then be placed on deposit in a separate
fund maintained by the city; and upon demand made by the true owner of the
property (having owned the property prior to the date of sale by the city),
the excess shall be delivered to the owner. If no demand is made by the true
owner for the excess sum within two years from the date of sale, the sum
shall become the property of the city and shall be transferred to the General
Fund of the city to be used as the City Council shall determine and direct.



(Prior Code, § 18-39)  (Ord. 84-078, § 1, passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 91-22,
§ 6, passed 7-23-1991)



§ 91.089  WORTHLESS PROPERTY.



   Any motor vehicle or other piece of property which has been offered for
sale at public auction or sale and for which no bids have been received,
shall, upon a finding by the City Council that the same is worthless
property, be disposed of by the Mayor in such a manner as he or she deems
advisable. A record of the disposition of all such vehicles and property
shall be maintained on file in the office of the City Secretary, which record
shall include a description of the property, the date and manner of
disposition and the amount received therefor, if any.



(Prior Code, § 18-40)  (Ord. 84-078, § 1, passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 91-22,
§ 6, passed 7-23-1991)



NUISANCE



§ 91.100  NUISANCE DEFINED.



   A NUISANCE shall be defined as any circumstance or condition existing
within the city limits which shall, because of its existence or the
circumstances and conditions occurring as a result of its existence,
negatively affect the health, safety and well-being of the residents,
citizens and inhabitants of the city or in some way constitute an actual and
direct detriment to the safety and welfare of the general public and/or the
value of property and/or tend to invite vandalism, to create fire hazards
and/or to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health,
safety and well-being of minors and/or is detrimental to the economic welfare
of the city by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and
continuing development of the city.



(Prior Code, § 18-55)  (Ord. 91-22, § 3, passed 7-23-1991)



§ 91.101  SPECIFIC APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Nuisance of general applicability declared to be a violation.
Wherever a circumstance, condition, property interest, property or a
possession of a natural person or legal entity shall be permitted to exist
under circumstances which constitute a natural and direct hazard to the
health, safety and well-being of the residents, citizens and inhabitants of
the city and/or a detriment to the safety and welfare of the general public
or a detriment to the value of the property, it shall constitute a nuisance
and be a violation of this code and be punished as herein provided.



   (B)   Nuisances in and around residential structures. A nuisance
shall be deemed to occur wherever there exist circumstances around
residential structures or houses which, because of their existence,
constitute an actual and potential hazard to the health, safety and general
well-being.



      (1)   In the event of the existence of this nuisance, any
police officer of the police force of the city is directed and empowered to
take action, including making immediate entry, to cause the immediate
abatement and removal of the offense caused by the existence of the nuisance
if the action is deemed necessary to prevent further injury or harm.



      (2)   A nuisance shall exist if any building materials and/or
raw materials and/or parts of buildings, foundations or improvements shall be
permitted to remain in an open, unsecured or unprotected area at such time
when construction is not ongoing and the materials are not being then and
there used for the construction. The maintenance of any debris, rubble,
wrappings, cord, boxes or other means of storage or delivery on residential
property in any manner shall constitute a nuisance. The maintenance of any
items of personal property in a quantity in excess of what may be reasonably
necessary for use by the owner, occupant or members of the immediate family
of the owners and occupants in an open yard or part of a residential lot or
improvement shall constitute a nuisance.



   (C)   Nuisance by noise. Any sustained or unusual noises exhibited
at hours customarily reserved for rest, sleep and repose are hereby declared
to be a nuisance.



   (D)   Nuisance by noise in the operation of any motor vehicle. The
operation of a motor vehicle within the city in such a manner as to exhibit
the emission of noise either through music or other noise of any kind,
including but not limited to any words or symbols, to a degree as herein
specified, shall constitute a nuisance and violation of this code. No one
shall operate a motor vehicle or be a passenger in a motor vehicle wherein
noise, music or vocal renditions from a radio or car stereo or other device
constitutes a nuisance as herein provided. A nuisance shall exist at any time
when the noise, music or vocal renditions can be heard in any manner by
persons not in the vehicle from which the noise is emanating. If this
circumstance exists, no other proof shall be necessary in order for a
violation to occur.



(Prior Code, § 18-57)  (Ord. 91-22, § 5, passed 7-23-1991)  Penalty, see
§ 91.999



§ 91.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person convicted of a violation of §§ 91.100 and 91.101
of the code of ordinances of the city shall be punished by a fine not less
than $100 for each time a violation shall occur.



   (C)   Any person violates or causes, allows, or permits another to
violate any provision of § 91.066 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$500.  Each occurrence of any such violation of § 91.066 shall constitute a
separate offense. Each day on which any such violation of § 91.066 occurs
shall constitute a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 18-56)  (Ord. 91-22, § 4, passed 7-23-1991; Am. Ord.
2012-01, passed 1-24-2012)



CHAPTER 92:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



Automated Burglar/Theft Alarm Protective Services



   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Applicability



   92.03   Permit required; annual renewal



   92.04   Permit application



   92.05   Duty of permit holder



   92.06   Permit required for existing alarm system



   92.07   Permit not transferrable; new permit required upon transfer
of property; permit form



   92.08   Production of permit for inspection



   92.09   Duties of permit holder generally



   92.10   Duty to repair or deactivate system



   92.11   Duty to provide access to alarm site



   92.12   Alarm system requirements



   92.13   Report of alarm system installation



   92.14   Requirements for an alarm system business



   92.15   Notification duties of alarm system business/telephone
answering service generally



   92.16   Fees and charges for false alarms



   92.17   Suspension or termination of a permit



   92.18   Reinstatement of revoked permit



   92.19   Mayor may establish rules



 



   92.99   Penalty



AUTOMATED BURGLAR/THEFT ALARM PROTECTIVE SERVICES



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM DIALING DEVICE. Any device connected to an alarm system which
automatically sends a pre-recorded message or coded signal to a
pre-determined location, indicating the activation of the alarm system.



   ALARM SITE. The specific property or area of the premises upon or
within which an alarm system is or is to be installed.



   ALARM SYSTEM. A device or system that transmits a signal intended to
summon police of the city in response to a burglary. The term includes an
alarm that emits an audible signal from the exterior of a structure.



   CENTRAL STATION. The part of an alarm system business which intercepts
signals indicating the activation of an alarm device and which relays this
information by live voice to the Police Department.



   FALSE ALARM. Any alarm which was not the result of an emergency or
threat of emergency of the kind for which the alarm system was designed to
give notice.



   FIFTEEN-MINUTE SHUT-OFF. An automatic device associated with a local
alarm or any alarm system which automatically causes the alarm to shut off
and discontinue the emission of an audible signal after a period of time not
to exceed 15 minutes of continuous operation.



   LOCAL ALARM. Any alarm emitting audible and/or visual signals in, at or
on the alarm site when activated and which causes notification to be made
directly or indirectly to the Police Department.



   PERMIT. A certificate of authorization issued by the City Secretary to
the person in control of the property which authorizes the operation of an
alarm system.



   PERMIT HOLDER. The individual, corporation, partnership or one other
legal entity to whom an alarm system permit is issued.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-1)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.02  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter and the regulations contained thereon shall be deemed
to all alarm systems, alarm sites, alarm dialing devices and local alarms and
shall not be deemed to regulate or cover:



   (A)   An alarm system installed on a motor vehicle;



   (B)   An alarm designed so that no notification is given either
audibly or by phone until after the occupants or an agent of the owner or
lessee have checked the alarm site and determined that there is physical
evidence at the site showing that the alarm was the result of criminal
activity of the kind for which the alarm system was designed to give notice,
if a person who is able to grant access to the alarm system remains at the
site until police arrive whenever the police are notified; or



   (C)   An alarm installed upon premises occupied by the United States
Government, the State of Texas, the County of Fort Bend, the City of Meadows
Place, or the Fort Bend County Independent School District, or any other
governmental entity.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-2)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.03  PERMIT REQUIRED; ANNUAL RENEWAL.



   (A)   Required. No person shall cause to be operated or permit the
operation of an alarm system unless a current permit has been issued by the
City Secretary for the system and the person shall pay a fee as set forth by
City Council in a schedule of fees.



   (B)   Multiple alarm systems. Any person in control of property at
an alarm site may obtain a separate permit for each alarm system or may
obtain a single permit for all alarm systems on as much of the one premises
as is under the control of the applicant for the permit, except that one
permit shall not authorize the operation of both hold-up alarms and burglar
alarms. If both hold-up alarms and burglar alarms are operated on one
premises, a single permit may be obtained for all hold-up alarms on as much
of the premises as is under the control of the applicant and a separate
permit for all burglar alarms on the premise under the applicant’s control.



   (C)   Annual renewal. All permits issued shall expire on December 31
of each year. Permits shall be automatically renewed upon completing a
renewal application which shall be in a form prescribed by the City
Secretary. The renewal application shall verify the current accuracy and/or
specify any changes in the original application on file. The established
annual fee shall be paid at the time of renewal. (Any permit that is not to
be renewed because of the failure of the permit holder to properly apply for
renewal or pay the prescribed annual fee shall be deemed cancelled on
December 31 of the year in which it expires.) The Mayor of the city as
provided for under § 92.19 shall have the power to delay the implementation
of this section by appropriate rules.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-3)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992; Am. Ord.
2012-18, passed 6-26-2012)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.04  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Application for a permit shall be made to the City Secretary
on a form as prescribed by the City Secretary, for the operation of an alarm
system by the person having control over the property on which the alarm
system is to be installed and operated. The application shall be made in
writing and in duplicate to the City Secretary.



   (B)   The application shall set forth:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of each person in
control of the property;



      (2)   The street address of the property on which the alarm
system is located and operated;



      (3)   Any business name used for the premises on which the
alarm system is to be installed and operated;



      (4)   Whether the alarm system or systems are or are not local
alarms and whether the alarm system or systems are designed to give notice of
burglary, hold-up or other type of emergency;



      (5)   The name of the person or alarm system business who will
install the alarm system and/or who will monitor the alarm system; and



      (6)   The names and telephone numbers of an alarm system
business or of two persons who are able to and have agreed to:



         (a)   Receive notification at any time;



         (b)   Come to the alarm site within one-half hour after
receiving a request to do so from any member of the Police Department of the
city; and



         (c)   Grant access to the alarm site and deactivate the
alarm system if it becomes necessary.



   (C)   The form prescribed by the City Secretary shall provide that
the applicant acknowledges that he or she has received a copy of this
subchapter providing regulations for alarm systems and is knowledgeable
thereof and agrees to comply with the provisions of law relating to such
alarms.



   (D)   The City Secretary may issue a permit to the individual,
corporation, partnership or other legal entity in control of the property
(alarm site) upon receipt of the application as herein provided and payment
of the permit fee as provided for herein.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-4)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.05  DUTY OF PERMIT HOLDER.



   Whenever a person listed on the application or listed on an amendment
to the application is unable or unwilling to perform the duties as set out
herein, the permit holder shall immediately upon such event file an amendment
to the permit application listing a person or company who is able and willing
to perform those duties so that at all times the application on file with the
City Secretary designates at least two persons and/or an alarm system
business who are able and willing to perform those duties.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-5)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.06  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EXISTING ALARM SYSTEM.



   No person shall operate or shall permit the operation of an alarm
system which was installed at an alarm site prior to January 1, 1992, unless
a permit for the alarm system is obtained prior to June 30, 1992, or such
later date as may be established by the Mayor of the city under applicable
rules issued under the authority contained in § 92.19. To obtain such a
permit, the person in control of the property shall file an application and
proceed as herein provided in the case of a new application.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-6)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.07  PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE; NEW PERMIT REQUIRED UPON TRANSFER OF
PROPERTY; PERMIT FORM.



   (A)   Each permit issued in accordance with this subchapter shall be
valid until such time as the control of the property is transferred from the
permit holder. Upon transfer of control of the property, a new permit shall
be required. Each permit issued hereunder shall be personal as to the holder
thereof and not transferable.



   (B)   The City Secretary shall cause a distinctive form to be
created for an alarm permit, the form shall bear the seal of the City of
Meadows Place and shall provide on its face in large, conspicuous letters the
year or portion thereof for which it is valid.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-7)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.08  PRODUCTION OF PERMIT FOR INSPECTION.



   The permit holder for an alarm system shall keep the permit at the
alarm site and shall produce the permit for inspection upon the request of
any member of the City Police Department.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-8)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.09  DUTIES OF PERMIT HOLDER GENERALLY.



   The person in control of the property and the holder of a permit on
which an alarm system is installed (alarm site) shall do both of the
following:



   (A)   Ensure that any person listed with the City Secretary for the
purpose of notification as herein provided is able to:



      (1)   Receive notification at any time;



      (2)   Come to the alarm site within one-half hour after
receiving a request to do so from any member of the Police Department of the
city or the City Secretary; and



      (3)   Grant access to the alarm site and to deactivate the
alarm system if it becomes necessary.



   (B)   Train all persons who may activate the alarm system in the
proper operation of the alarm system.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-9)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.10  DUTY TO REPAIR OR DEACTIVATE SYSTEM.



   (A)   The permit holder and any persons in control of the alarm site
shall ensure that the alarm system is repaired within 72 hours of receipt of
written notification that the system is malfunctioning, which notice to be
given on a form designated by the Police Department or the City Secretary.



   (B)   The person in control of the property may cause the system to
be deactivated rather than repaired if the procedure is determined to be
appropriate. If the system is deactivated, the system shall not be
reactivated until it has been repaired.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-10)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.11  DUTY TO PROVIDE ACCESS TO ALARM SITE.



   Any person who is notified by the City Secretary or by any member of
the Police Department of activation of an alarm system and who is able to
give access to the alarm site shall come to the alarm site within one-half
hour of the time the person is notified of the activation and shall provide
the City Secretary and/or a member of the Police Department with necessary
access or assistance.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-11)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.12  ALARM SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.



   No person shall apply for a permit, nor shall any person install, cause
to be installed or permit to be installed any alarm system unless the
requirements of this section are met.



   (A)   Any alarm system may be activated as a result of different
types of emergency situations and shall give a unique signal to designate
activation as a result of a hold-up, a burglary, a fire, medical emergency or
any other type of emergency situation so that the proper notification and
proper response can be made.



   (B)   Any local alarm system shall have a 15-minute shut-off and
must not make a sound similar to that of a siren or any emergency vehicle or
similar to a civil defense warning system.



   (C)   Any hold-up alarm shall be designed so that it may be
activated only by intentional and deliberate human action and shall not be
activated by springs, clips or similar devices.



   (D)   No local alarm shall be activated by a hold-up alarm.



   (E)   No person shall use or permit the use of any telephone device
or telephone attachment which automatically selects any telephone line
leading into the City Hall and/or the communication center of the Police
Department of the city and/or the communication center of the Sheriff's
Department of the county, or any number leading into the offices of any
public service organization that transmits any prerecorded message or signal.



   (F)   No person shall use or permit the use of any system which
gives notification of the activation of an alarm system directly to the
Police Department by any means other than live human voice.



   (G)   The Chief of Police and/or the City Secretary may set
reasonable standards and procedures to be followed by any alarm system
business or telephone answering service when giving notice to the Police
Department of activation of an alarm system. The standards and procedures
shall be set out in writing and made available to any alarm system business
or telephone answering service requesting same.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-12)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.13  REPORT OF ALARM SYSTEM INSTALLATION.



   (A)   Any alarm system business which installs an alarm system
within the city shall provide the City Secretary of the following information
on a form designated by the City Secretary. Providing this information shall
not be deemed application for a permit which is otherwise required under
other sections of this subchapter. The information required shall be:



      (1)   The address where the system is located;



      (2)   The name and address of the person having control over
the property; and



      (3)   The type of alarm system.



   (B)   The City Secretary shall prescribe a form for the purposes of
submitting the information and the same shall be submitted to the City
Secretary not earlier than 20 days prior to the installation of the system
and not later than 48 hours after the system is installed. In the event an
alarm system is installed in conjunction with remodeling, improvements or
other work, the person performing the work shall first inquire as to whether
or not any other permits are required for the work under the terms and
provisions of this code and, if so required, the person making the
installation shall be required to obtain the permits under the procedures and
regulations as herein provided. All information submitted concerning the
installation of an alarm system shall, unless otherwise provided for by law,
be treated as confidential and access thereto shall be restricted to
legitimate law enforcement personnel for law enforcement purposes and in
furtherance of the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-13)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.14  REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ALARM SYSTEM BUSINESS.



   Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity, whether
physically located with a place of business in the city or not, shall be in
violation of this code and subject to punishment as provided for by law if
the person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity agrees to maintain
or service any alarm system within the city unless the person, partnership,
corporation or other legal entity shall:



   (A)   Ensure that personnel of the business, who are able to render
effective assistance, arrive at the alarm site within one-half hour of
request for assistance by any member of the Police Department or the City
Secretary if the alarm system business has agreed with any person to respond
to the alarm system. This requirement shall not be applicable to alarm system
businesses that have specifically, by agreement, excluded any obligation to
personally attend to an alarm device;



   (B)   Ensure that sufficient personnel of the business are available
to provide service and to repair any alarm system the business has agreed to
maintain or service within 72 hours after notification that the system is in
need of repair is received from any person in control of the property, from a
member of the Police Department of the city, or from the City Secretary; and



   (C)   Keep a written record of the date and time of repair and a
description of the specific repair which was performed on any alarm system
when the repair was made in response to notification by the person in control
of the property, by a member of the Police Department or by the City
Secretary or any member of his or her staff, that the alarm system was in
need of repair. This written record shall be maintained for at least two
years and shall be made available for inspection and duplication by any
member of the Building Official's staff, designated by the Building Official,
or any member of the Police Department, designated by the Chief of Police, to
inspect the records when that member of the Building Official's staff or the
Police Department makes demand at the office of the alarm system business
during regular business hours.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-14)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.15  NOTIFICATION DUTIES OF ALARM SYSTEM BUSINESS/TELEPHONE ANSWERING
SERVICE GENERALLY.



   Any alarm system business which operates a central station and any
telephone answering service which agrees with any person to provide services
relating to an alarm system which is located on an alarm site in the city
shall:



   (A)   Have sufficient personnel, trained in the procedures to be
followed in receiving and relaying notice of the activation of any alarm
system, on duty at all times to ensure that emergency messages or alarm
signals received by the business can be relayed immediately to the Police
Department;



   (B)   Notify the person in control of the property or his or her
designated employee of the activation of the alarm system within 24 hours of
the time the alarm was activated by telephone or by placing the notice in the
mail, addressed to the person in control of the property;



   (C)   Keep a written record of the date and time each notification
of the activation of an alarm system is received and the date, time and
method the person in control of the property or his or her designated
employee was notified. These written records shall be maintained for at least
two years and shall be made available for inspection by the City Secretary,
or any member of his or her staff, or any member of the Police Department
upon reasonable demand at the office of the City Secretary;



   (D)   Test or cause to be tested all equipment used by the central
station or telephone answering service relating to the receipt of
notification of the activation of any alarm system and the equipment used in
relaying those notifications to the Police Department, at least one time in
every calendar year and, where a test result is unsatisfactory, correct or
cause to be corrected, within a reasonable period of time not to exceed seven
days, the cause of the unsatisfactory test result;



   (E)   Produce evidence of the results of tests conducted pursuant to
division (D) above upon request of a member of the staff of the City
Secretary designated by the City Secretary to perform such services, or to
any member of the Police Department. The requirements of this division shall
be satisfied if the results are made available at the office of the City
Secretary on the next regular business day after demand is made; and



   (F)   Not violate any provisions of the laws of the state or the
city relating to operating and licensing.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-15)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.16  FEES AND CHARGES FOR FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   No penalty or fee for signaling a false alarm by an alarm
system shall be made unless at least five other false alarms have occurred
during the preceding 12 months. A false alarm shall not be deemed to have
occurred unless a response is made by the city police or fire service within
30 minutes of the alarm notification and the police or fire service
determines from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises
that the alarm was false.



   (B)   In the event a false alarm occurs and there have been at least
five previous false alarms during the preceding 12 months, owner or occupant
shall pay a fee as set forth by City Council in a schedule of fees.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-16)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992; Ord. 92-15, §
1, passed 2-25-1992; Am. Ord. 2012-18, passed 6-26-2012)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.17  SUSPENSION OR TERMINATION OF A PERMIT.



   (A)   The city shall not, at any time, terminate its law enforcement
response to an alarm held by a permit holder because of excess false alarms,
if the false alarm fees are paid in full. No permit shall be terminated or
fail to be renewed without the City Secretary giving at least 30 days'
written notice to the permit holder. The notice shall be in writing and shall
be mailed certified mail, return receipt requested, by the City Secretary to
the address of the permit holder or to the address for the permit site.



   (B)   No permit may be canceled, nor renewal denied, without fully
complying with the terms and provisions of this section, and prior to
termination, the permit holder may request a hearing before the Mayor of the
city. The notice of termination and/or the intent not to renew shall specify
the reasons for termination and/or non-renewal. If a hearing is requested by
the permit holder, the City Secretary shall advise the permit holder, the
Chief of Police and the Mayor as to the date, time and place of the hearing.
The permit holder may appear in person or represented by counsel, may present
testimony and cross-examine all witnesses.



   (C)   All hearings shall be conducted under rules consistent with
the nature of the proceedings; provided, however, that the following rules
shall apply to such hearings:



      (1)   All parties shall have the right to representation by a
licensed attorney although an attorney is not required;



      (2)   Each party may present witnesses in his or her own
behalf;



      (3)   Each party has the right to cross-examine all witnesses;
and



      (4)   Only evidence presented before the hearing officer at
the hearing may be considered in rendering a final order.



   (D)   If the permit holder fails to appear at the hearing at the
date, time, and place specified, the city shall, at the time of the hearing,
present sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie case showing that five
or more false alarms, for which responding officers have been unable to find
proof of robbery or attempted robbery, burglary or attempted burglary, any
criminal felony, fire, smoke, arson or attempted arson, have been activated
within the current calendar year or the calendar year immediately preceding
the date of the noticed hearing.



   (E)   If the Mayor finds that grounds exist for revocation of the
permit for the alarm system, the Mayor may revoke the permit and/or decline
to renew any expired permit. The City Secretary shall give written notice to
the permit holder of that decision. Upon receipt of this notice, the permit
holder may, on or before the expiration of ten days from the date of receipt
of the notice, file a request with the City Secretary for a hearing de novo
before the City Council of the city. The request shall be accompanied by a
fee in an amount as shall be established by the City Secretary to cover the
costs of the hearing and all notification required. The City Council shall
conduct a hearing in accordance with the terms and provisions of law and
shall hear such witnesses as shall reasonably be presented and shall make
findings thereon in the same format as was previously required of the Mayor.
If the City Council finds that grounds exist for the revocation of the permit
for the alarm system, it may revoke the permit and shall instruct the City
Secretary to give written notice to the permit holder of the revocation. The
decision of the City Council shall be final and binding.



   (F)   Upon receipt of a final notice of termination and/or
nonrenewal as herein provided, the permit holder shall disconnect the alarm
system immediately and shall surrender any previously issued permit to the
City Secretary or any member of the Police Department.



   (G)   Final written notice shall be given to the permit holder as to
the results of any final hearing before the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-17)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.18  REINSTATEMENT OF REVOKED PERMIT.



   After a permit for an alarm system has been revoked, the person in
control of the property on which the alarm system is located may make
application to the city for reinstatement of the permit. In addition to the
information required in any permit application, an applicant for
reinstatement shall also submit to the city an affidavit of an alarm
inspector employed by an alarm system business. The affidavit shall certify
that the alarm system for which permit reinstatement is sought is
mechanically sound and free of defects which tend to produce false alarms.
Upon receipt of the application and affidavit, the city shall reinstate the
alarm permit upon deposit by the applicant with the city as set forth by City
Council in a schedule of fees. The deposit may be made in cash or in the form
of a performance bond issued by a good and sufficient surety, acceptable to
the city, on condition that the sum of money subject to the bond is payable
to the city upon demand by the city in the event that the terms and
provisions of this subchapter are not complied with or in any way breached.
The deposit shall be held by the city for a period of one full calendar year
following the date of reinstatement, at the end of which time, if the subject
alarm has produced five or fewer false alarms during the calendar year, the
deposit shall be returned to the permit holder. However, if in the event of
more than five alarms during that period, any fees and charges assessed under
the terms and provisions of this subchapter may be charged against the
deposit, and the balance of the deposit will not be returned to the permit
holder until further revocation of the permit or until the completion of one
calendar year in which five or fewer false alarms occur, whichever shall
occur first. The city shall be permitted to charge the deposit as herein
required for the costs incurred by reason of the false alarms which may occur.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-18)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992; Am. Ord.
2012-18, passed 6-26-2012)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.19  MAYOR MAY ESTABLISH RULES.



   (A)   The Mayor of the city is authorized, from time to time, to
establish rules for implementation and interpretation of this subchapter. Any
such rules so prescribed shall be filed with the City Secretary and shall
become final and binding within 20 days after being so filed with the City
Secretary unless prior to the expiration of the 20-day period the City
Council, by majority vote, passes a resolution suspending the prescribed
rules.



   (B)   The City Secretary, upon receipt of the prescribed rules,
shall cause a copy of the prescribed rules to be published by posting the
same in the customary place reserved for posting legal notifications within
the city.



(Prior Code, § 9.5-19)  (Ord. 92-07, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits another to violate
any provision of §§ 92.03, 92.16 and 92.18 shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $500.  Each occurrence of any such violation of §§ 92.03, 92.16
and 92.18 shall constitute a separate offense.  Each day on which any such
violation of §§ 92.03, 92.16 and 92.18 occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 6-26-2012)



CHAPTER 93:  FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   93.01   Arson reward



Fire Department



   93.15   Establishment



   93.16   Fire Chief



   93.17   Equipment and property



   93.18   Emergency circumstances and conditions



   93.19   Extraordinary circumstances and conditions



   93.20   Volunteer Fire Department



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 93.01  ARSON REWARD.



   (A)   The city hereby offers a reward of $250 to anyone who secures
and furnishes information necessary to and which results in arrest and
conviction of any person or persons who commit the crime of arson within the
corporate limits of the city.  This reward is a standing offer and shall be
paid out of the General Fund of the city.



   (B)   The City Secretary and/or Fire Marshal is hereby directed to
have prepared and posted, in at least six public buildings located within the
city, an arson reward notice bearing the language as set out in division (A)
of this section. Placards bearing such notice language shall be eight inches
by 12 inches in size and shall be placed in wooden frames under glass.



   (C)   The City Secretary is hereby directed to provide a certified
copy of this section, one of the placards and a list of places where the
placards have been posted, to the office of the State Board of Insurance. 



(Prior Code, § 13-2)  (Ord. 84-066, § 1, passed 9-25-1984; Ord. 86-04, §
1, passed 1-28-1986)



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 93.15  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby established a City Fire Department, which shall consist
of either volunteers as members of a Volunteer Fire Department or employed
fire officers who shall be compensated in accordance with law. The
composition of the Fire Department shall be within the discretion of the
Mayor as chief administrative officer of the city, based upon policy as shall
from time to time be established by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 13-75)  (Ord. 86-030, § 1, passed 7-30-1986)



§ 93.16  FIRE CHIEF.



   (A)   The Mayor, with concurrence of the City Council, shall appoint
a Fire Chief who shall serve in that capacity from time to time as the Mayor
shall direct. The Fire Chief shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and/or
City Council.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall be the chief fire officer of the city,
and shall at all times be in command of the Fire Department, either volunteer
or regularly paid officers. The Fire Chief shall have all powers provided for
by law and shall have the power to issue orders, make directives and delegate
to subordinates the responsibility for the conduct of the Department as shall
from time to time be deemed necessary, just and proper by the Fire Chief.



(Prior Code, § 13-76)  (Ord. 86-030, § 1, passed 7-30-1986)



§ 93.17  EQUIPMENT AND PROPERTY.



   All fire apparatus and Fire Department equipment that shall at any time
be acquired by the city shall be city property and shall not be neglected or
wasted. The use thereof may be dictated by the Mayor pursuant to a policy
established by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 13-77)  (Ord. 86-030, § 1, passed 7-30-1986)



§ 93.18  EMERGENCY CIRCUMSTANCES AND CONDITIONS.



   In addition to the requirements of law, the Fire Chief shall from time
to time have the right to promulgate such rules and regulations as deemed
necessary, to be placed in force and effect under emergency circumstances or
conditions or during the training or routine duty of any member of the
Department. Any person failing to obey any order of the Fire Chief or to
respond to any direction of the Fire Chief communicated to that person shall
be deemed to be in violation of this code and guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 13-78)  (Ord. 86-030, § 1, passed 7-30-1986)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 93.19  EXTRAORDINARY CIRCUMSTANCES AND CONDITIONS.



   If at any time there exist circumstances and conditions which require
the restraint of persons, the arrest of persons suspected of offenses
relating to fires or other actions deemed necessary to preserve the health
and safety of the city, the Fire Chief is authorized to take all appropriate
action necessary to preserve and protect the health, safety and well-being of
the residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city. To this end, in the
absence of a peace officer, the Fire Chief may, when deemed necessary for the
protection of the health, safety and well-being, restrain persons and/or
effect an immediate arrest in furtherance of his or her duties, obligations
and responsibilities.



(Prior Code, § 13-79)  (Ord. 86-030, § 1, passed 7-30-1986)



§ 93.20  VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   The Volunteer Fire Department of the city may organize as a chartered
volunteer fire department if the members of the Department so elect and may
appoint and elect officers as the members may choose. However, the members of
the Volunteer Fire Department, regardless of office held with the volunteer
organization, shall serve as directed by the Fire Chief and shall perform
only such actions and assume such duties as shall from time to time be
designated and directed by the Fire Chief. Volunteer firefighters shall not
have any right of continuation in office but may be discharged from duties,
responsibilities and obligations as the Fire Chief may from time to time
direct. In addition, membership in a Volunteer Fire Department shall not be
deemed to provide any additional authority in the Fire Department of the city.



(Prior Code, § 13-80)  (Ord. 86-030, § 1, passed 7-30-1986)



CHAPTER 94:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



General Provisions



   94.01   Purpose



   94.02   Regulation of parks and public grounds



   94.03   Park hours




Park Pavilion, Community Center and Swimming Pool




   94.15   Provisions applicable to the Park Pavilion use and rental
only



   94.16   Provisions applicable to the Community Center use and rental
only



   94.17   Provisions applicable to the Swimming Pool use and rental
only



   94.18   Provisions applicable to the Park Pavilion, the Community
Center, and the Swimming Pool



   94.19   Provisions applicable to barbeque pit rentals



   94.20   Provisions applicable to kayak rentals



   94.21   Provisions applicable to tennis court rentals



 



   94.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  PURPOSE.



   In order to facilitate all public recreational programs in the city and
to ensure that all park land, including presently existing park land and park
land which may be acquired in the future, is properly administered, planned
and developed to its maximum potential for the benefit of the citizens and
inhabitants of the city, the Parks and Recreation Department of the city is
established.



(Prior Code, § 21.5-1)  (Ord. 85-030, §§ 1, 2, passed 10-22-1985; Ord.
2016-10, passed 7-26-2016)



§ 94.02  REGULATION OF PARKS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS.



   The Director of Parks and Recreation of the city shall be empowered to
post signs, barriers, notices, or other regulatory devices as may be from
time to time deemed necessary or proper because of certain circumstances or
conditions that may be in effect or existence at that time.



(Prior Code, § 21.5-6)  (Ord. 85-030, §§ 1, 2, passed 10-22-1985; Ord.
92-01, § 1, passed 1-14-1992; Ord. 2016-10, passed 7-26-2016)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 94.03  PARK HOURS.



   All city park hours shall be 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., unless otherwise
provided for in this section.



(Ord. 2016-10, passed 7-26-2016)



PARK PAVILION, COMMUNITY CENTER AND SWIMMING POOL



§ 94.15  PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE PARK PAVILION USE AND RENTAL ONLY.



   (A)   Any person desiring to use a park pavilion, shall submit a
park pavilion application to the city and apply a rental fee and a deposit as
set forth by City Council in a schedule of fees. An applicant must be 21
years of age or older and in good financial standing with the city. If the
city denies the rental application, the city shall refund the fee and
cleaning deposit to the applicant no later than five business days after the
date the city denies the rental application. If the city approves the rental
application, the city shall refund the cleaning deposit no later than ten
business days after rental unless the applicant fails to clean the park
pavilion, owes the city other fees associated with rental of any city
facility, applicant causes property damage to the park pavilion, or fails to
adhere to the terms and conditions of this section or any other city
ordinance.



   (B)   Rentals of park pavilions are for the entire time that the
park is open.



   (C)   The applicant shall submit an application to the city not less
than two business days before the rental date and not earlier than 90 days
before the rental date.



   (D)   The applicant shall remove all items brought into the park
pavilion. Applicant shall clean the park pavilion. Clean-up includes removing
all trash and debris after placing such items in city approved trash bags and
placing such trash bags in the city’s receptacle for solid waste; removing
all decorations; cleaning and returning all tables and chairs to their proper
place of storage.



   (E)   No rental of the park pavilion shall continue later than 10:00
p.m. the use of the park pavilion outside the city approved reservation is
strictly prohibited and may result in forfeiture of the security deposit.
Moreover, criminal trespass charges may be filed by the city for a violation
of this section.



(Ord. 2016-10, passed 7-26-2016)



§ 94.16  PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE COMMUNITY CENTER USE AND RENTAL ONLY.



   (A)   Any person desiring to use the Community Center, shall submit
a Community Center application to the city and pay a rental and cleaning fee
as well as a damage deposit as set forth by the City Council in a schedule of
fees. An applicant must be 21 years of age or older and in good financial
standing with the city. If the city denies the rental application, the city
shall refund the rental and cleaning fee and damage deposit to the applicant
no later than five business days after the date the city denies the rental
application.



   (B)   The city shall provide a key to the applicant only which may
be picked up from the city on the last business day prior to the day for
which rental is authorized and the applicant shall return the key to the city
no later than 4:00 p.m. on the next business day after rental.



   (C)   In addition to the rules established by § 94.18, the
following rules shall apply to Community Center use and rental:



      (1)   Limitation of reservation. The applicant shall submit an
application to the city not less than ten business days before the rental
date and not earlier than one year before the rental date. The applicant may
rent the interior facilities and patio only. Renters may use the kitchenette
refrigerator, microwave, tables, and chairs; however, the ice machine,
projector, and screen are not for use.



      (2)   Swimming pool access. No one may enter the swimming pool
area without prior approval by the Director of Parks and Recreation.
Violation of this rule shall result in forfeiture of the applicant’s
exclusion from the Community Center and Swimming Pool for one calendar year.



      (3)   Decorations. Any decoration attached to the walls or
ceilings must be approved by the Parks and Recreation Department. Decorations
may not be permanently attached. Tape of any kind is prohibited on all
surfaces. Wall putty may be used to hang or mount decorations.



      (4)   Tablecloths. Tablecloths shall be used on tables if
food, liquids, decorations, or material or objects are used, which may stain
or scratch the surface of the table.



      (5)   Thermostats. Thermostats shall be returned to the posted
temperatures at the conclusion of the rental.



      (6)   Capacity. Building capacity shall not exceed 165 people.



      (7)   Securing the Community Center. All doors shall be locked
at the conclusion of the rental. Interior furnishings shall remain inside the
building and exterior or swimming pool furniture shall remain outside the
building.



      (8)   Cleaning. The city shall clean the Community Center
after use.



      (9)   Time reserved. No rental of the Community Center shall
continue later than 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and 11:45 p.m. on
Friday and Saturday, except the Community Center rental may continue until
1:00 a.m. on January 1. Rental of the Community Center is limited to the
hours specified on the reservation. The use of the Community Center outside
the city approved reservation is strictly prohibited and may result in
forfeiture of the security deposit. Moreover, criminal trespass charges may
by the city for a violation of this section.



(Ord. 2014-08, passed 5-27-2014; Ord. 2016-10, passed 7-26-2016)



§ 94.17  PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE SWIMMING POOL USE AND RENTAL ONLY.



   (A)   Availability of swimming pool for public use.



      (1)   Seasonal access. A public swimming pool may be owned and
operated by the city and may be made available for the recreational use of
residents of the city who purchase a seasonal wristband and subject to the
following conditions:



         (a)   Seasonal wristband fees shall be set by City
Council in the Schedule of Fees set forth in § 37.01.



         (b)   Seasonal wristbands are valid during the season
time frame set by the city. If a wristband holder moves out of the city, then
seasonal use shall cease. The city shall not provide any refunds.



         (c)   Seasonal wristbands may be issued for each member
of the household. Each member of the household who has been issued a city
wristband may admit one guest to the swimming pool.



         (d)   A valid driver's license with a Meadows Place
address or a current Meadows Place water bill must be shown to purchase a
seasonal wristband.



      (2)   Day access. Non-residents may purchase a one-day
swimming pool wristband. These wristbands may be purchased at the swimming
pool during normal operating hours at a fee as set by City Council in the
Schedule of Fees set forth in § 37.01 .



      (3)   Concessions. Concession punch cards may be issued by the
city for the purchase of prepackaged concessions available at the pool.



      (4)   The city shall determine the day and hours of operation
of the pool.



   (B)   (1)   Swimming pool rental. Any person desiring to rent the
swimming pool shall submit a swimming pool application to the city and pay a
rental fee and security deposit as may be set forth by City Council in the
Schedule of Fees set forth in § 37.01 . An applicant must be 21 years of age
or older and in good financial standing with the city. If the city denies the
rental application, the city shall refund the rental fee to the applicant no
later than five business days after the date the city denies the rental
application. If city staff determines for any reason that the swimming pool
should not be in use, including but not limited to inclement weather, for one
and one-half hours or more, then the applicant shall receive a full refund of
the rental fee and security deposit from the city.



      (2)   In addition to the rules established by § 94.16, the
following rules shall apply to swimming pool rentals:



         (a)   Limitation of reservation. The applicant shall
submit an application to the city not less than two business days before the
rental date and not earlier than 90 days before the rental date.



         (b)   Swimming pool reservations are allowed for a
maximum time of three and one-half hours and are scheduled only after public
use hours. No rental of the swimming pool shall continue later than 10:00
p.m. on Sunday through Thursday or 11:45 p.m. on Friday and Saturday, except
the swimming pool rental may continue until 1:00 a.m. on January 1. Rental of
the swimming pool is limited to the hours specified on the reservation. The
use of the swimming pool outside the city approved reservation is strictly
prohibited and may result in forfeiture of the security deposit. Moreover,
criminal trespass charges may be filed by the city for a violation of this
section.



         (c)   Glassware prohibited. No glassware shall be
brought in the swimming pool.



         (d)   Lifeguards. Swimming pool rentals are subject to
availability of lifeguards. The city shall determine the number of lifeguards
required to supervise a reservation based on the anticipated number of people
in attendance and the type of event.



   (C)   The renter of the swimming pool shall remove all items brought
into the swimming pool. The renter shall clean the swimming pool area.
Clean-up includes removing all trash and debris after placing such items in
city-approved trash bags and placing such trash bags in the city's receptacle
for solid waste; removing all decorations; cleaning and returning all tables
and chairs to their proper place of storage. A violation of this section may
result in the forfeiture of the renter's security deposit.



(Ord. 2014-08, passed 5-27-2014; Ord. 2016-10, passed 7-26-2016; Ord.
2017-14, passed 4-25-2017)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.18  PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE PARK PAVILION, THE COMMUNITY CENTER,
AND THE SWIMMING POOL.



   (A)   No commercial use allowed. Commercial use of the park
pavilion, community center, and swimming pool is prohibited, unless approved
in writing by the Director of Parks and Recreation or Mayor. Commercial use
shall mean and include all professional exhibitions or contests, promotional
and public dances, shows, classes, and other attractions sponsored, hosted,
or held by profit-making organizations or individuals, regardless of whether
such event, activity, or program is conducted at no charge and open to the
public. Commercial use does not include non-profit organizations with a
current Federal tax-exempt status designation.



   (B)   Reservations not transferrable. Reservations of the Park
Pavilion, Community Center, and Swimming Pool are not transferrable.



   (C)   Nondiscrimination policy. Reservations for the park pavilion,
community center, and swimming pool are on a first come, first served basis.
It is the policy of the city to make the park pavilion, community center, and
swimming pool available for rental to as broad a spectrum of groups and
individuals as is feasible. The city may revoke rental privileges or deny a
rental application based on an applicant’s or group’s past rental or
usage history.



   (D)   Changes to reservations. All changes, cancellations, and
additions to park pavilion, community center, and swimming pool reservations
shall be made no later than seven days prior to the time originally reserved.
The city may deny any changes or additions to reservations if made outside
this timeframe. Cancellation of reservations made outside this timeframe
shall result in applicant’s loss of the security deposit or rental fee.



   (E)   Conflicts with city activities. Activities conducted by the
city at the park pavilion, community center, or swimming pool shall be given
priority at all times even over existing reservations, and the city reserves
the right to cancel any reservations that may conflict with a city-sponsored
activity.



   (F)   Supervision of youth groups required. Groups shall have one
adult present at all times for every ten individuals 17 years of age and
younger.



   (G)   Smoking prohibited. There shall be no smoking in the park
pavilion, community center, or swimming pool.



   (H)   Setup. Applicant shall set up tables, chairs, and any other
items necessary for use of the park pavilion, community center, and swimming
pool. The amount of time needed to set up shall be included in the time
reserved.



   (I)   Indemnification of city. The applicant agrees to indemnify and
hold harmless the city and its officials, officers, agents, employees,
contractors, and subcontractors, from any and all actions, claims, costs,
demands, damages, and expenses, including but not limited to attorney’s
fees and court costs, arising out of the use of the park pavilion, community
center, and swimming pool. Furthermore, such indemnification shall apply with
respect to all acts or omissions of the applicant and the applicant’s
guests, family, friends, invitees, licensees and their respective invitees or
licensees associated with the use of the park pavilion, community center, and
swimming pool.



   (J)   City not liable for losses or damages. The city is not liable
for lost, damaged, or misplaced property at the park pavilion, community
center, or swimming pool. Furthermore, applicant releases and discharges the
city from any and all liability for loss, injury, or damage to persons or
property, including death that may be sustained arising out of the use of the
park pavilion, community center, or swimming pool.



   (K)   Compliance with applicable laws. The applicant is required to
be present at the park pavilion, community center, or swimming pool, as
applicable, and available to city personnel during the entire time reserved.
Applicant and the applicant’s guests, family, friends, invitees, licensees
and their respective invitees and licensees shall comply with all Federal,
state, and local laws. Furthermore, the applicant assumes full responsibility
and liability for the acts and omissions of his or her guests, family,
friends, invitees, licensees and their respective invitees and licensees that
may result in a violation of Federal, state, or local laws.



   (L)   Small objects prohibited. Rice, birdseed, confetti or similar
small objects are prohibited in the park pavilion, community center, and
swimming pool.



   (M)   Liability insurance. As part of the application to rent the
park pavilion, community center, or swimming pool, the city may require the
applicant to furnish proof of general liability insurance, require the
applicant to name the city as an additional insured, and include a waiver of
subrogation or waiver of right of recovery under such policy. Liability
insurance amounts shall be determined by the City Council which would ensure
adequate coverage for possible personal injury, death, or property damage
that may arise out of the rental and use of the park pavilion, community
center, or swimming pool by the applicant. If applicant rents a bounce house
or similar type amusement, applicant shall provide proof of general liability
insurance for not less than $1,000,000, name the city as an additional
insured, and include a waiver of subrogation or waiver of right of recovery
under such policy. Swim teams also shall provide proof of general liability
insurance for not less than $ 1,000,000, name the city as an additional
insured, and include a waiver of subrogation or waiver of right of recovery
under such policy.



   (N)   Liquids with coloring, dyes, or chemicals which may stain
prohibited. Liquids, including but not limited to juice or punch, which
contain coloring, dyes, or chemicals which may stain or discolor surfaces or
fabrics of the park pavilion, community center, or swimming pool are
prohibited.



   (O)   Maintenance issues. If the park pavilion, community center, or
swimming pool experience plumbing, mechanical, structural, or other such
problems while in use, the applicant shall immediately contact the city and
report such problem.



   (P)   Parking. Parking shall be limited to the lot in front of
Community Center and the parking lot west of the Community Center across the
bridge.



   (Q)   Open flames and combustible materials prohibited. No person
shall bring into or use at the park pavilion, community center, or swimming
pool, whether inside or outside, an open flame, a flame-producing device, or
any flammable or combustible material such as, but not limited to, candles,
incense, and charcoal.



   (R)   Alcohol. Alcohol is allowed in the park pavilion, community
center, and swimming pool; however, applicant shall pay an increased rental
fee if alcohol is consumed. Such rental fee shall be set by City Council in a
schedule of fees.



   (S)   Removal. If the applicant or applicant’s family, friends,
guests, invitees, licensees, or anyone associated or affiliated with
applicant violates any of the rules and regulations of this subchapter, the
city may require the immediate vacation of the park pavilion, community
center, and swimming pool of some or all people. Furthermore, the city may
refuse any applicant's future application to use or rent the park pavilion,
community center, or swimming pool.



   (T)   Security. The city may require applicant to hire certified
peace officers. Applicant shall comply with the city’s instructions
regarding security personnel.



   (U)   Closure. The city may close, either temporarily or
permanently, the park pavilion, community center, or the swimming pool at any
time the city finds it necessary to undertake repairs or maintenance, or in
the interest of the health, safety, or welfare of the community.



(Ord. 2014-08, passed 5-27-2014; Ord. 2016-10, passed 7-26-2016)



§ 94.19  PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO BARBEQUE PIT RENTALS.



   (A)   Any persons desiring to use the stationary barbeque pit in
McDonald Park shall submit a barbeque pit rental application with the city
and pay a rental fee and deposit as set forth by City Council in a schedule
of fees.



   (B)   (1)   Any person desiring to use the city's mobile barbeque
pit shall submit a barbeque pit rental application with the city and pay a
rental fee and deposit as set forth by the City Council in a schedule of
fees. The city’s mobile barbeque pit may be rented by the Meadows Place
Swim Team, Meadows Place Home and Garden Club, youth sports leagues, Fort
Bend Independent School District, Meadows Place Neighborhood Watch, scouting
groups, and any other community related entity as approved by the Director of
Parks and Recreation or the Mayor.



      (2)   The city shall deliver and pick up the mobile barbeque
pit. Except for Fort Bend Independent School District, the mobile barbeque
pit shall be located on city property. Fort Bend Independent School District
may locate the mobile barbeque pit on its school property within the city
only.



(Ord. 2016-10, passed 7-26-2016)



§ 94.20  PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO KAYAK RENTALS.



   (A)   No boat, kayak, canoe, inner tube, or other similar equipment
or devices shall be allowed in the city’s lake, except for the city’s
kayaks.



   (B)   Any person desiring to use the city’s kayak, shall submit a
kayak rental application and pay a rental fee as set forth by City Council in
a schedule of fees. The rental application with fee must be submitted to the
city at least two days before the use. No person, group, association, entity,
or organization may rent more than four of the city's kayak’s at one time.
Weekend kayak use begins on Friday and ends Monday morning at 8:00 a.m.



   (C)   Upon approval of the rental application, the city will provide
the applicant with a key to the gate in which the kayaks are housed and a
lock code to the specific kayak rented.



   (D)   A life jacket shall be worn at all times the kayak is in use.



(Ord. 2016-10, passed 7-26-2016)



§ 94.21  PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO TENNIS COURT RENTALS.



   (A)   Any city resident desiring to use the city’s tennis courts,
shall submit a tennis application and pay a rental fee as set forth by City
Council in a schedule of fees. The city shall issue only two access cards per
family.



   (B)   If a resident moves from the city, the resident shall return
the access card(s) to the city upon moving.



(Ord. 2016-10, passed 7-26-2016)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits another to violate
any provisions of this sections hall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500
unless such violation implicates fire safety, zoning, or public health and
sanitation including dumping of refuse in which case the fine amount shall
not be more than $2,000. Each occurrence of any such violation of this
section shall constitute a separate offense. Each day on which any such
violation of this section occurs shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2014-08, passed 5-27-2014; Ord. 2016-10, passed 7-26-2016)



CHAPTER 95:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS



Section



Antennas and Towers



   95.01   Definitions



   95.02   Applicability



   95.03   Guidelines and requirements



   95.04   Installation of an antenna on a structure other than a tower



   95.05   Lighting of towers prohibited



   95.06   Federal and other governmental requirements



   95.07   Building Codes; safety standards



   95.08   Tower placement permit required



   95.09   Application and fees



   95.10   Requirements of an application



   95.11   Shortened administrative process



   95.12   General requirements for approval of an antenna tower or
structure and the issuance of a tower permit



   95.13   Factors considered in granting the tower permit



   95.14   Availability of suitable towers or other structures



   95.15   Setbacks



   95.16   Security



   95.17   Landscaping



   95.18   Removal of abandoned antennas and towers



   95.19   Antennas and towers existing as of the date of the adoption
of this subchapter



   95.20   Applicant shall acquire no vested rights



   95.21   Regulations to the extraterritorial jurisdiction



ANTENNAS AND TOWERS



§ 95.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this code, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, and any other meanings or provisions in this code relating to such
terms that may be in conflict herewith shall be of no force and effect and
the meanings as herein provided shall be applicable.



   ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE.  Human-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles, and similar alternative-design mounting structures.



   ANTENNA. Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio,
television, or any other type of communications through the sending and/or
receiving of electromagnetic waves.



   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.



   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission.



   GOVERNING AUTHORITY.  The City Council of the City of Meadows Place.



   HEIGHT. When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other
structure, even if the highest point is an antenna.



   TOWER.  Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting
lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and
television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers,
cellular telephone towers and the like.



   TOWER PERMIT. A permit issued by the City Council under the authority
of this code and the provisions of this chapter. Any construction,
maintenance or use of a tower or antenna not in accord with the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed illegal and the owner or operator thereof may be
fined to the maximum extent permitted by law for each day a violation shall
occur and each day shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.



(Prior Code, § 27-1)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.02  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   District height limitations. The requirements set forth in
this code shall govern the location of towers and antennas in the city.



   (B)   Public property. Antennas or towers located on publicly owned
property shall be exempt from the requirements of this code, provided a
license or lease authorizing the antenna or tower has been approved by the
City Council.



   (C)   Amateur radio and receive-only towers. This code shall not
govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 100 feet
in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio
station operator or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna.



   (D)   Grandfathered towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna
existing on the effective date of this section shall not be required to meet
the requirements of this code other than the requirements of this code for
grandfathered towers and antennas. Any towers or antennas that fail to meet
the requirements of this code shall be referred to as "grandfathered towers"
or "grandfathered antennas."



   (E)   Network nodes. This chapter shall not apply to network nodes
installed and operational on or after September 1, 2017, as such term is
defined by Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 284.



(Prior Code, § 27-2)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997; Ord. 2017-02,
passed 1-24-2017; Ord. 2018- 06, passed 3-27-2018)



§ 95.03  GUIDELINES AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish rules
and regulations for the siting and maintenance of towers and antennas of the
type as herein defined and set out. The goals of this chapter are to
encourage and to provide for the location of towers in nonresidential areas
and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community, and to
encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing towers. In addition, it
is the purpose of these regulations to encourage the use of towers and
antennas to be located in areas where the adverse impact on the community is
minimal and to encourage the user of towers and antennas to configure them in
a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas,
and to enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to
provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently.



   (B)   Existing sites. Each applicant for a tower permit shall
provide the City Council an inventory of its existing towers, including
specific information about the location, height and design of each tower. The
City Council shall review the data and information as may be submitted, and
all data submitted in conjunction with an application as herein provided
shall be deemed a part of the open and public record.



   (C)   Lighting. The guidelines set forth in this code shall govern
the location of all towers and the installation of all antennas; provided,
however, that the governing body may in its sole discretion provide other
regulations or other requirements that accomplish the objectives of this code
where it is found that the goals and purposes of this chapter and this code
are better served by such exceptions.



   (D)   Requirements. Towers shall either be constructed to maintain a
galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA,
be painted sky blue or gray so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.



   (E)   Design requirements. At a tower site, the design of buildings
and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to
the natural setting and built environment.



(Prior Code, § 27-3)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.04  INSTALLATION OF AN ANTENNA ON A STRUCTURE OTHER THAN A TOWER.



   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a
neutral color that is identical to or closely compatible with the color of
the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible.



(Prior Code, § 27-4)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.05  LIGHTING OF TOWERS PROHIBITED.



   Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or
other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the City Council shall
approve the design for lighting and the design must take into effect existing
and contemplated uses of surrounding property and be configured in a way as
to cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.



(Prior Code, § 27-5)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.06  FEDERAL AND OTHER GOVERNMENTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the
FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the federal government or any other
governmental entity with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If
the standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and
antennas governed by this code shall bring the towers and antennas into
compliance with the revised standards and regulations within six months of
the effective date of the revised standards and regulations. Failure to bring
towers and antennas into compliance with the revised standards and
regulations shall constitute an immediate and automatic revocation of the
authority granted under this chapter and the city may require the removal of
any tower antenna in noncompliance at the cost of the owners.



(Prior Code, § 27-6)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.07  BUILDING CODES; SAFETY STANDARDS.



   To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower
shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in
the Building Codes of the city and the applicable standards for towers that
are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time
to time. The city, through the Building Official or other persons so
designated, may inspect towers and antennas at any time, and if the Building
Official finds and concludes that the tower or an antenna fails to comply
with such codes and standards and/or constitutes a danger to persons or
property, then the Building Official, upon notice being provided to the owner
of the tower, may order that the tower and antenna be brought into compliance
with the codes and standards within a period not to exceed 30 days. If the
owner fails to bring the tower into compliance within 30 days, the City
Council may order the removal of the tower and antennas at the expense of the
owner. In the event a removal is ordered, the city shall not assume any
liability for the removal and shall be entitled to a lien upon the personal
property, fixtures or real estate for the purpose of paying its cost incurred
in the removal.



(Prior Code, § 27-7)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.08  TOWER PLACEMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.



   The City Council finds and determines that it is in the best interest
of the health, safety and well-being of the residents, citizens and
inhabitants of the city that no tower or antenna shall be constructed,
erected or maintained in the city unless a permit, hereinafter referred to as
a tower permit, shall have first been issued by the City Council for the
placement, location and maintenance of the tower and antenna.



(Prior Code, § 27-8)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.09  APPLICATION AND FEES.



   From time to time the City Council may adopt an application form or
procedure for the issuance of a tower permit. In addition, the City Council
may specify fees, costs and expenses that must be paid by the applicant as an
application fee prior to the review or issuance of the tower permit. In the
event the City Council shall fail to specify or provide for tower permit
application or a procedure for the issuance of a tower permit, then the
Building Official is hereby directed to establish such procedure as shall be
reasonable and necessary to accomplish the objectives of this code. The
application fee approved by the City Council shall be in an amount sufficient
to cover the cost incurred by the city in reviewing the application and
material submitted by the applicant. In addition, prior to the issuance of
any permit and as a condition for the issuance of a tower permit, the
applicant shall pay any additional cost as may be incurred by the city,
including but not limited to professional fees incurred in the review of any
application.



(Prior Code, § 27-9)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.10  REQUIREMENTS OF AN APPLICATION.



   Each application filed hereunder shall show and attach thereto all
relevant documents showing compliance with all laws and regulations
promulgated by the federal government, including laws and regulations
relating to the FAA or the FCC or any other governmental entity. In addition,
no authority granted under this code shall be deemed to have any final
authority until an application for a building permit has finally been
approved by the Building Official of the city.



(Prior Code, § 27-10)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.11  SHORTENED ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS.



   (A)   The City Council recognizes that there are certain
circumstances where a tower permit may be issued administratively by the
Building Official without review by the City Council, and in this regard the
Building Official is hereby directed and authorized to issue a tower permit
as provided for under this chapter without referral to or review by the City
Council. The applicant for a tower permit by administrative approval shall
first comply with all other requirements of this code including making
application on such form as may be from time to time provided by the city and
paying the required fee. The authority herein granted to the Building
Official shall be deemed discretionary by the Building Official and the
Building Official may decline to issue a tower permit administratively and
may refer the application to the City Council for approval in accordance with
the other provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Building Official may approve a tower permit
administratively if it is found that one or more of the following conditions
or circumstances shall exist:



      (1)   The proposed tower or antenna, including the placement
of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with
the tower or antenna, will be located in an industrial or heavy commercial
district or area of town. An industrial or heavy commercial area is one that
is separated from any platted lot of record that is in residential use or
intended for residential use by at least 1,000 feet from the closest point of
any lot platted or used for residential purposes or, in the case of
non-platted property, 1,000 feet from any structure actually used for
residential purposes. In measuring or determining any of the distances as
herein provided, measurements should be taken from the closest point of the
lot or structure to the base or structural point of the tower closest to the
residential lot or residential structure.



      (2)   The installation of an antenna is on an existing
structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water
tower or other free-standing nonresidential structure) that is at least 50
feet in height or greater so long as the additional antenna adds no more than
20 feet to the height of the existing structure.



      (3)   The installation of an antenna is on an existing tower
of any height so long as the addition of the antenna adds no more than 20
feet to the height of the existing tower. The tower permit issued under this
section shall not permit the placement of additional buildings or other
supporting equipment used in connection with the antenna.



(Prior Code, § 27-11)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.12  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL OF AN ANTENNA TOWER OR STRUCTURE
AND THE ISSUANCE OF A TOWER PERMIT.



   The following general provisions shall govern the issuance of a tower
permit and shall control all applications for a tower permit. Each applicant
requesting a tower permit under this code shall submit a scaled site plan and
a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, or other
documentation signed and sealed by appropriate professional engineers showing
the location and dimensions of the improvement, including information
concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements,
setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other
information necessary to assess compliance with this code, including such
other and additional information as may be deemed necessary and required by
the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 27-12)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.13  FACTORS CONSIDERED IN GRANTING THE TOWER PERMIT.



   The City Council shall consider the following factors in determining
whether or not to issue a tower permit and such other factors as may be
deemed appropriate and necessary in order to determine that the goals of the
code are properly served:



   (A)   Height of the proposed tower;



   (B)   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and
residential districts; however, the City Council shall not approve any tower
which is closer than 1,000 feet to any lot platted for residential use or
from any structure in residential use;



   (C)   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;



   (D)   Surrounding topography;



   (E)   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;



   (F)   Design of the tower with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obstructiveness; and



   (G)   The availability of suitable and existing towers and other
structures presently constructed which are suitable for antenna location.



(Prior Code, § 27-13)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.14  AVAILABILITY OF SUITABLE TOWERS OR OTHER STRUCTURES.



   No new tower permit shall be issued unless the applicant demonstrates
to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Council that no existing tower or
structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence
submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate
the applicant's proposed antenna or tower may consist of any of the following.



   (A)   No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area required to meet applicant's engineer's requirements.



   (B)   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet applicant's engineer's requirements.



   (C)   Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient
structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related
equipment.



   (D)   The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antennas on the existing towers or structures or the
antennas on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with
the applicant's proposed antenna.



   (E)   The fees or costs required to share an existing antenna or
structure which will be paid at the beginning of a sharing relationship or
will be paid within one year from the date of the inception of any sharing
relationship exceed the cost of constructing a new tower.



   (F)   Property owner(s) of existing towers or structures are
unwilling to accommodate reasonably the applicant's needs. The applicant must
specify the reason for property owner(s) refusing to accommodate and submit
satisfactory proof of non-accommodation, including documents evidencing
appropriate financial tenders.



   (G)   The applicants demonstrate that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.



(Prior Code, § 27-14)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.15  SETBACKS.



   The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all
towers and antennas for which a tower permit is required; provided, however,
that the governing body may, in its discretion, provide for other or
different regulations if it finds that the goals of this code are better
served by such modifications.



   (A)   Towers must be set back a distance equal to 200 feet from the
nearest point to any lot platted for residential use or any structure in
residential use. If the height of the antenna tower is deemed to be greater
than 500 feet, then the setback as herein provided shall be three times the
height of the tower.



   (B)   Towers, guys and accessory facilities must be constructed in a
way to avoid adverse impact upon adjoining properties and the uses thereof.
In addition, all such structures and apparatus must be properly screened by a
visual barrier or fence of a height not less than eight feet and shall be
appropriately marked.



   (C)   In all areas other than industrial and heavy commercial areas
which are separated from lots platted for residential use or from structures
in residential use by more than 1,000 feet, towers over 90 feet in height
shall not be located within one-quarter mile from an existing tower that is
over 90 feet in height.



(Prior Code, § 27-15)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.16  SECURITY.



   In addition to the fencing requirements as herein set out, all fencing
shall be locked and secured and shall be equipped with appropriate
anti-climbing devices; provided, that if the City Council finds and
determines that, because of natural barriers or the existence of other
apparatus or conditions, this requirement is not necessary, the City Council
may in an appropriate case modify the screening and fencing requirements as
herein set out.



(Prior Code, § 27-16)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.17  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   All towers constructed and maintained within the city limits
shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with the provisions as
herein set out. The City Council, however, upon appropriate application, may
modify the provisions of this code when it is deemed appropriate in
accordance with the circumstances and conditions then existing.



   (B)   The requirements as herein provided are:



      (1)   Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of
plant materials that effectively screen the view of the tower compound. The
standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide
outside the perimeter of the compound. The applicant for a tower permit shall
file with the city a landscape plan which shall be approved by the City
Council in conjunction with any application filed in accordance herewith. In
the case of an application for administrative approval, the requirements for
a landscape plan may be approved by the Building Official without City
Council approval if a request for administrative approval is granted. It
shall be the duty of the applicant to fully maintain any landscaping as
herein provided as a condition for the maintenance of the permit; and



      (2)   Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on
the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases,
such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the
property perimeter may be deemed by the City Council to be a sufficient
buffer.



(Prior Code, § 27-17)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.18  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS.



   Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12
months shall be deemed abandoned, and the owner of the antenna or tower shall
remove the same within 30 days of the receipt of a notice from the City
Council notifying the owner of the abandonment. If the antenna or tower is
not removed within the required 30 days, or such additional period as may be
allowed by the City Council upon application, the City Council may remove the
antenna or tower at the expense of the owner and may file a lien upon the
real estate and any personal property or fixtures found to pay the cost of
removal.



(Prior Code, § 27-18)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.19  ANTENNAS AND TOWERS EXISTING AS OF THE DATE OF THE ADOPTION OF
THIS SUBCHAPTER.



   (A)   Any antenna or tower that would otherwise be subject to
regulation under the terms and provisions of this code that had been
constructed and lawfully in existence at the date of adoption of this chapter
shall be deemed grandfathered and shall not be subject to the regulations
provided under this code for the issuance of a tower permit. However, all
other provisions of this code applicable to the maintenance or renovation of
an antenna or tower shall be deemed applicable and in existence.



   (B)   The owner of a previously existing antenna tower shall be
entitled to grandfathered status only if the owner and/or lessee of the
antenna or tower shall file a declaration and claim of grandfathered status
on or before the expiration of six months from the date of adoption of this
chapter. Any person failing to timely claim grandfathered status shall be
required as a condition of the maintenance of an antenna or tower to obtain a
tower permit as herein required for a newly constructed antenna or tower.



(Prior Code, § 27-19)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.20  APPLICANT SHALL ACQUIRE NO VESTED RIGHTS.



   (A)   No applicant for a tower permit or person intending to apply
for a tower permit shall at any time acquire any vested rights to a tower
permit or other authority or privilege to maintain an antenna or tower in the
city limits. Nor shall any person who shall have previously constructed and
maintained an antenna or tower otherwise subject to regulation under this
chapter be deemed to have acquired any vested rights or property rights to
maintain the tower or antenna in the city.



   (B)   The city declares that the provisions of this chapter are
necessary for the preservation of the health, safety and well-being of the
residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city and as such the health,
safety and well-being of the residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city
require that this chapter and code be enforced to the maximum extent
permitted by law and that all rights of property shall at all times be
subordinate to the regulations as herein set out.



(Prior Code, § 27-20)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 95.21  REGULATIONS TO THE EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.



   The City Council finds and determines that its regulation of antennas
and towers is important for the maintenance of the health, safety and
well-being of the residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city and, as
such, declares that the regulations contained in this chapter and code shall,
to the extent that may from time to time be permitted under the laws of the
state, be applicable to all towers and antennas that may be permitted and
constructed in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.



(Prior Code, § 27-21)  (Ord. 97-33, § 1, passed 10-28-1997)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   BUSINESS LICENSING GENERALLY





         111.   PEDDLERS





         112.   SALES





         113.   AMUSEMENTS





         114.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES





         115.   FOOD SERVICE





         116.   CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESS




CHAPTER 110:  BUSINESS LICENSING GENERALLY



Section



   110.01   Expiration of permits, licenses and authorities



§ 110.01  EXPIRATION OF PERMITS, LICENSES AND AUTHORITIES.



   (A)   All permits, licenses and authorities issued by the city on or
after February 1, 2000 shall expire on the date provided by other applicable
law for the issuance of a permit, license and authority if a date is
provided, or 180 days after the date of issuance of the permit, license and
authority if no date is otherwise provided.



   (B)   Any person previously having any right or authority under an
expired permit shall have the right at any time to seek renewal or reissuance
of the permit or authority.



(Ord. 2000-08, passed 2-22-2000)



CHAPTER 111:  PEDDLERS



Section



General Provisions



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Exceptions



   111.03   Right of property owners and tenants to specify “no
solicitation”



   111.04   Misrepresentation



   111.05   Hours of operation



   111.06   Prohibition



License



   111.17   License required



   111.18   Application



   111.19   Identification



   111.20   False information



   111.21   Service of process



   111.22   Bond



   111.23   Fee



   111.24   Procedures for issuance of license



   111.25   Duration



   111.26   Display



   111.27   Advertising restricted



   111.28   Suspension or revocation



 



   111.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GOODS.  Tangible personal property, including but not limited to
newspapers and magazines, and subscriptions to tangible personal property.



   INTERSTATE COMMERCE. Soliciting, selling, or taking orders for, or
offering to take orders for, any goods which, at the time the order is taken,
are in any federal district or territory, any commonwealth, or in any state,
other than Texas, or will be produced in any federal district or territory,
any commonwealth, or any state, other than Texas, and shipped or introduced
into the city in fulfillment of such orders.



   NONCOMMERCIAL PURPOSE or CAUSE.  A purpose or cause not created,
existing or espoused for the generation of profit or the remuneration of
individuals, including, but not limited to, the religious or charitable
solicitation of contributions, seeking political support or contributions,
the promotion of civic causes, the promotion of conservation of resources or
animals, or advocating a philosophy or religion.



   PEDDLING.  Going from house to house or from place to place in the
city, whether by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other means of
conveyance, for the purpose of soliciting, selling or taking orders for or
offering to sell or take orders for any goods or services.  This definitions
shall also include the use or occupancy of any building, structure, tent,
table, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or
any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples
and taking orders for future delivery.



   PREMISES.  Any residence, commercial business, home, or other place in
the city.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.02  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales made to dealers
by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business, or
to sales made under authority and by order of law, or to vendors of farm or
dairy products.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.03  RIGHT OF PROPERTY OWNERS AND TENANTS TO SPECIFY “NO
SOLICITATION.”



   (A)   Any property owner or tenant within the city may place or
affix on the front of any premises owned or rented by them a sign or other
identifying marker stating: “No Solicitation” or “No Solicitors.”



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or to in any
way request entry upon any premises for the purpose of peddling, where a sign
or other identifying marker authorized by division (A) is placed or affixed.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.04  MISREPRESENTATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the activity of peddling
to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality of his or her
goods, wares, merchandise, or services for the purpose of inducing another to
purchase the same.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.05  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of
peddling by going from house to house or from place to place within the city
between the hours of one-half hour before sunset and one-half hour after
sunrise the following morning, except by specific appointment with or
invitation from the prospective customer.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.06  PROHIBITION.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of peddling to or from a
vehicle, cart, wagon, trailer or other means of conveyance, which is parked
or stopped upon a public street or right-of-way in the city.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



LICENSE



§ 111.17  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except as provided by division (B) of this section, it shall
be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in the activity of peddling
without having first applied for and obtained a license from the City
Secretary.



   (B)   No license or fee shall be required for any person or entity
to go from house to house or from place to place in the city solely for a
noncommercial purpose.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.18  APPLICATION.



   Any person or entity who is required by this chapter to obtain a
license from the City Secretary shall submit a written application to the
City Secretary, which application shall give the following information:



   (A)   Name, date of birth, home address and local address, if any,
of applicant;



   (B)   Name and address of the person, firm or corporation, if any,
that he or she represents, or from whom or through whom, orders are to be
solicited or cleared;



   (C)   Nature of the goods or services which are to be sold, or for
which orders are to be solicited;



   (D)   Whether applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand or
receive or accept payment or deposit of money, in advance of final delivery;



   (E)   A statement that the applicant has not been convicted of any
felonies of any nature or any other crimes of moral turpitude in this state
or any other state; or if having been so convicted, a full statement as to
the place of conviction, date of conviction and crime for which applicant was
convicted;



   (F)   Period of time which applicant wishes to engage in the
activity of peddling in the city; and



   (G)   Any other information requested by the city.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.19  IDENTIFICATION.



   A the time of filing an application for a license, the applicant shall
submit, for inspection by the City Secretary, written proof of his or her
identity, which may be in the form of an automobile operator’s license or
an identification letter or card issued to registrant or applicant by the
person, firm or corporation for whom or through whom orders are to be
solicited or cleared.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.20  FALSE INFORMATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading
information in connection with his or her application for a license required
by this chapter.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.21  SERVICE OF PROCESS.



   At the time of filing an application for a license required by this
chapter and before any license shall be issued under this chapter, there
shall also be filed with the City Secretary an instrument in writing, signed
by the applicant under oath, nominating and appointing the Secretary of State
of the State of Texas as his or her true and lawful agent, with full power
and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and one the
behalf of the applicant, and service of summons in any action brought upon
the applicant’s bond shall be deemed made when served on the Secretary of
State of the State of Texas.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.22  BOND.



   (A)   The applicant for a license required by this chapter shall pay
a bond as set forth by City Council in a schedule of fees.  The bond shall
be signed by the applicant and signed as surety by a surety company
authorized to do business in the state, conditioned for the final delivery of
goods or performance of services in accordance with the terms of an order
obtained prior to delivery or performance, and also conditioned to indemnify
any and all purchases or customers from any and all defects in material or
workmanship that may exist in any goods or services sold by the principal of
that bond, at the time of delivery or performance, and that may be discovered
by the purchaser or customer within 30 days after delivery or performance,
and which bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons or entities
that may make any purchase or give any order to the principal on the bond,
either directly or indirectly.



   (B)   In the event one bond, bond form, or one surety company shall
be the surety for a number of applicants, then the bond, bond form, or
undertaking shall clearly set out that the liability of the surety is for
each applicant making application.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.23  FEE.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, any person or
entity required to obtain a license under this chapter shall pay a fee as set
forth by City Council in a schedule of fees; provided, however, when any
person or entity engages the activity of peddling through one or more agents
or employees, the person shall, in addition to the fee above-mentioned, pay a
license fee as set forth by City Council in a schedule of fees for each agent
or employee so engaged.  The fees herein required shall be used for the
purpose of defraying expenses incident to the issuance of the licenses. 
However, nothing herein contained shall be construed or shall in any way
waive the requirement of each applicant to adhere to any other provisions of
this chapter.



   (B)   A person or entity is exempt from the fee provided for by this
section if the person or entity is engaged in the activity of peddling which
is:



      (1)   Solely interstate commerce; or



      (2)   Solely for the exclusive benefit of a nonprofit
corporation, nonprofit association, or other  nonprofit entity that has a
valid designation by the federal government, provided that evidence of the
nonprofit status of such corporation, association, or entity is submitted
with the person or entity’s license application.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.24  PROCEDURES FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Within five business days after receipt of an application by
the City Secretary, any person may file written objections with the Mayor,
stating in full the grounds for objection to the issuance of a license.



   (B)   The Mayor shall investigate the objections, if any, and shall
also investigate the application of the applicant and shall, within five
business days, either approve or disapprove the application for a license. 
The Mayor shall take into consideration in making this determination the
health, safety, and well-being of the citizens, and such other facts as shall
properly come to his or her attention.



   (C)   In the event the Mayor shall approve or disapprove the
issuance of a license, then, within ten business days after the date of the
decision of the Mayor, any party aggrieved thereby shall have the right to
appeal the same to the City Council, by giving notice of the appeal in
writing to the City Secretary.  The City Secretary shall, upon receipt of
the notice, place the appeal on the agenda for the next regular meeting of
the City Council.



   (D)   The City Council shall hear such testimony and examine such
facts and evidence as to the issuance of the license and shall approve or
disapprove the issuance, taking into consideration the health, safety, and
well-being of the citizen of the city, and such other matters as shall
properly come to their attention.  The decision of the City Council shall be
final as to all matters determined herein and shall not be appealable.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.25  DURATION.



   Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
valid for a period not to exceed three months from the date of its issuance.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.26  DISPLAY.



   Any person or entity having a license and engaging in the activity of
peddling within the city shall display his or her license upon the request of
any person.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.27  ADVERTISING RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity holding a license granted
under this chapter to advertise in any manner whatsoever, other than by
display upon request as provided by § 111.26, that the person is the holder
of the license, or to claim in any manner that such license is an endorsement
by the city.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.28  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate the laws of the United States of
America, the state, or the city, or any of the terms or provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation of any license.  Upon a
written complaint of such violations being filed by any person with the City
Secretary, a hearing shall be held, within 15 days from the date of the
receipt of the compliant, before the Mayor to hear all evidence with
reference to the complaint.  The Mayor shall, within ten days of the date of
the conclusion of the hearing, enter an order, in writing, dismissing the
complaint, suspending the license, or revoking the license.



   (B)   In the event that the Mayor shall either suspend or revoke any
license, the holder of the license may, upon giving written notice within ten
days of the date of the order entered by the Mayor, have the right of appeal
to the City Council.  The City Council shall hear all evidence and shall
either sustain or reverse the decision made by the Mayor.  If no appeal is
taken from the action of the Mayor within ten days, as set out herein, then
the decision of the Mayor shall be final and binding.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates or causes, allows, or permit another to violate
any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500
or, in the case of a violation of a provision of this chapter that governs
fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of
refuse, a fine of not more than $2,000.  Each occurrence of any such
violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.  Each day on
which any such violation of this chapter occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Ord. 2014-09(B), passed 6-24-2014)



CHAPTER 112:  SALES



Section



Garage Sales



   112.01   Defined



   112.02   Duration, frequency



   112.03   Permit suspension or revocation



GARAGE SALES



§ 112.01  DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARAGE SALE.  The offering for sale of 20 or more items of used
personal property from a residence, and shall include "patio sales," "porch
sales" and "driveway sales."



(Prior Code, § 15-1)  (Ord. 84-047, § 1, passed 6-12-1984)



§ 112.02  DURATION, FREQUENCY.



   No garage sale shall be held at any single location for a period of
more than two successive days, nor more than four times on specific
designated weekends in the calendar year. For the purposes of this section,
WEEKEND means Friday and Saturday. The specific designated weekends are the
second weekend in the calendar months of February, May, August and November
of each year.



(Prior Code, § 15-3)  (Ord. 84-047, § 1, passed 6-12-1984; Ord. 2003-13,
passed 5-27-2003; Ord. 2006-40, passed 12-19-2006; Ord. 2010-06, passed
3-23-2010)



§ 112.03  PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate the laws of the United States of
America, the state or of the city, or any of the terms or provisions of this
chapter, shall be subject to suspension or revocation of any license, permit
or authority of any nature whatsoever granted under the terms or provisions
of this chapter. Upon a written complaint of such violations being filed by
any person with the City Secretary, the Mayor shall have the right to
immediately suspend any license, permit or authority granted hereunder,
pending a hearing to be held by the Mayor within 15 days of the date of
receipt of the  complaint, at which hearing the Mayor shall hear all
evidence with reference to the complaint. The Mayor shall, within ten days of
the date of the conclusion of the hearing, enter an order, in writing, either
dismissing the complaint or suspending or revoking the license, permit or
such other authority as granted hereunder.



   (B)   In the event that the Mayor shall either suspend or revoke any
license, permit or other authority of any nature granted hereunder, the
holder of the permit, license or authority may, upon giving written notice
within ten days of the date of the order entered by the Mayor, have the right
of appeal to the City Council. The City Council shall hear all evidence and
shall either sustain or reverse the suspension and/or revocation made by the
Mayor. If no appeal is taken from the action of the Mayor within ten days, as
set out herein, then the decision of the Mayor shall, in all things, be final
and binding.



(Prior Code, § 15-4)  (Ord. 84-047, § 1, passed 6-12-1984)



CHAPTER 113:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



General Provisions



   113.01   Scope



   113.02   Duty of owner



Licenses and Permits



   113.15   Licenses and permits; generally



   113.16   Application



   113.17   Procedure for issuance



   113.18   Record



   113.19   False information



   113.20   Current information



   113.21   Change of ownership



   113.22   Duration



   113.23   Renewal



   113.24   Suspension or revocation



   113.25   Application after revocation



Regulation of Amusement Rides



   113.35   Permit required



   113.36   Posting of permit



Regulation of Coin-Operated Machines



   113.45   Scope of subchapter



   113.46   License required



   113.47   License fee



   113.48   Occupation tax



   113.49   Posting of license and certificate of payment



   113.50   Sealing machine for nonpayment



   113.51   Police protection



   113.52   Hours of operation



   113.53   Prohibiting intoxicating liquids or controlled substances



   113.54   Doors and openings; unobstructed view



   113.55   Amplified sound



   113.56   Lighting



 



   113.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 113.01  SCOPE.



   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply to the operation
of entertainment and/or amusement facilities in the city.



(Prior Code, § 5-1)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



§ 113.02  DUTY OF OWNER.



   Either the owner or a responsible employee formally designated by the
owner under the provisions of this chapter shall be in attendance on the
premises of the business or facility during all hours of operation; and it
shall be the duty of the owner at all times to maintain on file with the City
Secretary a current written designation of the responsible employee or
employees together with the employee affidavit(s) hereinafter required.



(Prior Code, § 5-2)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



LICENSES AND PERMITS



§ 113.15  LICENSES AND PERMITS; GENERALLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to perform any work or
engage in any activity which requires a license or permit under the terms and
provisions of this chapter, as hereinafter set out, without having first
obtained the license or permit from the city. Only a person who complies with
the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive and/or to
retain such a license or permit. Licenses and permits issued under the terms
and provisions of this chapter are not transferrable, nor shall they be
subject to assignment or conveyance; and upon the attempted transfer,
assignment or conveyance, the same shall become immediately void. The
licenses and permits shall be posted at the places of business for which the
same are issued as hereinafter specified.



(Prior Code, § 5-11)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 113.16  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any person or entity desiring to perform any work or engage in
any activity covered under the terms and provisions of this chapter, for
which a license or permit is required as hereinafter set out, shall, prior to
the opening or operation of the business or facility, file written
application with the City Secretary for the license or permit, which
application shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Either:



         (a)   The name, home address and principal business
address of each owner of the business or enterprise seeking the license or
permit hereunder, if the business or enterprise be unincorporated; or



         (b)   If the business or enterprise be incorporated, the
name, home address and principal business address of each and every officer
and director thereof, including a statement of the office or position held by
each.



      (2)   A statement as to the specific type of business or
entertainment and amusement facility for which the license or permit is
sought;



      (3)   The address and location within the city at which the
business or entertainment and amusement facility is to be operated;



      (4)   A statement that the applicant, including each and every
owner and/or each and every officer and director of an owner corporation, if
any, has not been convicted of any felonies of any nature or any other crimes
of moral turpitude in this state or any other state; and if having been so
convicted, a full statement as to the place of conviction, date of conviction
and crime for which applicant was convicted; and



      (5)   Any further information as may be required under the
terms and provisions of this chapter for the type of business or
entertainment and amusement facility specified.



   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by an affidavit in a form
as hereinafter set out, signed by the individual applicant, or in the event
of a partnership by one of the partners thereof, or in the event of a
corporation by an officer of the corporation, verifying and affirming the
information set out in the application as being true and correct and, in the
event of ownership other than by an individual owner, attesting that the
person signing the application and affidavit is a bona fide representative of
the partnership or corporation. The form to be used is as follows:



   STATE OF TEXAS



   COUNTY OF FORT BEND



   BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, a Notary Public, on this day
personally appeared the undersigned Affiant, who after being by me first duly
sworn, on his or her oath deposed and said:



"My name is___________________________________________.



I am____________________________________________ (here, state Affiant is
doing business individually, is a partner in a partnership or is an officer
in a corporation).  I state that I have read the application to which this
Affidavit is attached, and I have personally reviewed the information therein
provided, and I state that such information is true and correct.



   (For a partnership or corporation, add:)



"I further state that I am ___________________________(here, state Affiant is
a partner in a partnership or an officer in a corporation), the applicant
herein, and that I am authorized to execute this Affidavit as a
representative of the applicant."



                        _____________________________



                        Affiant



   SWORN TO AND SUBSCRIBED TO before me this, the day of________,
20________.



                        ______________________________



                        Notary Public in and for



                        Fort Bend County, Texas



   (C)   The application shall be accompanied by the owner's written
designation of the responsible employee or employees who shall be in
attendance on the premises of the business or facility during all hours of
operation. The application shall further be accompanied by an affidavit of
each such designated responsible employee, signed by the employee and
containing the following information:



      (1)   The full name and home address of the employee; and



      (2)   A statement that the employee has not been convicted of
any felonies of any nature or any other crimes of moral turpitude in this
state or any other state; and if having been so convicted, a full statement
as to the place of conviction, date of conviction and crime for which the
employee was convicted.



   (D)   At the time of filing of the application, it shall be the duty
of the applicant to secure and place on file with the City Police Department,
in the form and manner as shall be prescribed by the Chief of Police of the
city, the fingerprints of the owner or owners, if a proprietorship or
partnership, or if a corporation, of the officer(s) and/or director(s) having
direct responsibility for the operation of the business or facility, and of
any responsible employee or employees designated hereunder.



   (E)   The application shall be accompanied by a certificate
verifying insurance coverage as follows:



      (1)   Worker's compensation insurance on each and every one of
applicant's employees, such insurance being in accordance with the provisions
of the Worker's Compensation Act of the state;



      (2)   Public liability insurance to the extent of $300,000 per
occurrence and $500,000 in the aggregate;



      (3)   Property damage insurance to the extent of $300,000 per
occurrence and $500,000 in the aggregate.



   (F)   The application shall further be accompanied by the license or
permit fee hereinafter prescribed for the specific license or permit sought,
which fee shall be returned only upon denial of the license or permit.



(Prior Code, § 5-12)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



§ 113.17  PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Within 20 days after filing of an application herein, any
person having knowledge bearing upon the application, relating to statements
made in the application or the applicant's compliance with the code of
ordinances, may file with the Mayor written objections to the issuance of a
license or permit, stating the grounds for the objections and a full
explanation therefor.



   (B)   The Mayor shall investigate such objections and the
application and shall, within 30 days after filing of the application, either
approve or disapprove the application for a license or permit. In making the
decision, the Mayor shall take into consideration the health, safety and
well-being of the citizens and such other facts as shall properly come to his
or her attention. The City Secretary shall mail written notice of the Mayor's
decision to the applicant.



   (C)   In the event the Mayor shall deny the license or permit
sought, then the applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to the
City Council by filing written notice of the appeal with the City Secretary
within 15 days of the mailing of written notice of the Mayor's decision. Upon
receipt of the notice of appeal, the City Secretary shall place the same on
the agenda of the City Council for the next regular meeting of the City
Council.



   (D)   At that regular meeting, the City Council shall hear all
testimony and examine all facts and evidence as to the issuance of the
license or permit; and as soon as practicable after the completion of the
hearing, the City Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance,
taking into consideration the health, safety and well-being of the citizens
of the city and such other matters as shall properly come before Council. The
decision of the City Council shall be final as to all matters determined
herein and shall not be appealable. The City Secretary shall mail written
notice of the City Council decision to the applicant.



(Prior Code, § 5-13)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



§ 113.18  RECORD.



   The City Secretary shall keep a permanent record of all licenses and
permits issued under this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 5-14)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



§ 113.19  FALSE INFORMATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading
information in connection with his or her application for a license or permit
required by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 5-15)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 113.20  CURRENT INFORMATION.



   In the event of any change, at any time, in the information provided in
the application filed under the terms and provisions of this chapter, or
simultaneously therewith, including but not limited to changes in home
addresses and principal business addresses or changes in the names and
addresses of the officers and directors of a corporation, it shall be the
duty of the licensee or permittee, prior to the effective date of this change
in information, to file with the City Secretary an affidavit providing the
new information and setting out the effective date thereof. It shall further
be the duty of the licensee or permittee to maintain on file with the Police
Department the fingerprints of all individuals whose fingerprints are
required under § 113.16.



(Prior Code, § 5-16)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



§ 113.21  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP.



   In the event of the sale, transfer or assignment of a business or
entertainment and amusement facility holding a license or permit under the
terms and provisions of this chapter, resulting in a change in ownership of a
proprietorship or a change in the identity of partners in a partnership or a
change in ownership of more than one-third of the outstanding shares in a
corporation, then, prior to the effective date of the change in ownership and
operation of the business or facility by the new owner, the new owner shall
make application for a license or permit as herein required and shall not
operate the business or facility until the license or permit shall have been
issued.



(Prior Code, § 5-17)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



§ 113.22  DURATION.



   Unless otherwise specified, each and every license and permit issued
under the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be valid from the date
of issuance until January 1 following the date of issuance. Annual license
and permit fees specified in this chapter shall be prorated based upon the
number of months during which the business or facility will be in operation
prior to the expiration of the license or permit on January 1.



(Prior Code, § 5-18)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



§ 113.23  RENEWAL.



   Any licensee or permittee desiring to renew a license or permit issued
under the terms and provisions of this chapter shall, on or before December 1
immediately preceding the January 1 expiration of the license or permit, file
an application with the City Secretary for renewal of the same. The
application shall be accompanied by the license or permit fee prescribed for
the specific license or permit sought.



(Prior Code, § 5-19)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



§ 113.24  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate the laws of the United States of
America, the state or the city, or any of the terms or provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation of any license, permit
or authority of any nature whatsoever granted under the terms and provisions
of this chapter.



   (B)   Upon receipt of a written complaint of such violations, filed
by any person including any employee of the city, the City Secretary shall
provide the licensee or permittee with a copy of the complaint and written
notice of the date and time of a hearing to be conducted by the Mayor. The
hearing shall be held not less than 15 days from the date of mailing of
written notice thereof to the licensee or permittee.



   (C)   At the date and time specified for hearing, the Mayor shall
hear all evidence relating to the complaint. Within ten days of the
conclusion of the hearing, the Mayor shall enter an order, in writing, either
dismissing the complaint or suspending or revoking the license, permit or
such other authority as granted hereunder. The City Secretary shall mail a
copy of the Mayor's order to the licensee or permittee.



   (D)   In the event that the Mayor shall either suspend or revoke any
license, permit or other authority of any nature granted hereunder, then the
holder of the license, permit or authority shall have the right to appeal the
decision to the City Council by filing written notice of the appeal with the
City Secretary within 15 days of the mailing of written notice of the Mayor's
decision. Upon receipt of notice of appeal, the City Secretary shall place
the same on the agenda of the City Council for the next regular meeting of
the City Council.



   (E)   At that regular meeting, the City Council shall hear all
testimony and examine all facts and evidence; and as soon as practicable
after the completion of the hearing, the City Council shall either sustain or
reverse the suspension or revocation order of the Mayor. The decision of the
City Council shall be final as to all matters determined herein and shall not
be appealable. The City Secretary shall mail written notice of the City
Council's decision to the licensee or permittee.



   (F)   If no appeal is taken from the action of the Mayor within 15
days, as set out herein, then the decision of the Mayor shall, in all things,
be final and binding.



(Prior Code, § 5-20)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



§ 113.25  APPLICATION AFTER REVOCATION.



   Whenever a revocation of a license or permit has become final, the
holder of the revoked license or permit may make written application for a
new license or permit.



(Prior Code, § 5-21)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



REGULATION OF AMUSEMENT RIDES



§ 113.35  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate,
manage or sponsor any Ferris wheel, merry-go-round or other amusement ride
operated for hire or for the purpose of promoting or advertising any trade or
business within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor pursuant
to the procedures specified in §§ 113.15 through 113.25.



   (B)   Upon application therefor, a permit may be issued hereunder if
the use is deemed to be in accordance with the land use ordinances then in
effect in the city. However, the city shall not be required to make any
inspection or determination of the safety of the rides or equipment covered
by the permit; and by issuance of the permit, the city assumes no liability
or responsibility for the safety of the rides. Therefore, no permit fee shall
be charged herein. Any permit issued shall state on the face thereof, in
clear, large and conspicuous type, as follows: "THE CITY OF MEADOWS PLACE,
TEXAS ASSUMES NO RESPONSIBILITY OR OBLIGATION FOR MAINTENANCE, OPERATION OR
PERFORMANCE OF THE RIDES OR EQUIPMENT COVERED BY THIS PERMIT."



(Prior Code, § 5-41)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 113.36  POSTING OF PERMIT.



   It shall be the duty of the permittee to post the required permit for
operation of amusement rides at a conspicuous location upon the site of the
operation of the rides in such a manner that the same can be easily read by
any member of the public coming upon the site. The permit shall remain posted
continuously during the term of the permit.



(Prior Code, § 5-42)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



REGULATION OF COIN-OPERATED MACHINES



§ 113.45  SCOPE OF SUBCHAPTER.



   Except as hereinafter provided in §§ 113.47, 113.48 and 113.52, this
subchapter shall be deemed applicable to any house, place of business, place
of amusement or other place wherein there are maintained four or more
coin-operated amusement machines or skill or pleasure coin-operated machines,
which shall include every coin-operated amusement machine of any kind or
character whatsoever, when the machine dispenses or is used or capable of
being used or operated for amusement or pleasure, or where the machine is
operated for the purpose of dispensing or affording skill or pleasure. The
following classes and types of machines are specifically exempted from
coverage under this subchapter: gas meters, pay telephones, food vending
machines, confection vending machines, beverage vending machines, merchandise
vending machines, cigarette vending machines, stamp vending machines and
service coin-operated machines including coin-operated computers which are
used for purposes other than amusement.



(Prior Code, § 5-51)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



Statutory reference:



   Coin-operated services, see Tex. Occup. Code Ch. 4153



§ 113.46  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, employee, representative
of the owner, lessee or any person who may be in charge and having care and
management of any place of business covered by this subchapter to open,
operate or conduct the same without having first obtained a license therefor
from the city. In addition to the licensing requirements specified in §§
113.15 through 113.25, an applicant for a license hereunder shall provide
proof of payment of the annual occupation tax for each machine as hereinafter
required.



(Prior Code, § 5-52)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 113.47  LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   A business covered by the terms and provisions of this
subchapter shall pay an annual license fee as set forth by City Council in a
schedule of fees.



   (B)   Exception:  Any bona fide charitable organization desiring to
make use of coin-operated amusement machines or skill or pleasure
coin-operated machines, for charitable purposes, on a temporary basis, shall,
upon proof of its status as a charitable organization and of the charitable
purposes contemplated herein by filing of an affidavit with the City
Secretary, in a form which shall be prescribed by the city, be exempt from
the payment of the license fee herein required.



(Prior Code, § 5-53)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984; Am. Ord.
2012-20, passed 6-26-2012)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.48  OCCUPATION TAX.



   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 113.45 as to the scope of
coverage of this subchapter, every owner who owns, controls, possesses,
exhibits, displays or who permits to be exhibited or displayed in the city,
any coin-operated amusement machines or skill or pleasure coin-operated
machines, shall pay on every such machine, except as hereinafter set out, an
annual occupation tax in the maximum amount allowed by state law. The
occupation tax shall be payable to the city:



      (1)   When no license is required, prior to commencement of
the initial use of each machine and, thereafter, prior to December 1 of each
year of continuing use;



      (2)   When a license is required, prior to or simultaneously
with the filing of an application for the issuance of a license hereunder; or



      (3)   In the case of a license renewal, prior to or
simultaneously with the filing of an application for renewal, on or before
December 1 immediately preceding the January 1 expiration of the license.



   (B)   The occupation tax shall be prorated based upon the number of
months during which the machines will be in operation prior to January 1
immediately following payment of the tax.



   (C)   Exceptions.



      (1)   Any bona fide charitable organization desiring to make
use of coin-operated amusement machines or skill or pleasure coin-operated
machines, for charitable purposes, on a temporary basis, shall, upon proof of
its status as a charitable organization and of the charitable purposes
contemplated herein by filing of an affidavit with the City Secretary, in a
form which shall be prescribed by the city, be exempt from the payment of the
occupation tax herein required.



      (2)   Any amusement machine removed from the premises for
temporary repair or maintenance may be temporarily replaced for a period not
exceeding 30 days without payment of an additional occupation tax.



(Prior Code, § 5-54)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984; Ord. 84-073,
§ 1, passed 11-8-1984; Ord. 86-11, § 1, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 113.49  POSTING OF LICENSE AND CERTIFICATE OF PAYMENT.



   (A)   Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this
subchapter shall be posted at a conspicuous location at the place of business
or facility wherein the subject coin-operated machines are in use, in such a
manner that the same can be easily read by any member of the public coming
upon the premises. The license shall remain posted continuously during the
term of the license.



   (B)   For each machine upon which the required occupation tax has
been paid, or which has been herein expressly exempt from the payment of the
occupation tax, the City Secretary shall issue a certificate evidencing
payment or exemption; and the certificate shall be securely attached to the
machine in a manner that will require continued application of steam and
water to remove the same, or the certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the machine so as to be easily seen by the public. The
certificate affixed to the machine shall be valid only for the particular
machine which must be identified by serial number, and it shall be unlawful
to move the machine to a different location or place of business within the
city without prior written notification to the city.



   (C)   Any person who shall fail to post a license as required by
this section or who shall exhibit, display or have in his or her possession
within the city, any coin-operated amusement machine or skill or pleasure
coin-operated machine, without having annexed or attached thereto a valid
certificate issued by the city showing payment of the tax due thereon for the
current year or exemption therefrom, shall be deemed to have violated this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 5-55)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 113.50  SEALING MACHINE FOR NONPAYMENT.



   (A)   The Mayor or his or her designee may seal, in a manner that
will prevent further operation, any coin-operated amusement machine or skill
or pleasure coin-operated machine subject to the payment of the occupation
tax upon which the tax levied by this subchapter has not been paid. Any
person subject to this section shall be required to pay a fee as set forth by
City Council in a schedule of fees for release of any machine sealed under
this section for nonpayment of the tax.



   (B)   Whoever shall break the seal, pursuant to this subchapter, or
exhibit, display or remove any machine on which the seal has been broken,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be in violation of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 5-56)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984; Am. Ord.
2012-20, passed 6-26-2012)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.51  POLICE PROTECTION.



   Whenever more than 25 persons are present in any area or room where
four or more coin-operated amusement machines or skill or pleasure
coin-operated machines are kept, a certified, uniformed peace officer, who
shall be compensated by the owner of the place of business, shall be on duty
on the premises of any place of business, covered under this subchapter. No
more than 25 persons may be admitted to the area or room where four or more
coin-operated amusement machines or skill or pleasure coin-operated machines
are kept unless a certified, uniformed peace officer is on duty.



(Prior Code, § 5-57)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984; Ord. 86-14, §
1, passed 4-22-1986)



§ 113.52  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Any place of business deemed covered by this subchapter shall
be permitted to be open for business from 10:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. Sunday,
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, from 10:00 a.m. Friday until 1:00
a.m. Saturday, and from 10:00 a.m. Saturday until 1:00 a.m. Sunday of each
calendar week.



   (B)   Exception: Any house, place of business, place of amusement or
other place which shall otherwise be covered under this subchapter shall not
be deemed covered or subject to the hours of operation specified in this
section if the place of business, place of amusement or other place shall be
equipped with partitions, doors or other method of closure which would allow
the closing of that portion of the place of business wherein four or more
coin-operated amusement machines or skill or pleasure coin-operated machines
are maintained, and the portion of the place of business is in fact closed
daily in compliance with this section.



(Prior Code, § 5-58)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



§ 113.53  PROHIBITING INTOXICATING LIQUIDS OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



   Neither intoxicating liquids, other than beer and wine, not any type of
controlled substances may be sold, consumed or possessed on the premises of
any place of business covered under this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 5-59)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 113.54  DOORS AND OPENINGS; UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW.



   (A)   Any place of business deemed covered by this subchapter shall
provide, from the normal point or points of entry into the place of business,
an unobstructed view of the entire public area wherein there are located four
or more coin-operated amusement machines or skill or pleasure coin-operated
machines.



   (B)   Doors and openings in partitions within the public area of any
place of business covered under this subchapter shall not be less than 50
square feet. At all times when any place of business covered under this
subchapter shall be open for business as provided herein, all such doors and
openings in partitions within the public area shall be unobstructed by doors,
curtains, gates or other obstructions.



   (C)   All partitions shall be constructed of a noncombustible
material of a one-hour fire rated assembly.



(Prior Code, § 5-60)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



§ 113.55  AMPLIFIED SOUND.



   No sound of any nature may be amplified or otherwise be audible beyond
the property limits of a place of business covered under this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 5-61)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 113.56  LIGHTING.



   Lighting shall be maintained at an intensity of not less than 30
foot-candle power, three feet from the floor, measured at any location in any
room open to the public, which shall be operative during all hours of
operation of any place of business covered under this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 5-62)  (Ord. 84-072, § 1, passed 10-23-1984)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates or cause, allows or permit another to violated
any provision of §§ 113.47 or 113.50 shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $500.  Each occurrence of any such violation of §§ 113.47 or
113.50 shall constitute a separate offense.  Each day on which any such
violation of §§ 113.47 or 113.50 occurs shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2012-20, passed 6-26-2012)



CHAPTER 114:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   Permit required



   114.03   Permit application



   114.04   Fee required, exceptions



   114.05   Renewal required



   114.06   Late hours permit



 



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The words in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed by Tex.
Alcoholic Beverage Code, § 1.04. except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 4-28-2015)



§ 114.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distill, brew,
sell, possess, for the purpose of sale, import, export, transport,
distribute, warehouse, store, solicit or take orders or for the purpose of
sale, bottle, rectify, blend, treat, fortify, mix, or process beer, wine, or
any other alcoholic beverage or engage in any other activity for which a
state permit or license is required under Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code until
the city issues a permit or renews a permit for such allowable activity
within the city.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 4-28-2015)



§ 114.03  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   A person who is required to receive a permit from the city under this
chapter shall complete and submit to the city and alcohol permit application
form as provided by the city. Each alcohol permit application submitted to
the city shall include a copy of a valid state permit or license as required
by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 4-28-2015)



§ 114.04  FEE REQUIRED, EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   If the city approved an alcohol permit application, the city
shall issue a permit to the applicant after the applicant pays to the city a
fee not to exceed one-half the state fee for each permit issued for premises
located within the city as permitted pursuant to the provisions of Tex.
Alcoholic Beverage Code, §§ 11.38 and 61.36. The city hereby levies and is
authorized to collect such fee.



   (B)   The following are exempt from the fee authorized by division
(A) of this section, but are not exempt from completing and submitting an
alcohol permit application to the city and receiving a permit from the city;



      (1)   Agent’s, airline beverage, passenger train beverage,
industrial, carrier’s, private carrier’s, private club registration,
local cartage, storage, and temporary wine and beer retailer’s permits;



      (2)   A wine and beer retailer’s permit issued for a dining,
buffet, or club car;



      (3)   A mixed beverage permit during the three-year period
following the issuance of the permit;



      (4)   Temporary beer license; and



      (5)   Agent’s beer license.



   (C)   After the third-year period following the issuance of a mixed
beverage permit, such permit holder shall complete and submit to the city an
alcohol permit application form as provided by the city. Each alcohol permit
application submitted to the city shall include a copy of a valid state
permit or license as required by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. If the city
approves an alcohol permit application, the city shall issue a permit to the
applicant after the applicant pays to the city a fee not toe exceed one-half
the state fee for each permit issued for premises located within the city as
permitted pursuant to the provisions of Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 4-28-2015)



§ 114.05  RENEWAL REQUIRED.



   (A)   Permits issued under this chapter shall be renewed with the
city no later than the fifteenth day after the date a state permit or license
is renewed. Renewal permits require the completion  and submission to the
city of an alcohol permit application. If the city approves an alcohol permit
application, the city shall issue a renewal permit to the applicant after the
applicant pays to the city a fee not to exceed one-half the state fee for
each permit issued for premises located within the city.



   (B)   If a state permit or license ir expired, revoked, or
terminated, then the city’s permit is automatically expired, revoke, or
terminated.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 4-28-2015)



§ 114.06  LATE HOURS PERMIT.



   The sale of beer and mixed beverages in the city is hereby authorized
between 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. on any day except Sunday and, on Sunday,
between 12:00 midnight and 2:00 a.m. and between noon and midnight, provided
that the seller of the same shall hold a mixed beverage late hours permit
and/or a retail dealer’s on-premises late hours license for the sale of
beer as required by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 4-28-2015)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits another to violate
any provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500
unless such violation is governed by fire safety, zoning, or public health
and sanitation including dumping of refuse in which case the fine amount
shall not be more than $2,000, except where state law provides otherwise, in
which case the range of fine shall be as provided by in such state law. Each
occurrence of any such violation of this section shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 4-28-2015)



CHAPTER 115:  FOOD SERVICE



Section




General Provisions




   115.01   State rules on food service sanitation adopted



   115.02   Amendments to state rules on food service sanitation



   115.03   Responsibility for enforcement




Application and Permit




   115.15   Application and permit for food service establishment or
temporary food service establishment




Inspections




   115.20   Inspections



   115.21   Re-inspections



   115.22   Inspection report



   115.23   Correction of violations



   115.24   Access to premises




Suspension and Revocation of Permit




   115.30   Suspension of permit



   115.31   Revocation



   115.32   Service of notices



   115.33   Hearing




Miscellaneous




   115.40   City barbeque pit



 



   115.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 115.01  STATE RULES ON FOOD SERVICE SANITATION ADOPTED.



   (A) City of Meadows Place, Texas, ("city") adopts the 2015 Edition of
the Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER) as published by the Texas
Department of State Health Services, Division for Regulatory Services,
Environmental and Consumer Safety Section, Policy, Standards, and Quality
Assurance Unit, Public Sanitation and Retail Food Safety Group, a copy of
which has been filed with the city, save and except those section(s) amended
in § 115.02. The words REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall mean the City of Meadows
Place. If any provision of this chapter conflicts with the rules and
regulations contained in the TFER, the more stringent provision shall control.



   (B)   A copy of the 2015 Texas Food Establishment Rules shall be
maintained by the cty. If a provision of said code is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance
or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto or any other ordinance or code or
regulation of the cty, the provision which establishes the higher standard
for the promotion of health and safety shall control.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 11-25-2014; Ord. 2018-29, passed 9-25-2018)



§ 115.02  AMENDMENTS TO STATE RULES ON FOOD SERVICE SANITATION.



    The Texas Food Establishment Rules adopted in § 115.01 are amended as
follows:



   228.2  Definitions. The following definitions apply in the
interpretation and application of this Code:



      (57)   Food Establishment -



         (D)   food establishment does not include an
establishment that offers only prepackaged foods that are not time or
temperature controlled for safety food, a produce stand that only offers
whole, uncut fruits and vegetables, a food processing plant, a cottage food
industry, an area where cottage food is prepared, sold or offered for human
consumption, a Bed and Breakfast Limited facility as defined in these rules,
or a private home that receives catered or home-delivered food.



         (E)   Includes a food processing plant, a child care
center (daycare), or a warehouse holding and/or distributing food, whether
for TCS food or non-TCS food.



      (143)   Temporary Food Establishment. A food establishment
that operates for a period of no more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction
with a single event or celebration. A farmer's market is defined as a
temporary food service establishment, but may operate for one year with a
valid permit.



   228.221  Mobile Food Units.



         (a)   Mobile Food Unit provisions.



            (2)   Restricted Operation. Mobile Food Units will
be permitted only on public or private property in conjunction with a
temporary event. The operator of said Mobile Food Unit must first i) obtain a
Temporary Food Establishment Permit from the regulatory authority, and ii)
obtain written permission from the property owner or lawful tenant for
placement of the Mobile Food Unit on said property, Mobile Food Units that
serve only food that is prepared, packaged in individual servings,
transported and stored under conditions meeting the requirements of this
Chapter, or beverages that are non-time/temperature controlled for safety
(NTCS) food and are dispensed from covered urns or other protected equipment,
need not comply with the requirements of these rules pertaining to the
necessity of water and sewage system nor to those requirements pertaining to
the cleaning and sanitization of equipment and utensils of the required
equipment for cleaning and sanitization exists at its central preparation
facility.



            (4)   Initial permitting requirements. The mobile
unit must be totally operable at time of inspection, including but not
limited to handwash/warewash facilities, refrigeration and wastewater
disposal. The regulatory authority shall require a Mobile Food Unit to
provide the following documentation at least 15 days prior to the event:



               (A)   Certified Food Manager Certification.



               (B)   Central Preparation Facility
Authorization (if required). A signed letter of authorization is required. to
verify facility use. if the Central Preparation Facility is not owned by the
mobile unit operator.



               (C)   Central Preparation Facility
Inspection Report. A copy of the most current health inspection of the
central preparation facility must be maintained on the mobile unit at all
times.



               (D)   Servicing Area Authorization. A signed
letter of authorization may be required by the regulatory authority to verify
service area use. if the servicing area is not owned by the mobile unit
operator.



               (E)   Menu of all food items to be sold.



               (F)   A floor plan of the mobile unit
showing all of the internal and external equipment that has been added to the
vehicle for the purpose of Mobile Vending submitted as a part of the
temporary food permit submittal.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 11-25-2014; Ord. 2018-29, passed 9-25-2018)



§ 115.03  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   The Health Official of the city shall be charged with the
responsibility for enforcement of the rules and regulations of this chapter.
The Health Official may be an employee of the city or an independent
contractor.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 11-25-2014)



APPLICATION AND PERMIT



§ 115.15  APPLICATION AND PERMIT FOR FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT OR
TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   To operate a food service establishment or a temporary food
service establishment, a person or entity shall first complete and submit to
the city a food service establishment or temporary food service establishment
application and pay a permit fee as set forth by City Council in a schedule
of fees.



   (B)   The food service establishment and temporary food service
establishment application shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Either:



         (a)   The name, home address and principal business
address of each owner of the food service establishment or temporary food
service establishment; or



         (b)   If the business or entity is incorporated, the
name and principal business address of at least two responsible officers or
directors, including a statement of the office or position held by each; and



      (2)   A statement as to the specific type of proposed food
service establishment or temporary food service establishment for which the
permit is sought;



      (3)   The address (premises) within the city at which the food
service establishment or the temporary food service establishment is to be
operated;



      (4)   A copy of building construction plans approved by the
city's Building Official, Fire Marshal, and Health Officer for a food service
establishment;



      (5)   The signature of the applicant or applicant's authorized
representative; and



      (6)   Any additional information as may be required by the
Health Official to determine the qualifications of the applicant for the
permit.



   (C)   Food service establishment permits are valid for 12 months,
unless suspended or revoked as provided for in this chapter.



   (D)   A valid food service establishment or temporary food service
establishment permit shall be visibly posted at the premises indicated on the
permit where members of the public are able to view such permit.



   (E)   Food service establishment and temporary food service
establishment permits are not transferrable. Any change in ownership by a
person or entity in whose name the food service establishment permit or the
temporary food service establishment permit is in, as the case may be, shall
require the new owner(s) to submit an application for a new food service
establishment or temporary food service establishment permit with the city
and pay a permit fee as set forth by City Council in a schedule of fees.



   (F)   At least 15 days before but no more than 30 days before the
anniversary date of the issuance of a permit, the food establishment permit
holder shall complete and submit to the city a written application with the
City Secretary for a renewal permit and pay to the city a renewal permit fee
in the amount set by City Council in a schedule of fees. The renewal
application shall contain the same information as the original application as
set forth in division (B) of this section.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 11-25-2014)



INSPECTIONS



§ 115.20  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Once the city receives a completed application and payment of
a permit fee for a food service establishment or a temporary food service
establishment, the Health Official will conduct an inspection of the premise
to determine if the rules and regulations contained in this chapter are met.
If the rules and regulations of this chapter are met and the food service
establishment or temporary food service establishment receives an inspection
score of 70 or above, the Health Official shall issue a permit to operate the
food service establishment or the temporary food service establishment.



   (B)   The Health Official shall inspect a food service establishment
at least three times in a 12- month period with such 12-month period being
the same time period as the food service establishment permit.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 11-25-2014)



§ 115.21  RE-INSPECTIONS.



   If a re-inspection is required as set forth in § 115.23 of this
chapter, then the Health Official shall conduct a re-inspection and the
permit holder shall pay a re-inspection fee as set forth by City Council in a
schedule of fees.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 11-25-2014)



§ 115.22  INSPECTION REPORT.



   After each inspection, the Health Official shall prepare an inspection
report. The inspection report shall summarize the requirements of this
chapter and the rules and regulations adopted and shall set forth a weighted
point value for each requirement.  Inspection remarks shall be written to
reference the section number of the relevant TFER. The rating score shall be
the total of the weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from
100. A copy of the inspection report shall be given to the person in charge
of the food service establishment or the temporary food service establishment
at the conclusion of the inspection, if possible.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 11-25-2014)



§ 115.23  CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The inspection report shall specify a reasonable time period
for the correction of any violations found, and correction of the violations
shall be accomplished within the period specified and in accordance with this
section.



      (1)   Food service establishment permit holders shall correct
all four and five-point violations no later than the tenth day after the
inspection. Temporary food service establishment permit holders shall correct
all four and five-point violations no later than 24 hours after the
inspection. The Health Official shall conduct a re-inspection of the food
service establishment after the tenth day after the inspection to confirm
that all four and five-point violations have been corrected. The Health
Official shall conduct a re-inspection of the temporary food service
establishment after 24 hours after the inspection. If all four and five-point
violations have not been corrected by the re-inspection, then the Health
Official shall suspend the food service establishment permit or the temporary
food service establishment permit, as applicable.



      (2)   Food service establishment permit holders shall correct
all one, two, and three- point violations by the next inspection with such
next inspection being at least 30 days after the previous inspection.
Temporary food service establishment permit holders shall correct all one,
two, and three- point violations within 48 hours after the inspection. The
Health Official shall conduct a re-inspection of the temporary food service
establishment 48 hours after the inspection to confirm that all one, two, and
three-point violations have been corrected. If all one, two, and three-point
violations have not been corrected by the next inspection or re-inspection as
the case may be, the Health Official may suspend the food service
establishment permit or the temporary food service establishment permit.



      (3)   If a food service establishment or temporary food
service establishment receives an inspection rating of less than 70, then the
permit holder shall correct violations no later than 48 hours after the
inspection.  The Health Official shall conduct a re-inspection of the food
service establishment 48 hours after the inspection to confirm that the
violations have been corrected which brings the inspection rating to more
than 70 with no four or five-point violations. If the inspection rating is
less than 70 at the re-inspection, then the Health Official shall suspend the
food service establishment permit or the temporary food service establishment
permit.



   (B)   The Health Official may order the immediate destruction of
food if in his or her determination the food presents an imminent danger to
the public if consumed or if allowed to remain at a premises. The permit
holder, owner, manager, or operator shall immediately comply with the Health
Official's food destruction order.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 11-25-2014)



§ 115.24  ACCESS TO PREMISES.



   If the food service establishment permit holder or temporary food
service establishment permit holder restricts access of the Health Official
to the premises during hours that the food service establishment or the
temporary food service establishment is regularly open for business or if the
food service establishment is not regularly open for business, then between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday or at any time in
the determination of the Health Official that an imminent health hazard
exists, then the Health Official shall suspend the food service establishment
permit.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 11-25-2014)



SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT



§ 115.30  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The Health Official may suspend the food service establishment
or the temporary food service establishment permit if the permit holder does
not comply with the rules and regulations of this chapter or if the operation
of the food service establishment or a temporary food service establishment
constitutes an imminent health hazard. Suspension is effective upon service
of the notice required by this chapter. When a permit is suspended, food
service operations shall cease immediately and the premise shall close. Any
conditions on the following list are conclusive, but not exhaustive, that an
imminent health hazard exists:



      (1)   Inoperable water supply at the premise;



      (2)   Inoperable sanitary sewer at the premise;



      (3)   Inoperable electricity for 60 or more minutes at the
premise;



      (4)   Lack of hot water that is capable of reaching 110
degrees at the premise;



      (5)   Rodent or pest infestation that will likely cause the
spread of disease at the premise;



      (6)   Spoiled food stored at the premise; or



      (7)   Premises which are exposed to the elements if such
exposure will likely cause the spread of disease.



   (B)   When a food service establishment or temporary food service
establishment permit is suspended, the permit holder, the owner or operator,
or any employee shall be notified in writing that the permit is immediately
suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written
request for a hearing is filed with the City Secretary by the permit holder
no later than 5:00 p.m. on the tenth day after the Health Official orders
suspension. If no written request for a hearing is filed as provided herein,
the suspension is sustained.



   (C)   If a suspension is sustained, either at a hearing or by
operation of law, a suspension shall be in effect as long as the reason for
the suspension exists. A permit holder may schedule a re-inspection and pay a
re-inspection fee to the city so that the city may determine whether the
reason for the suspension still exists. After the re-inspection, the Health
Officer shall either lift the suspension or sustain the suspension.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 11-25-2014)



§ 115.31  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The city may, after providing opportunity for a hearing,
revoke a food service establishment or temporary food service establishment
permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the rules and regulations
of this chapter or for interference with the Health Official in the
performance of his or her duties. Prior to revocation, the city shall notify
the permit holder, the owner or operator, or any employee or person in
charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to
revocation, and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the tenth
calendar day following service of notice unless a written request for a
hearing is filed with the City Secretary by the permit holder by 5:00 p.m. at
the end of the tenth calendar day. If a hearing request is timely filed, the
permit holder will be afforded an opportunity for a hearing no later than 20
days after the city receives the hearing request. If no hearing request is
filed or if the request is not timely filed, the revocation of the permit
becomes final.  When a permit is revoked, food service operations shall
cease immediately and the premise shall close.



   (B)   If the city revokes a food service establishment or temporary
food service establishment permit and the permit holder desires to operate a
food service establishment or temporary food service establishment, then the
permit holder shall complete a new application for a food service
establishment or temporary food service establishment and pay a permit fee.
The city shall treat such application as a new, original application and
applicant shall comply with all the rules and regulations of this chapter
before the city will issue a new permit.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 11-25-2014)



§ 115.32  SERVICE OF NOTICES.



   A notice provided for in this chapter is properly served when it is
hand delivered to the food service establishment or the temporary food
service establishment permit holder, the owner or operator, or any employee
or person in charge of the premise. Notice also may be properly served when
it is sent by certified mail with return receipt requested to the last known
address of the permit holder. Notice also may be properly served when it is
posted on the premises.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 11-25-2014)



§ 115.33  HEARING.



   Any hearing under this chapter shall be conducted by the City
Council.  Based upon evidence presented at the hearing, the City Council
shall either sustain the action of the Health Official if it finds by a
preponderance of the evidence that the Health Official's actions were
justified or overturn the action of the Health Official if it finds by a
preponderance of the evidence that the Health Official's actions were not
justified. The judgment of the City Council shall be given to the food
service establishment or the temporary food service establishment permit
holder and filed with the City Secretary. The judgment of the City Council is
final and binding on all parties.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 11-25-2014)



MISCELLANEOUS



§ 115.40  CITY BARBEQUE PIT.



   The city may allow the rental of its barbeque pit to charitable
organizations or not-for-profit or non-profit entities whose mission benefits
the city, sports groups whose membership consists of a majority of city
residents, or youth groups whose membership consists of a majority of city
residents if such entity or groups pays a rental fee as set forth by the City
Council in a schedule of fees.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 11-25-2014)



115.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits another to violate
any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500
unless such violation is governed by fire safety, zoning, or public health and



sanitation including dumping of refuse in which case the fine amount shall
not be more than $2,000. Each occurrence of any such violation of this
chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Each day on which any such
violation of this chapter occurs shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 11-25-2014)



CHAPTER 116:  CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESS



Section



   116.01   Short title and purpose



   116.02   Definitions



   116.03   Violations; penalty



   116.04   Defenses



   116.05   Registration required



   116.06   Registration application



   116.07   Issuance and display of certificate of registration;
presentment upon request



   116.08   Expiration and renewal of certificate of registration



   116.09   Non-transferability



   116.10   Maintenance of records



   116.11   Restriction on extension of consumer credit



   116.12   Requirement of consumer understanding of agreement



   116.13   Referral to consumer credit counseling



§ 116.01  SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   This chapter may be known and cited as "Credit Access
Businesses Regulation."



   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the welfare of the
citizens of the city by monitoring credit access businesses in an effort to
reduce abusive and predatory lending practices. To this end, this chapter
establishes a registration program for credit access businesses, imposes
restrictions on extensions of consumer credit made by credit access
businesses, and imposes recordkeeping requirements on credit access
businesses.



(Ord. 2013-32, passed 12-17-2013)



§ 116.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.  A certificate of registration issued by
the Director under this chapter to the owner or operator of a credit access
business.



   CONSUMER.  An individual who is solicited to purchase or who purchases
the services of a credit access business.



   CONSUMER'S LANGUAGE OF PREFERENCE. The language the consumer
understands best.



   CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESS.  Has the meaning given that term in Tex.
Finance Code § 393.601.



   DEFERRED PRESENTMENT TRANSACTION. Has the meaning given that term in
Tex. Finance Code § 393.601.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the department designated by the City
Council, Mayor, or Mayor's Designee, to enforce and administer this chapter.



   EXTENSION OF CONSUMER CREDIT. The meaning given that term in Tex.
Finance Code § 393.001.



   MOTOR VEHICLE TITLE LOAN.  Has the meaning given that term in Tex.
Finance Code § 393.601.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, organization, partnership,
association, financial institution, or any other legal entity.



   REGISTRANT.  A person issued a certificate of registration for a
credit access business under this chapter and includes all owners and
operators of the credit access business identified in the registration
application filed under this chapter.



   STATE LICENSE.  A license to operate a credit access business issued
by the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under Tex. Finance Code Ch. 393,
Subch. G.



(Ord. 2013-32, passed 12-17-2013)



§ 116.03  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.



   (A)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter, or who
fails to perform an act required of the person by this chapter, commits an
offense. A person commits a separate offense for each and every violation
relating to an extension of consumer credit, and for each day during which a
violation is committed, permitted, or continued.



   (B)   An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not
more than $500.



   (C)   A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of
an offense under this chapter and need not be proved.



   (D)   The penalties provided for in division (B) are in addition to
any other remedies that the city may have under city ordinances and state law.



(Ord. 2013-32, passed 12-17-2013)



§ 116.04  DEFENSES.



   It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that at the time of
the alleged offense the person was not required to be licensed by the state
as a credit access business under Tex. Finance Code Ch. 393, Subch. G.



(Ord. 2013-32, passed 12-17-2013)



§ 116.05  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   A person commits an offense if the person acts, operates, or conducts
businesses as a credit access business without a valid certificate of
registration. A certificate of registration is required for each physically
separate credit access business.



(Ord. 2013-32, passed 12-17-2013)



§ 116.06  REGISTRATION APPLICATION.



   (A)   To obtain a certificate of registration for a credit access
business, a person must submit an application on a form provided for that
purpose to the Director. The application must contain the following:



      (1)   The name, street address, mailing address, facsimile
number, and telephone number of the applicant.



      (2)   The business or trade name, street address, mailing
address, facsimile number, and telephone number of the credit access business.



      (3)   The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, and
telephone numbers of all owners of the credit access business, and the nature
and extent of each person's interest in the credit access business.



      (4)   A copy of a current, valid state license held by the
credit access business pursuant to Tex. Finance Code, Ch. 393, Subch. G.



      (5)   A copy of a current, valid certificate of occupancy
showing that the credit access business is in compliance with the City of
Meadows Place Code of Ordinances.



      (6)   A non-refundable application fee for the amount
established.



   (B)   An applicant or registrant shall notify the Director within 45
days after any material change in the information contained in the
application for a certificate of registration, including, but not limited to,
any change of address and any change in the status of the state license held
by the applicant or registrant.



(Ord. 2013-32, passed 12-17-2013)



§ 116.07  ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; PRESENTMENT
UPON REQUEST.



   (A)   The Director shall issue to the applicant a certificate of
registration upon receiving a completed application under § 116.06.



   (B)   A certificate of registration issued under this section must
be conspicuously displayed to the public in the credit access business. The
certificate of registration must be presented upon request to the Director or
any peace officer for examination.



(Ord. 2013-32, passed 12-17-2013)



§ 116.08  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   A certificate of registration expires on the earliest of:



      (1)   One year after the date of issuance; or



      (2)   The date of revocation, suspension, surrender,
expiration without renewal, or other termination of the registrant's state
license.



   (B)   A certificate of registration may be renewed by making
application in accordance with § 116.06. A registrant shall apply for
renewal at least 30 days before the expiration of the registration.



(Ord. 2013-32, passed 12-17-2013)



§ 116.09  NON-TRANSFERABILITY.



   A certificate of registration for a credit access business is not
transferable.



(Ord. 2013-32, passed 12-17-2013)



§ 116.10  MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.



   (A)   A credit access business shall maintain a complete set of
records of all extensions of consumer credit arranged or obtained by the
credit access business, which mush include the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the consumer;



      (2)   The principal amount of cash actually advanced;



      (3)   The length of the extension of consumer credit,
including the number of installments and renewals;



      (4)   The fees charged by the credit access business to
arrange or obtain an extension of consumer credit; and



      (5)   The documentation used to establish a consumer's income
under § 116.11 of this chapter.



   (B)   A credit access business shall maintain a copy of each written
agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an
extension of a consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any
refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer).



   (C)   A credit access business shall maintain copies of all
quarterly reports filed with the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under
Tex. Finance Code § 393.627.



   (D)   The records required to be maintained by a credit access
business under this section must be retained for at least three years and
made available for inspection by the city upon request during the usual and
customary business hours of the credit access business.



(Ord. 2013-32, passed 12-17-2013)



§ 116.11  RESTRICTION ON EXTENSION OF CONSUMER CREDIT.



   (A)   The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a
credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in
obtaining in the form of a deferred presentment transaction may not exceed
20% of the consumer's gross monthly income.



   (B)   The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a
credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in
obtaining in the form of a motor vehicle title loan may not exceed the lesser
of:



      (1)   Three percent of the consumer's gross annual income; or



      (2)   Seventy percent of the retail value of the motor vehicle.



   (C)   A credit access business shall use a paycheck or other
documentation establishing income to determine a consumer's income.



   (D)   An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business
obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides
for repayment in installments may not be payable in more than four
installments. Proceeds from each installment must be used to repay at least
25% of the principal amount of the extension of consumer credit. An extension
of consumer credit that provides for repayment in installments many not be
refinanced or renewed.



   (E)   An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business
obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides
for a single lump sum repayment may not be refinanced or renewed more than
three times. Proceeds from each refinancing or renewal must be used to repay
at least 25% of the principal amount of the original extension of consumer
credit.



   (F)   For purposes of this section, an extension of consumer credit
that is made to a consumer within seven days after a previous extension of
consumer credit has been paid by the consumer will constitute a refinancing
or renewal.



(Ord. 2013-32, passed 12-17-2013)



§ 116.12  REQUIREMENT OF CONSUMER UNDERSTANDING OF AGREEMENT.



   (A)   Every agreement between the credit access business and a
consumer evidencing an extension of consumer credit (including, but not
limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer), must be
written in the consumer's language of preference. Every credit access
business location must maintain on its premises, to be available for use by
consumers, agreements in the English and Spanish languages.



   (B)   For every consumer who cannot read, every agreement between
the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of consumer
credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to
the consumer) must be read to the consumer in its entirety in the consumer's
language of preference, prior to the consumer's signature.



   (C)   For every consumer who cannot read, every disclosure and
notice required by law must be read to the consumers in its entirety in the
consumer's language of preference, prior to the consumer's signature.



(Ord. 2013-32, passed 12-17-2013)



§ 116.13  REFERRAL TO CONSUMER CREDIT COUNSELING.



   A credit access business shall provide a form, to be prescribed by the
Director, to each consumer seeking assistance in obtaining an extension of
consumer credit which references non-profit agencies that provide financial
education and training programs and agencies with cash assistance programs.
The form will also contain information regarding extensions of consumer
credit, and must include the information required by § 116.10(A)(l)-(5) of
this chapter specific to the loan agreement with the consumer. If the
Director has prescribed a form in the consumer's language of preference, the
form must be provided in the consumer's language of preference.



(Ord. 2013-32, passed 12-17-2013)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES




CHAPTER 130:  MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES



Section



Property Offenses



   130.01   Draining noxious liquids onto public property



   130.02   Interfering with police officer or firefighter



   130.03   Littering/illegal dumping



   130.04   Tampering with property owned or controlled by the city



   130.05   Loitering on private property



   130.06   Trash hauling vehicles



   130.07   Obstructions, vegetation on public street right-of-way



   130.08   Limitations on vehicles weighing in excess of specified
limits; designation of truck routes



   130.09   Refuse prohibited at or near streets and curbs



   130.10   Trimming of trees, shrubs and other vegetative material



Offenses Against Public Peace



   130.20   Interfering with public travel



   130.21   Noise



   130.22   Landing of aircraft restricted



   130.23   Drilling and mining prohibited



   130.24   Solicitation to purchase or acquire a controlled substance,
controlled substance analogue, dangerous drug or volatile chemical



   130.25   Storage of ice boxes, refrigerators and air-tight containers



Explosives and Weapons



   130.35   Fireworks



   130.36   Fire bombs



   130.37   Discharge of firearms within the city



   130.38   BB gun, pellet gun, air rifle, spring gun



   130.39   Operation of model rockets prohibited without permit



Minors



   130.50   Unattended children in motor vehicles



   130.51   Minors in possession of alcoholic beverages and other
controlled substances



   130.52   Possession of firearms by a child



   130.53   Juvenile curfew



Residence of Sexual Offenders



   130.65   Findings and intent



   130.66   Definitions



   130.67   Sexual offenders' residence prohibition; exceptions



   130.68   Property owners prohibited from renting real property to
sexual offenders



   130.69   Sex offender exemption request form



 



   130.99   Penalty



PROPERTY OFFENSES



§ 130.01  DRAINING NOXIOUS LIQUIDS ONTO PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drain, pump or
discharge any impure or noxious water, liquids or liquid material into the
streets, gutters, storm sewer systems and public grounds of the city.



(Prior Code, § 20-1)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  INTERFERING WITH POLICE OFFICER OR FIREFIGHTER.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any
police officer or firefighter of the city in the execution of his or her
duties.



   (B)   To INTERFERE, as that term is used herein, shall mean to
intervene and thereby obstruct passage or free movement, materially delay or
prohibit, by direct or devious means.



(Prior Code, § 20-2)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  LITTERING/ILLEGAL DUMPING.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person disposes or allows
or permits the disposal of litter or other solid waste at a place that is not
an approved solid waste site, including a place on or within 300 feet of a
public highway, on a right-of-way, or on other public or private property.



   (B)   This section shall be equally applicable to include the
unauthorized disposal of litter or other solid waste in a dumpster or similar
receptacle.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to the disposal of or temporary
storage for future disposal of litter or other solid waste by a person on
land owned by that person or by that person's agent, unless otherwise
prohibited under the terms and provisions of this code.



   (D)   The City Council and/or the Mayor are authorized at any time
to institute a program to offer a reward of $50 for reporting a violation of
this section or of Tex. Health and Safety Code § 365.012 which results in
prosecution thereunder. 



(Prior Code, § 20-5)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984;  Ord. 94-10, § 1, passed 3-22-1994)  Penalty,
see § 130.99



§ 130.04  TAMPERING WITH PROPERTY OWNED OR CONTROLLED BY THE CITY.



   (A)   No person shall tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove
or in any way injure any property belonging to or under the control of the
city.



   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to pay a reward, up to $100, to
any person giving information leading to the arrest and conviction of any
person for violating the provisions of division (A) of this section.



(Prior Code, § 20-8)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  LOITERING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city limits of this city
to be in or about private buildings or premises when the person shall not
have been granted either the right or permission to be in or about such place.



(Prior Code, § 20-12)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  TRASH HAULING VEHICLES.



   (A)   All vehicles, when carrying and/or hauling trash, debris,
dirt, waste paper, rubbish, sand, refuse, garbage, manure, slop, rags, ashes
or other loose materials, shall be loaded, equipped and operated upon the
streets and thoroughfares of this city so that at no time can the materials
or substances spill over, fall out of, or be blown from the vehicle or
vehicles during the time they are being driven upon and/or over the streets,
thoroughfares or highways within the city.



   (B)   Each vehicle used or operated for the purpose of hauling
trash, debris, dirt, waste paper, rubbish, sand, refuse, garbage, manure,
slop, rags, ashes or other loose materials, shall, at all times, have the
name or names of its owner or owners, whether personal, corporate or
otherwise, prominently, legibly and permanently displayed on each side of the
vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 20-13)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.07  OBSTRUCTIONS, VEGETATION ON PUBLIC STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   The planting of trees or shrubbery or the creation or
construction of any other obstruction within the right-of-way of any public
street, other than right-of-way of the state, is prohibited without prior
agreement of the city, acting through the Mayor of the city or his or her
designee. In addition, any planting of trees or shrubbery or the creation or
construction of any other obstruction within a right-of-way of the state
within the city limits without prior agreement of the state, acting through
the proper representative of the State Highway Commission, is hereby
prohibited.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to maintain trees, shrubs or
other vegetative material upon a public street right-of-way without keeping
the same property trimmed so as to provide a minimum clearance measured from
the pavement to the lowest limb, branch or part thereof extending over the
sidewalk of not less than ten feet and over the street/pavement of not less
than 16 feet. It shall further be unlawful not to keep the trees, shrubbery
or other brush sufficiently trimmed, pruned or cut so that the same will not
extend into any part of the paved surface, including any part of the curb,
from the nonpaved area of the public street right-of-way.



(Prior Code, § 20-14)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984; Ord. 89-021, § 1, passed 8-22-1989; Ord.
2008-22, passed 8-26-2008)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.08  LIMITATIONS ON VEHICLES WEIGHING IN EXCESS OF SPECIFIED LIMITS;
DESIGNATION OF TRUCK ROUTES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle
weighing in excess of 20,000 pounds GVW (gross vehicle weight) upon the
public streets of the city unless the vehicle shall have a specified final
destination within the city for the purpose of loading or unloading all or
part of a cargo; and in that event, the vehicle shall travel only upon such
streets as are necessary to arrive at the specified destination by the most
direct route possible.



   (B)   However, this restriction shall not apply to any vehicles
traveling upon Airport Boulevard, Kirkwood Street or Dairy Ashford Road,
which streets are hereby designated as "truck routes" within the city. Should
the operator of any vehicle weighing in excess of 20,000 pounds GVW deem it
necessary to travel upon any street within the city other than a designated
truck route, without having a specified final destination as herein required,
the operator shall first obtain a permit from the city and shall be required
to have a police escort during the course of the vehicle's travel through the
city and shall be required to pay, in advance as may be requested, all costs
incurred by the city in this regard.



(Prior Code, § 20-15)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-040,
§ 1, passed 5-14-1984; Ord. 84-075, §§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984)  Penalty,
see § 130.99



§ 130.09  REFUSE PROHIBITED AT OR NEAR STREETS AND CURBS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful and in violation of this code and
punishable to the maximum extent permitted by law for any resident, citizen
or inhabitant of the city to keep, store or to maintain rubbish of any type
upon or adjacent to public streets or public street rights-of-way in the city
except for the purpose of depositing for a normal and customary trash pickup,
which shall only be permissible not more than 18 hours before a scheduled
trash pickup.



   (B)   Tree trimmings, brush cuttings and hedge cuttings properly
bundled for residential trash pickup may be deposited next to a public street
immediately adjacent to a residence.



   (C)   The term RUBBISH as used herein shall mean to include any type
of garbage can, garbage bag, loose or enclosed debris, material, garbage,
leaves, cuttings, vegetative waste or household waste of any kind or
character. The term shall also mean to include liquid or semi-liquid waste
materials which are customarily deposited in trash or garbage cans.



   (D)   Except when placed at curbside for pickup in compliance with
this section, garbage cans or receptacles shall at all times be stored behind
a fence, enclosure or shall otherwise be screened from view. The storage area
shall be no closer to a public street than the outermost wall of any
residential structure.



   (E)   All commercial, industrial waste or other waste products
customarily produced by industry or business shall be prohibited at all times
upon residential properties within the city limits. Any violation thereof
shall also be punished to the maximum extent as permitted by law.



(Prior Code, § 20-21)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984; Ord. 90-05, § 1, passed 3-27-1990)  Penalty,
see § 130.99



§ 130.10  TRIMMING OF TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER VEGETATIVE MATERIAL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to maintain trees, shrubs or
other vegetative material upon nonresidential property without keeping the
same property trimmed so as to provide a minimum clearance measured from the
ground to the lowest limb, branch or any part thereof of not less than ten
feet.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to maintain trees, shrubs or
other vegetative material upon nonresidential property without keeping the
same property trimmed so as to provide a minimum clearance measured from the
ground to the lowest limb, branch or any part thereof of not less than 16
feet over any street, pavement or parking lot or other impervious cover.



   (C)   It shall further be unlawful not to keep the trees, shrubbery
or other brush sufficiently trimmed, pruned or cut so that the same will not
extend into any part of the paved surface, including any part of the curb.



(Ord. 2009-16, passed 7-28-2009)  Penalty, see § 130.99



OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE



§ 130.20  INTERFERING WITH PUBLIC TRAVEL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any public street,
public sidewalk or other public place in the city, so as to interfere with
public travel, after being requested not to do so by any peace officer of the
city.



(Prior Code, § 20-3)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.21  NOISE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to make, continue
or cause to be made, permitted or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual
noise or any noises reasonably calculated to annoy, disturb, injure or
endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the
limits of the city.



(Prior Code, § 20-4)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.22  LANDING OF AIRCRAFT RESTRICTED.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any aircraft
to land or to take off from any place in the city, for any purpose
whatsoever, unless the same is a designated and authorized airport or
heliport.



      (2)   Exception: This section shall not apply to the landing
and use of aircraft in the city when the same is then being used by an
official law enforcement agency of the state or local government or when the
same is then being used in the performance of rescue and/or life-saving
operations.



   (B)   The Mayor or his or her designee is hereby authorized and
directed to grant written permission for an aircraft to land or take off in
the city at some place other than an airport or heliport when it shall seem
to him or her to be necessary, taking into consideration the health, safety
and well-being of the citizens of the city.



   (C)   Any person landing or taking off in an aircraft of any kind or
nature in the city from a place other than a designated airport of heliport,
without the express written permission of the Mayor or his or her designee,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in §
130.99.



   (D)   The Mayor or his or her designee, acting with the Chief of
Police, is hereby authorized and directed to impound and to take possession
of any aircraft which may be found in the city, which the Mayor or his or her
designee has reason to believe and does believe will be operated or stored in
violation of the terms and provisions of this section, and is hereby
authorized to keep the aircraft in the city's possession and under its
control until such time as the same can be safely removed from the city
without endangering the health, safety and well-being of the citizens of the
city. The Mayor or his or her designee is hereby instructed and directed to
require removal of the aircraft by land vehicle or other ground
transportation if, in the exercise of his or her sound discretion, the Mayor
or his or her designee shall believe such removal shall be the only means of
safe removal.



(Prior Code, § 20-9)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.23  DRILLING AND MINING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or other
entity to engage in drilling for oil and/or gas or to engage in mining or any
mineral deposit upon any land or property located within the incorporated
limits of the city. 



(Prior Code, § 20-19)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984; Ord. 87-007, § 1, passed 3-3-1987)  Penalty,
see § 130.99



§ 130.24  SOLICITATION TO PURCHASE OR ACQUIRE A CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE,
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOGUE, DANGEROUS DRUG OR VOLATILE CHEMICAL.



   (A)   As used in this section, the following words and terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this division (A), unless the context
of their usage clearly indicates another meaning.



      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.  The meaning ascribed to it by Tex. Health
& Safety Code Ch. 481, or any amendments thereto.



      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOGUE.  The meaning ascribed to it by
Tex. Health & Safety Code Ch. 481, or any amendment thereto.



      DANGEROUS DRUG.  The meaning ascribed to it in Tex. Health &
Safety Code Ch. 481, or any amendment thereto.



      PROHIBITED SUBSTANCE.  A controlled substance, controlled
substance analogue, dangerous drug, volatile chemical, or any combination
thereof.



      VOLATILE CHEMICAL.  Any of the chemicals or an isomer of any of
the chemicals listed in Tex. Health & Safety Code Ch. 481, or any amendment
thereto.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if, with intent to acquire a
prohibited substance, he or she requests, commands or attempts to induce
another to sell, donate or otherwise transfer or deliver a prohibited
substance to the person.



   (C)   A person may not be convicted under this section on the
uncorroborated testimony of the person allegedly solicited and unless the
solicitation is made under circumstances strongly corroborative of both the
solicitation itself and the actor's intent that the other person act on the
solicitation.



   (D)   It is no defense to prosecution under this section that:



      (1)   No monetary or other consideration was tendered to the
person solicited; or



      (2)   The person solicited was unable or unwilling to transfer
or deliver a prohibited substance.



   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this
section that:



      (1)   The solicitation is made in furtherance of a transaction
which would not constitute a violation of any applicable law; or



      (2)   The solicitation is made by a peace officer or federal
law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his or her duties or by a
law enforcement agent acting in the lawful discharge of an official duty.



(Prior Code, § 20-20)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984; Ord. 89-028, § 1, passed 9-26-1989)  Penalty,
see § 130.99



§ 130.25  STORAGE OF ICE BOXES, REFRIGERATORS AND AIR-TIGHT CONTAINERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to
remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any
warehouse or storage room or any unoccupied or abandoned dwelling, building
or other structure, under such circumstances as to be accessible to children,
any ice box, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight container which
has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an opening of 50
square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a latch or
other fastening device capable of securing the door or lid shut.



   (B)   The Building Official or his or her designee shall enforce the
provisions of this section. 



(Prior Code, § 20-18)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984; Ord. 84-079, § 1, passed 12-11-1984)  Penalty,
see § 130.99



EXPLOSIVES AND WEAPONS



§ 130.35  FIREWORKS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      FIREWORKS. The term shall include FIREWORKS, firecrackers,
rockets, sparklers, torpedoes, Roman candles, fire balloons and all other
substances or any combination whatsoever designed or intended to produce a
noise or effects of fireworks or pyrotechnics, whether or not herein
specifically designated and defined.



      SELL. This term shall include sale, offering for sale and
exposing for sale.



      SET OFF. This term shall include setting off, firing, igniting,
discharging or in any other manner setting into action, and shall also
include the causing of any of such things to happen.



   (B)   Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful to manufacture, store,
sell, possess or set off fireworks within the city, except as hereinafter
provided.



   (C)   Exceptions.



      (1)   This section shall not apply to signal flares used under
certain circumstances when deemed necessary to constitute a warning of danger
or emergency condition.



      (2)   This section shall not apply to public displays of
fireworks by any adult person, firm, partnership, corporation or association,
provided that the individual or entity desiring to make such public display
of fireworks shall first make written application for and be granted a permit
by the Mayor, at least 48 hours in advance of the date of the proposed
display.



      (3)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit, it shall be
the duty of the Mayor to make an investigation, through review of the
application and consultation with and receipt of advice and counsel from such
fire officials as the Mayor may, from time to time, deem necessary, in order
to determine whether or not such a display, as proposed by the applicant,
shall be of such a character that it may be hazardous to property or
dangerous to any person. In the event that the application is approved, the
Mayor shall issue a permit for the public display; the permit shall be for a
period of time designated on the permit, not to exceed 14 days, and the
permit shall not be transferable.  In the event that the application is
denied by the Mayor, the applicant shall be notified of the denial in writing.



      (4)   The following terms and conditions are specified and
shall be binding upon the issuance of a permit to display fireworks:



         (a)   The display shall be limited to an aerial display;



         (b)   The range of aerial display shall not exceed a
200-foot radius;



         (c)   Fireworks shall be discharged vertically from
steel tubes;



         (d)   The material to be used for the public display
shall not be stored within the city limits but shall be brought in on the day
of the public display and then shall be taken immediately to the place of
display for further handling and storage;



         (e)   No public display of fireworks shall be of such a
character and so located, discharged or fired as to be hazardous or dangerous
to persons or property, this determination to be within the sound discretion
of the Mayor;



         (f)   The person or persons handling the display of
fireworks shall be competent adult persons, experienced pyrotechnic
operators, approved by the Mayor, with the advice and counsel of such fire
officials as the Mayor may, from time to time, consult; and no other persons
other than those approved by the Mayor shall handle the fireworks of the
public display, the names of the experienced pyrotechnic operators being
designated on the permit issued by the Mayor;



         (g)   For each public display, the Mayor may require, as
a condition for the issuance of the permit, that the applicant retain the
services of, and pay all costs in connection with the services of,
fire-fighting personnel to be present during the time of the display, such
fire-fighting personnel to be approved by the Mayor;



         (h)   The applicant for the display permit shall, at the
time of application, furnish proof that he or she carries compensation
insurance for his or her employees as provided by the laws of the state, and
he or she shall file with the City Secretary a certificate of insurance
evidencing the carrying of public liability insurance in an amount not less
than $100,000, issued by an insurance carrier authorized to transact business
in the state, for the benefit of the person named therein as assured, as
evidence of ability to respond in damages in at least the amount of $100,000,
which policies to be approved by the Mayor; or in lieu of insurance, the
applicant may file with the City Secretary a bond in the amount of $100,000,
issued by an authorized surety company, to be approved by the Mayor,
conditioned upon the applicant's payment of all damages to persons or
property which shall or may result from or be caused by the public display of
fireworks or any negligence on the part of the applicant or his, her or its
agents, servants, employees or subcontractors in the presentation of the
public display;



         (i)   No public fireworks display shall be made for a
period of time longer than one hour per performance; and



         (j)   Applicant shall pay a fireworks display permit fee
as set forth by City Council in a schedule of fees.  This  fee is exclusive
of any expense to applicant which may arise from the requirement that
fire-fighting personnel be present at the public display.



   (D)   Parental responsibility for fireworks violations. No relation
in the ascending line of a minor, or a guardian of a minor, shall furnish
money to a minor for the purchase of fireworks, or encourage, act in
conjunction with, or in any manner instigate or aid a minor in having,
keeping, storing, selling, offering for sale, giving away, using,
transporting or manufacturing fireworks within the corporate limits of the
city. This shall be an offense, regardless of whether the minor has been
found guilty of the offense. The commission of any of the aforesaid acts by a
minor on the property under the control or owned by the relation or guardian,
or on property within their sight or hearing, shall be prima facie evidence
that the relation or guardian was instigating or aiding the minor.



(Prior Code, § 20-6)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984; Am. Ord. 2012-21, passed 6-26-2012) Penalty, see
§ 130.99



§ 130.36  FIRE BOMBS.



   (A)   No person shall make, carry, possess or use any type of
"Molotov Cocktail," gasoline or petroleum base fire bomb, or other incendiary
missile within the city.



   (B)   The words MOLOTOV COCKTAIL as used herein shall mean a
gasoline or kerosene filled bottle or container with a fuse or wick inserted
in the neck.



(Prior Code, § 20-7)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.37  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS WITHIN THE CITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a pistol, gun, rifle,
shotgun or other type of firearm of any nature whatsoever, upon public or
private property within the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 20-10)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.38  BB GUN, PELLET GUN, AIR RIFLE, SPRING GUN.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, by firing or
activating, a BB gun, pellet gun, air rifle or spring gun upon public or
private property within the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 20-11)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.39  OPERATION OF MODEL ROCKETS PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMIT.



   (A)   Definition. The term ROCKET or MODEL ROCKET as used herein
shall be deemed to include and to mean any device designed to be ignited,
propelled or otherwise catapulted into the air space above property caused by
the electrical, mechanical or friction ignition of propelling devices,
including but not limited to gunpowder, chemical compounds or other mixtures
which produce an explosive effect of sufficient thrust to launch a device to
an altitude or level in excess of five feet above ground level.



   (B)   Prohibition. No person shall operate a device within the city
limits of the City of Meadows Place which shall result in the propelling of
rockets, model rockets, or other such devices either vertically or
horizontally from ground level without having first obtained a permit as
hereinafter described.



   (C)   Permit required. Any person wishing to operate a model rocket
otherwise prohibited by the terms and provisions of this section shall apply
for a permit which may be issued by the City Secretary only upon compliance
with the conditions, restrictions and limitations as herein set out.



      (1)   An application for a permit shall specify the date and
time of the proposed launch, and the permit for the launch shall be valid for
a period not to exceed two hours after the time specified or requested for
the permit to be issued. An application for a permit may specify a time of
launch during any daylight period which shall begin one hour after sunrise
and end one hour before sunset. The time of sunrise and sunset shall be that
promulgated by the National Weather Service in the event of dispute or
conflict as to the intent.



      (2)   The applicant for a permit shall provide proof of
liability and property damage insurance in an amount not to be less than
$500,000 in the aggregate or $100,000 per occurrence. This policy of
insurance shall specifically provide an endorsement covering rocket or model
rocket launches and/or be accompanied by a letter from the issuing insurance
carriers stating that no exclusion or other limitation exists in the policy
which limits, restricts or withdraws coverage for claims incurred through
rocket or model launches and damages ensuing therefrom.



      (3)   The applicant must have obtained from the Fire
Department and EMS Department of the city clearance for the launch.
Notification of the launch and request for clearance shall be made at least
48 hours prior to the launch. A letter or other writing shall be obtained
from the Fire Department and EMS personnel in charge and presented at the
time that a permit is requested evidencing compliance with this requirement.



      (4)   No permit for a model rocket launch shall be issued
unless the place of launch shall be specified by a drawing or map attached to
the application, identifying the place or location of the launch. No
projected point of launch shall be closer than 500 feet from high grass,
homes or other structures.



      (5)   The applicant for a permit shall specify the landing
area, angle of launch, size of rocket and engine and shall identify the
persons knowledgeable of the model rocketry safety codes in charge of the
launch.



      (6)   The applicant shall state the name, address and driver's
license number of the person who intends to be in control of the projected
launch.



      (7)   The applicant shall provide such other information as
from time to time shall be required by the Fire Marshal, Chief of Police, or
City Secretary designed to insure maintenance of the health, safety and
well-being of the residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city.



(Prior Code, § 20-22)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984; Ord. 90-14, § 1, passed 7-24-1990; Ord. 91-42,
§ 1, passed 12-17-1991)  Penalty, see § 130.99



MINORS



§ 130.50  UNATTENDED CHILDREN IN MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he or she, acting with
knowledge, intent or criminal negligence, leaves a child in a motor vehicle
for longer than five minutes if the child is:



      (1)   Younger than seven years of age; and



      (2)   Not attended by an individual who is 14 years of age or
older.



   (B)   The terms KNOWLEDGE, INTENT and CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE, as used
in this section, shall have the same meanings as set out in the definitions
of these terms in the Texas Penal Code. 



(Prior Code, § 20-17)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-043,
§ 1, passed 6-4-1984; Ord. 84-075, §§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984)



§ 130.51  MINORS IN POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND OTHER CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. The beverage as defined in Tex. Alcoholic
Beverage Code § 1.04, as amended.



      DRUG. The substance as defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code §
481.002, as amended.



      MINOR.  Any person under the age of 21 years.



      OPEN PARTY. A social gathering at a residence or premises at
which non-family or non-related persons are present.



      RESIDENCE or PREMISES. A motel room, hotel room, home, apartment,
condominium or other dwelling unit, including any part of a dwelling unit or
hall, meeting room or other place of assembly, whether occupied on a
temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically
for social functions or whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without
compensation.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having
possession or control of a residence or premises to allow an open party to
take place at the residence or premises if alcoholic beverages or drugs
(controlled substances) are possessed, consumed or used by any minor thereat
if that person knows of the existence of such possession, consumption or use.
It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution hereunder that the person
took reasonable measures to prevent or eliminate any prohibited possession,
consumption or use of an alcoholic beverage or drug as set forth herein.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:



      (1)   The possession, consumption or use of an alcoholic
beverage by a minor while in the possession of the minor's parent, legal
guardian, grandparent, or aunt or uncle if the parent, legal guardian,
grandparent, or aunt or uncle is not a minor; or



      (2)   The possession, consumption or use of a drug by a minor
pursuant to a lawful prescription issued by a medical doctor. 



(Prior Code, § 20-23)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984; Ord. 92-08, § 1, passed 1-28-1992)  Penalty,
see § 130.99



§ 130.52  POSSESSION OF FIREARMS BY A CHILD.



   (A)   The following words and phrases shall be deemed to have the
following meanings as hereinafter set out:



      ADULT.  Any person who is 18 years of age or older.



      AIR RIFLE.  Air rifles and any other type of gun which uses
compressed air, gas or a compressed spring to project a projectile of any
kind, including a BB gun.



      CHILD.  Any person who is younger than 18 years of age.



      CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE.  Acting, or failing to act, with respect to
circumstances surrounding one's conduct or the result of one's conduct when
one ought to be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the
circumstances exist or the result will occur. The risk must be of such a
nature and degree that the failure to perceive it constitutes a gross
deviation from the standard of care that an ordinary person would exercise
under all the circumstances as viewed from the actor's standpoint.



      FIREARM. Any device designed, made or adapted to expel a
projectile through a barrel by using the energy generated by an explosive or
burning substance or any device readily convertible to that use.



      INTENTIONALLY.  Acting with intent with respect to the nature of
one's conduct or to a result of one's conduct when it is one's conscious
objective or desire to engage in the conduct or cause the result.



      KNOWINGLY.  Acting with knowledge with respect to the nature of
one's conduct or to circumstances surrounding one's conduct when one is aware
of the nature of one's conduct or that the circumstances exist. One acts
KNOWINGLY with respect to a result of one's conduct when one is aware that
his or her conduct is reasonably certain to cause the result.



      RANGE. Any public or private facility at which firearms training
or practice, or both, is conducted under controlled circumstances intended to
encourage the safe handling of firearms and at which procedures or facilities
are in place that are intended to prevent the projectiles discharged from the
firearms from causing any damage to persons or property.



      RECKLESSLY.  Acting with respect to circumstances surrounding
one's conduct or the result of one's conduct when one is aware of but
consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the
circumstances exist or that the result will occur. The risk must be of such a
nature and degree that its disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the
standard of care that an ordinary person would exercise under all the
circumstances as viewed from the actor's standpoint.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any adult intentionally, knowingly,
recklessly or with criminal negligence to facilitate, suffer or permit the
physical possession of a firearm by a child by allowing the child to obtain
unsupervised access to the firearm.



   (C)   It is a violation of this code for a person intentionally,
knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence to discharge a firearm
within the city or within 1,000 feet of the city limits.



   (D)    It is a defense to prosecution under this section of the code
if:



      (1)   The firearm was possessed or discharged upon a range and
under the supervision of an adult; or



      (2)   The discharge or possession of the firearm was justified
as provided in Tex. Penal Code Chapter 9.



   (E)   It is additionally a defense to prosecution if reasonable
precautions under the circumstances had been taken to ensure that a child
would not have the ability to obtain access to the firearm without
supervision. Such precautions could include but not be limited to the storage
of the firearm in a place where, at the time the access was obtained, an
unsupervised child would not reasonably have been expected to have been able
to gain access.



(Prior Code, § 20-24)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984; Ord. 92-37, passed 10-27-1992)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 130.53  JUVENILE CURFEW.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the express purpose of this section to:



      (1)   Deter criminal conduct involving juveniles;



      (2)   Reduce the number of juvenile crime victims;



      (3)   Reduce injury from accidents involving juveniles;



      (4)   Reduce the additional time police officers are required
to be in the field due to juvenile crime;



      (5)   Provide additional and more effective means and options
for dealing with gang-related violence and crime;



      (6)   Reduce juvenile peer pressure to stay out late;



      (7)   Reduce juvenile peer pressure to participate in violent
or criminal activities; and



      (8)   Assist parents in the control of their children.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CURFEW HOURS.



         (a)   From 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and



         (b)   From 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or
Sunday.



      EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action to prevent a serious illness,
serious bodily injury, loss of life, or for the preservation of valuable
property. This term shall include but not be limited to a fire, natural
disaster, automobile accident, or any similar situation requiring immediate
action.



      ESTABLISHMENT.  Any privately-owned place of business to which
the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or
entertainment.



      GUARDIAN.



         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian
of the person of a minor; or



         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has
been placed by a court.



      MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age.



      OPERATOR.  Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term
includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.



      PARENT.  A person who is:



         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent
of another person; or



         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a
parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and shall include but not be limited to
streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment
houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.



      REMAIN. To:



         (a)   Linger or stay; or



         (b)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by
a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the
premises.



      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY.  Bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organs.



   (C)   Offenses.



      (1)   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during
curfew hours.



      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he
or she knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to
remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the
city during curfew hours.



      (3)   The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment
commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours.



   (D)   Defenses.



      (1)   It shall be a defense to prosecution under division (C)
above, that the minor was:



         (a)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;



         (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's
parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;



         (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



         (d)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



         (e)   Involved in an emergency;



         (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the Police Department about the minor's presence;



         (g)   Attending an official school, religious or
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a governmental,
an educational or religious institution, civic organization, or other similar
entity, that takes responsibility for the minor; or going to or returning
home from, without any detour or stop, any such official government, school,
religious or recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a
governmental, educational or religious institution civic organization, or
other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;



         (h)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or



         (i)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of
minority removed in accordance with Tex. Family Code Chapter 31.



      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (C)(3)
above that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.



   (E)   Enforcement.  Before taking any enforcement action under this
section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason
for being in the public place or establishment. The officer shall not issue a
citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably
believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and
other circumstances, no defense in division (D) is present.



   (F)   Penalties.  When required by Tex. Family Code § 51.08, as
amended, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor
who violates division (C) of this section and shall refer the minor to
Juvenile Court.



(Ord. 2006-06, passed 3-28-2006; Ord. 2009-02, passed 2-24-2009; Ord.
2012-06, passed 3-27-2012; Ord. 2012-10, passed 5-22-2012)  Penalty, see §
130.99



RESIDENCE OF SEXUAL OFFENDERS



§ 130.65  FINDINGS AND INTENT.



   (A)   Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders that use physical
violence and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who
present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are
extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses and
most sexual offenders commit many offences, have many more victims than are
ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes.



   (B)   This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to
society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant.



   (C)   It is the intent of this subchapter to serve the city’s
compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where
children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual
offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or
permanent residences.



(Ord. 2006-21, passed 7-25-2006; Ord. 2017-23, passed 8-22-2017)



§ 130.66  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHILD SAFETY ZONE. Premises where children commonly gather.



   PERMANENT RESIDENCE.  A place where the person abides, lodges or
resides for 14 or more consecutive days.



   TEMPORARY RESIDENCE.  A place where the person abides, lodges or
resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar
year and which is not the person’s permanent address, or a place where the
person routinely abides, resides or lodges for a period of four or more
consecutive or nonconnective days in any month and which is not the
person’s permanent residence.



(Ord. 2006-21, passed 7-25-2006; Ord. 2015-23, passed 8-22-2017)



§ 130.67  SEXUAL OFFENDERS' RESIDENCE PROHIBITION; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a
violation of Tex. Penal Code Articles 43.05, 43.25, 43.26, 20.04, 21.02,
21.08, 21.11, 22.011, 22.021, 25.02, 30.02, 20A.02, regardless of whether the
adjudication was deferred, in which the victim of the offence was less than
16 years of age, to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence
within 1,000 feet of a child safety zone, or any premises where children
commonly gather, including but not limited to, a school, day care facility,
playground, public or private youth center, public swimming pool, or video
arcade facility, as those terms are defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code
Art. 481.134.



   (B)   For the purpose of determining the minimum distance
separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line
from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the
nearest property line of a child safety zone or the premises where children
commonly gather, as described herein.



   (C)   Exceptions. A person residing within 1,000 feet of a child
safety zone, or those places where children commonly gather, as specified
herein does not commit a violation of this subchapter if any of the following
apply:



      (1)   The person established the permanent or temporary
residence and has complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the
State of Texas, prior to the date of the adoption of this subchapter.



      (2)   The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense
and was not convicted as an adult.



      (3)   The person is a minor.



      (4)   The premises known as a child safety zone or where
children commonly gather, as specified herein, within 1,000 feet of the
person's permanent or temporary residence was opened after the person
established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex
offender registration laws of the State of Texas.



(Ord. 2006-21, passed 7-25-2006; Ord. 2017-23, passed 8-22-2017) Penalty, see
§ 130.99



§ 130.68  PROPERTY OWNERS PROHIBITED FROM RENTING REAL PROPERTY TO SEXUAL
OFFENDERS.



   It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof,
manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it
will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person
prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence
pursuant to the terms of this subchapter, if such place, structure or part
thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, is located within
1,000 feet of a child safety zone, or any premises where children commonly
gather, including but not limited to, a school, day care facility,
playground, public or private youth center, public swimming pool, or video
arcade facility, as those terms are defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code
Art. 481.134.



(Ord. 2006-21, passed 7-25-2006; Ord. 2017-23, passed 8-22-2017)  Penalty,
see § 130.99



§ 130.69  SEX OFFENDER EXEMPTION REQUEST FORM.



   (A)   The City of Meadows Place Registered Sex Offender Exemption
Request Form, seeking an exemption from the sex offender residence
requirements, §§ 130.65 through 130.68, as amended, is attached to
Ordinance 2017-30 as Exhibit A and is hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference herein and expressly made a part hereof, as if copied herein
verbatim.



   (B)   Upon completion of the City of Meadows Place Registered Sex
Offender Exemption Request Form ("Request Form") and submission to the City
Secretary, the Request Form shall be considered by City Council. The City
Secretary will obtain confirmation of the criminal background submitted from
the applicable law enforcement agency prior to consideration by City Council.
City Council may authorize and approve the request if the Request Form
contains any of the statutory exceptions set forth in §§ 130.65 through
130.68 as amended, or the exceptions set forth in Tex. Local Government Code
§ 341.906; or Tex. Code of Crim. Proc. Article 62.301, Exemption From
Registration for Certain Young Adult Sex Offenders; or Article 62.351,
Exemptions for Certain Juveniles. In granting an exemption based on the
statutory exceptions or some other basis, the City Council shall consider the
probable effect the exemption will have upon the public health, safety and
welfare of the community.



   (C)   City Council may authorize an exemption after assessing the
following:



      (1)   (a)   The person lives with his/her family in the
only home available and affordable to the family;



         (b)   The number of victims;



         (c)   The diversity of victims;



         (d)   The person's relationship to the victims;



         (e)   A history of juvenile sexual offenses;



         (f)   Employment status.



      (2)   The findings of City Council, together with the specific
facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated in the
official minutes of the Council meeting at which such exemption is granted.



(Ord. 2017-30, passed 10-24-2017)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person or persons who shall violate the terms or
provisions of § 130.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as
provided in § 10.99 of this code; provided, however, any fine to be imposed
shall not be less than $25.



(Prior Code, § 20-1)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984)



   (C)   Any person who shall fail to comply with the requirements of
§ 130.06 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided
in § 10.99 of this code; provided, however, any fine to be imposed shall not
be less than $25.



(Prior Code, § 20-13)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984)



   (D)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §
130.21, or who shall fail to comply therewith, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in § 10.99 of this code;
provided, however, any fine to be imposed shall not be less than $25.



(Prior Code, § 20-4)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984)



   (E)   Any person violating the provisions of § 130.22 shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in § 10.99;
provided, however, any fine to be imposed shall not be less than $25 for each
time the person shall land or take off in violation of this section.



(Prior Code, § 20-9)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984)



   (F)   Violation of § 130.24 shall constitute a misdemeanor
punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$2,000. However, any conduct proscribed hereunder which also constitutes an
offense under state law shall not be prosecuted under this section, but shall
be prosecuted pursuant to and punishable as provided by the applicable state
law. An offense under this section is not a lesser included offense under
Tex. Health & Safety Code, Ch. 481.



(Prior Code, § 20-20)  (Ord. 84-029, § 1, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 84-075,
§§ 1, 2, passed 11-8-1984; Ord. 89-028, § 1, passed 9-26-1989)



   (G)   A person who shall violate any provision of § 130.53 shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed $500. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Ord. 2006-06, passed 3-28-2006; Ord. 2009-02, passed 2-24-2009) 



   (H)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates §§
130.65 through 130.68 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.



      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates § 130.67
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500.



      (3)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates § 130.68
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500.



(Ord. 2017-23, passed 8-22-2017)



   (I)   Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits another
to violated any provision of § 130.35 shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $500.  Each occurrence of any violation of § 130.35 shall
constitute a separate offense.  Each day on which any such violation of §
130.35 occurs shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2006-21, passed 7-25-2006; Am. Ord. 2012-21, passed 6-26-2012)



   (J)   Any person who violates or causes, allows, or permits another
to violate any provision of § 130.69 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$500.



(Ord. 2017-30, passed 10-24-2017)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   BUILDINGS





         151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION





         152.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS





         153.   PLANNING AND ZONING




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDINGS



Section



General Provisions



   150.01   Office of the Building Official



   150.02   Adoption of Codes



   150.03   Reserved



   150.04   Deed restriction certification



   150.05   Insurance requirements



   150.06   Reserved



   150.07   Registration of contractors



   150.08   Marking of vehicles



   150.09   Certificate of occupancy required; fee



   150.10   Construction requirements for private parking areas in
residential and commercial zoned districts



   150.11   Special swimming pool requirements



   150.12   Connection to sewer system



   150.13   Mold remediation work permit required; fee



   150.14   Residential rental property licensing and inspection



Building in Residential Districts



   150.25   Residential roofing requirements



Substandard Buildings



   150.35   Building Official



   150.36   Minimum standards for continued use and occupancy



   150.37   Procedure for determination of substandard building



   150.38   Procedure for abatement of substandard building



   150.39   Authority to secure substandard building



   150.40   Assessment of civil penalty



   150.41   Procedure for administrative adjudication hearing



   150.42   Liability of city



Landscape Development Requirements for Commercial Development



   150.55   Applicability



   150.56   Definitions



   150.57   Horticultural site plan for street yard development required



   150.58   Requirements



   150.59   Requirements for new trees



   150.60   Vehicular use areas, parking lots and areas adjacent to
public street rights-of-way



   150.61   Credit/bonuses



   150.62   Fees and inspections



   150.63   Exhibits



   150.64   Obstructive vegetative growth



   150.65   Landscape areas to be maintained free of debris and litter



   150.66   Replacement of dead, dying or diseased landscaping materials



   150.67   Permits and certificates of occupancy



 



   150.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.01  OFFICE OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   There is hereby established the Office of the Building Official of the
city. The person appointed as the Building Official is hereby authorized and
directed to administer and enforce the standards and codes adopted in §
150.02.



(Prior Code, § 9-1)  (Ord. 84-17, § 1, passed 2-6-1984)



§ 150.02  ADOPTION OF CODES.



(A)   Conflicts; amendments generally.



      (1)   A copy of the codes adopted in this section shall be
maintained by the office of the City Secretary. If a section of any code is
found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire,
safety or health ordinance or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto or any
other ordinance or code or regulation of the city, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion of the health and safety of
the people shall prevail.



      (2)   All amendments to any prior editions of the codes as set
out in this section shall be deemed controlling as to the new edition unless
the same shall have been repealed or otherwise amended by ordinance duly
adopted by the City Council amending the code.



   (B)   2015 International Building Code adopted.



      (1)   The city adopts the 2015 International Building Code
published by the International Code Council, with the exception of such
sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended and the same
is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as if the same was copied in full
herein, and the provisions thereof shall be the building regulations within
the corporate limits of the city.



      (2)   This code and its amendments shall not apply to one- and
two-family dwellings and multi-family dwellings of not more than three
stories with individual exits and property lines between dwelling units and
their accessory buildings unless otherwise stated. These structures shall be
regulated by the current International Residential Code as adopted by the
city.



      (3)   The following amendments and deletions to the 2015
International Building Code are made:



         Section 101.1 Title These regulations shall be known as the
International Building Code of the City of Meadows Place, herein referred to
as "this code."



         Section 101.4.6 Energy. The provisions of the Energy Code
adopted and/or enforced by the City, or as required by State Law, whichever
is most restrictive shall apply to all matters governing the design and
construction of buildings for energy efficiency.



         Section F 903.1 General. Automatic fire sprinkler systems
shall comply with applicable requirements of the City of Meadows Place.   



         Section 1507.8 Wood Shingles. The use of wood shingles is
prohibited. All sections and tables (Sections 1507.8.1 thru 1507.8.8) are
deleted.



         Section 1507.9 Wood Shakes. The use of wood shakes is
prohibited. All sections and tables (Section 1507.9.1 thru 1507.9.9) are
deleted.



         Section 1612.3 Flood Hazard Areas. The flood insurance
study for the City of Meadows Place, as amended or revised, with accompanying
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM),
including related supporting data and revisions thereto, is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be part of this section.



      (4)   A copy of the 2015 International Building Code shall be
maintained by the city. If a provision of said code is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health
ordinance or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto or any other ordinance
or code or regulation of the city, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion of health and safety shall control.



   (C)   2015 International Residential Code adopted.



      (1)   The city adopts the 2015 International Residential Code,
published by the International Code Council, with the exception of such
sections and subsections as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended and
the same are adopted and incorporated as if the same were copied in full
herein, and the provisions shall be building regulations within the corporate
limits of the city.



      (2)   A copy of the 2015 International Residential Code shall
be maintained by the city. If any part of this section is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health
ordinance or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto or any other ordinance
or code or regulation of the city, the provision which establishes the higher
standard of the promotion of health and safety shall control.



      (3)   Amendments. The 2015 International Residential Code
shall be amended to read as follows:



   Section R101.1 Title. Theses provisions shall be known as the
Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings of the City of Meadows
Place, Texas, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as
“this code.”



   Section R101.2 Scope. The provisions of the International Residential
Code for One- and Two-family dwellings shall apply to the construction,
alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and
occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family
dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories above grade plane in
height with a separate means of egress  and their accessory structures not
more than three stories above grade plane in height. All structures three or
more stories in height shall be equipped with a city approved automatic fire
extinguisher system.



      Exceptions:



      1.   Live/work units located in townhouses and complying with
the requirements of Section 419 of the International Building Code shall be
permitted to be constructed in accordance with the International Residential
Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings. Fire suppression required by Section
419.5 of the International Building Code where constructed under the
International Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings shall
conform to Section P2904.



      2.   Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer
guestrooms shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the
International Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings where
equipped with a fire sprinkler system in accordance with Section P2904.



   Section R103 Building official. Whenever a reference in this code is
made to the building official, such term may include a city employee or
independent contractor engaged by the city as well as any city designated
deputy building official. If the city has no building official or the
building official is unwilling or unable to perform the duties as set forth
in this code or any city code, then the Mayor may perform such duties.



   Section R104.2 Applications and permits. The City shall receive
applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the
erection and alteration of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for
which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the
provisions of this code.



   Section R104.6 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an
inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or where the building
official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or
upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code
which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the
building official or designee shall attempt to gain entry to a structure or
premise by consent of the owner. If the owner does not consent to entry, the
Building Official may seek an inspection warrant from the City’s Municipal
Court. Nothing herein shall limit the Building Official from gaining entry to
a structure or premise as allowed by law.



   Section R104.7 Department records. The City shall keep official records
of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected,
reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be
retained in the official records for the period required for the retention of
public records.



   Section R104.8 Liability. The building official, member of any board,
or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the
jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby
be rendered civilly or criminally liable personally and is hereby relieved
from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a
result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of
official duties.



   Section R104.10.1 Flood hazard areas. The building official shall not
grant modifications to any provision related to flood hazard areas as
established by Table R301.2(1).



   Section R105.1 Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of
a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair,
remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing
system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any
such work to be performed, shall first make application to the City and
obtain the required permit.



   Section R105.2.1 Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and
repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application
shall be submitted within the next working business day to the City.



   Section R105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the
applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by
the City. Such application shall:



      1.   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the
permit for which application is made.



      2.   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be
done by legal description, street address or similar description that will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.



      3.   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed
work is intended.



      4.   Be accompanied by construction documents and other
information as required in Section R106.1.



      5.   State the valuation of the proposed work.



      6.   Be signed by the applicant or the applicant’s
authorized agent.



      7.   Give such other data and information as required by the
City.



   Section R105.3.1 Action on application. The City shall examine or cause
to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a
reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction
documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the City
shall reject such application in writing stating the reasons therefor. If the
City is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this
code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the City shall issue a
permit therefor as soon as practicable.



   Section Rl05.3.1.1 Determination of substantially improved or
substantially damaged existing buildings in flood hazard areas. For
applications for reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair
or other improvement of existing buildings or structures located in a flood
hazard area as established by Table R301.2(l), the City shall examine or
cause to be examined the construction documents and shall make a
determination with regard to the value of the proposed work. For buildings
that have sustained damage of any origin, the value of the proposed work
shall include the cost to repair the building or structure to its predamaged
condition. If the City finds that the value of proposed work equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the building or structure before the
damage has occurred or the improvement is started, the proposed work is a
substantial improvement or restoration of substantial damage and the City
shall require existing portions of the entire building or structure to meet
the requirements of Section R322.



   For the purpose of this determination, a substantial improvement shall
mean any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market
value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is
started. Where the building or structure has sustained substantial damage,
repairs necessary to restore the building or structure to its predamaged
condition shall be considered substantial improvements regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term shall not include either of the
following:



      1.   Improvements to a building or structure that are required
to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by
the City and that are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions.



      2.   Any alteration of a historic building or structure,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the continued designation as a
historic building or structure. For the purpose of this exclusion, a historic
building shall be any of the following:



         2.1.   Listed or preliminarily determined to be eligible
for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.



         2.2.   Determined by the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined to
qualify as an historic district.



         2.3.   Designated as historic under state or local
historic preservation program that is approved by the Department of Interior.



   Section R105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a
permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days
after the date of filing unless such application has been pursued in good
faith or a permit has been issued; except that the City is authorized to
grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 180
days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated.



   Section R105.4 Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit
shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation
of any of the provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of the
jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be
valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other
data shall not prevent the City from requiring the correction of errors in
the construction documents and other data. The City is authorized to prevent
occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of this code or of any
other ordinances of this jurisdiction.



   Section R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid
unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after
its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The
City is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for
periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in
writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.



   Section R105.6 Suspension or revocation. The City is authorized to
suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever
the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or
incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any
of the provisions of this code.



   Section R105.9 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the
City is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures
and sites for which an application has been filed.



   Section R106.1 Submittal documents. Submittal documents consisting of
construction documents, and other data shall be submitted in two or more sets
with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be
prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes
of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special
conditions exist, the City is authorized to require additional construction
documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.



      Exception:



      The City is authorized to waive the submission of construction
documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design
professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such
that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to obtain
compliance with this code.



   Section R106.1.1 Information on construction documents. Construction
documents shall be drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents
are permitted to be submitted when approved by the City. Construction
documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and
extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the
provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations,
as determined by the City.



   Section R106.1.3 Information on braced wall design. For buildings and
structures utilizing braced wall design, and where required by the City,
braced wall limes shall be identified on the construction documents.
Pertinent information including, but not limited to, bracing methods,
location and length of braced wall panels and foundation requirements of
braced wall panels at top and bottom shall be provided.



   Section R106.1.4 Information for construction in flood hazard areas.
For buildings and structures located in whole or in part in flood hazard
areas as established by Table R301.2(l), construction documents shall include:



      1.   Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries
and flood zones and the design flood elevation, as appropriate;



      2.   The elevation of the proposed lowest floor, including
basement; in areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), the height of the proposed
lowest floor, including basement, above the highest adjacent grade;



      3.   The elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structural member in coastal high hazard areas (V Zone) and in Coastal A
Zones where such zones are delineated on flood hazard maps identified in
Table R301.2(1) or otherwise delineated by the jurisdiction; and



      4.   If design flood elevations are not included on the
Community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the City and the applicant
shall obtain and reasonably utilize any design flood elevation and floodway
data available from other sources.



   Section R106.2 Site plan or plot plan. The construction documents
submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan
showing the size and location of new construction and existing structures on
the site and distances from lot lines. In the case of demolition, the site
plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of
existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot.
The City is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan
where the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when
otherwise warranted.



   Section R106.3 Examination of documents. The City shall examine or
cause to be examined construction documents for code compliance.



      Section R106.3.1 Approval of construction documents. Where the
City issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved in writing
or by a stamp which states “REVIEWED FOR CODE COMPLIANCE.” One set of
construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the City. The other
set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and
shall be open to inspection by the City.



      Section R106.3.2 Previous approvals. This code shall not require
changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy
of a structure for which a lawful permit has been issued or otherwise
lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good
faith within 180 days after the effective date of this code and has not been
abandoned.



      Section R106.3.3 Phased approval. The City is authorized to issue
a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building
or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or
structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and
detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of
this code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a
building or structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the
building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire
structure will be granted.



   Section R106.5 Retention of construction documents. One set of approved
construction documents shall be retained by the City for a period of not less
than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as required
by state or local laws.



   Section R107.1 General. The City is authorized to issue a permit for
temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to
time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The City
is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.



   Section R107.3 Temporary power. The City is authorized to give
permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric
installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final
certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary
certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary
lighting, heat or power in NFPA 70.



   Section R107.4 Termination of approval. The City is authorized to
terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the
temporary structure or use to be discontinued.



   Section R108.5 Refunds. The City is authorized to establish a refund
policy.



   Section R109.1.3 Floodplain inspections. For construction in flood
hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(l), upon placement of the lowest
floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the
City shall require submission of documentation, prepared and sealed by a
registered design professional, of the elevation of the lowest floor,
including basement, required in Section R322.



   Section R109.1.5 Other inspections. In addition to inspections in
Subsections R109.1.1 through R109.1.4, the City shall have the authority to
make or require any other inspections to ascertain compliance with this code
and other laws enforced by the City.



   Section R109.1.5.1 Fire-resistance-rated construction inspection. Where
fire-resistance-rated construction is required between dwelling units or due
to location on property, the City shall require an inspection of such
construction after lathing or gypsum board or gypsum panel products are in
place, but before any plaster is applied, or before board or panel joints and
fasteners are taped and finished.



   Section R109.1.6.1 Elevation documentation. If located in a flood
hazard area, the documentation of elevations required in Section R322.1.10
shall be submitted to the City prior to the final inspection.



   Section R109.2 Inspection agencies. The City is authorized to accept
reports of approved agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements
as to qualifications and reliability.



   Section R109.3 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder or their agent to notify the City that such work is ready for
inspection. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections
required by this code to provide access to and means for inspection of such
work.



   Section R109.4 Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the
point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the
approval of the City. The City upon notification, shall make the requested
inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the    construction
that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an
agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this code.
Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not
be covered or concealed until authorized by the City.



   Section R110.1 Occupancy permit. Occupancy permits are governed by the
city’s code of ordinances including but not limited to § 150.09.



   Section R111.1 Connection of service utilities. No person shall make
connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building
or system that is regulated by this code for which a permit is required,
until approved by the City.



   Section R111.2 Temporary connection. The City shall have the authority
to authorize and approve the temporary connection of the building or system
to the utility, source of energy, fuel or power.



   Section R111.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The City
shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the
building, structure or system regulated by this code and the referenced codes
and standards set forth in Subsection R102.4 in case of emergency where
necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or where such
utility connection has been made without the approval required by Subsections
R111.1 or R111.2. The City shall notify the serving utility and where
possible the owner or the owner’s authorized agent or occupant and occupant
of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect
prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection, the
owner, the owner’s authorized agent or occupant of the building, structure
or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical
thereafter.



   Section R112.1 Appeal rights. The duly elected and constituted members
of the City of Meadows Place, Texas, City Council are hereby named and
constitute the Board of Appeals. The term of office of each such member shall
run concurrently with the term of office to which he or she was elected as a
member of City Council.



   Section R112.2 Voting. The Mayor shall serve as the chairman of the
board and may vote on any item before the board. The presence of any four
members, including the Mayor Chairman, shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.



   Section R112.3 Procedures. Any person or entity aggrieved by a decision
of the building official or other city official may appeal such decision to
the Board of Appeals by filing a written appeal with the City Secretary of
the City of Meadows Place, Texas. The City Secretary shall set a public
hearing on the matter no later than the fifteenth (15th) day after the date
the appeal is filed with the City. The board shall allow each side to present
evidence and witnesses and present their sides within a reasonable time. The
board shall issue a ruling no later than the tenth (10th) day after the date
of the hearing.



   Section R112.4 Hearing required. Before filing suit in a court of
competent jurisdiction, the person or entity aggrieved as provided for in
this Section shall first follow the appeal process before filing any suit.



   Section R112.5 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions
of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of
construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive
requirements of this code.



   Section R112.5.1 Determination of substantial improvement in flood
hazard areas. When the building official or city official provides a finding
required in Section R105.3.1.1, the board of appeals shall determine whether
the value of the proposed work constitutes a substantial improvement. A
substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the building or structure before the
improvement or repair is started. If the building or structure has sustained
substantial damage, all repairs are considered substantial improvement
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not include:



      1.   Improvements of a building or structure required to
correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the
building official or city official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or



      2.   Any alteration of an historic building or structure,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the continued designation as
an historic building or structure. For the purpose of this exclusion, an
historic building is:



         2.1.   Listed or preliminarily determined to be eligible
for listing in the National Register of Historic Places;



         2.2.   Determined by the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined to
qualify as an historic district; or



         2.3.   Designated as historic under a state or local
historic preservation program that is approved by the Department of Interior.



   Section R112.5.2 Criteria for issuance of a variance for flood hazard
areas. A variance shall be issued only upon:



      1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique
characteristics of the size, configuration or topography of the site render
the elevation standards in Section R322 inappropriate.



      2.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship by rendering the lot undevelopable.



      3.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, cause fraud on or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.



      4.   A determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary to afford relief, considering the flood hazard.



      5.   Submission to the applicant of written notice specifying
the difference between the design flood elevation and the elevation to which
the building is to be built, stating that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor
elevation, and stating that construction below the design flood elevation
increases risks to life and property.



   Section R113.3 Prosecution of violation. The building official or any
city official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction,
at any time, to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or
termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in
violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made
pursuant thereto.



   Section R113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision
of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of
the approved construction documents or directive of the City, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to
penalties as prescribed by law and this ordinance.



   Section R114.1 Notice to owner. Upon notice from the City that work on
any building or structure is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of
this code or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, such work shall be
immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be
given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s agent or to
the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which work
will be permitted to resume.



   Section R202 Definitions.



   “Accessory Structure/Building” is deleted and a new definition is
added to read as follows:



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE/BUILDING. A detached, subordinate
structure/building, the use of which is clearly incidental and related to
that of the principal structure /building or use of the land, and which is
located on the same lots that as that of the principal structure/building or
use.



   “Townhouse” is deleted and a new definition is added to read as
follows:



   TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of
attached units separated by property lines in which each unit extends from
foundation to roof and with open space on at least two sides.



   TABLE INSET:



 


Subject to Damage From:




Ground Snow Load

 

Wind Speed (mph )

 

Seismic Design Category

 

Weathering

 

Frost Line Depth

 

Termite

 

Winter Design Temp

 

Ice Barrier Underlay- ment Required

 

Flood Hazards

 

Air
Freezing Index

 

Mean Annual Temp




0

 

120

 

A

 

N

 

1 in.

 

VH

 

32°

 

No

 

N/A

 

0-1,00 0

 

67




 



   Section R902.1 Roof covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with
materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. Asphalt shingle roof
coverings must conform to ASTM D 3161, Class F, or as an alternative,
determined in accordance with ASTM D 6381 and UL 2390. Shingle product
wrappers that are not labeled as conforming to one of the following test
standards (ASTM D 3161, Class F; ASTM D 6381 and UL 2390, Class G or H; or
ASTM D 7158, Class G or H) are not acceptable. Roof assemblies with coverings
of brick, masonry, slate, clay or concrete roof tile, exposed concrete roof
deck, ferrous or copper shingles or sheets; and metal sheets and shingles,
shall be considered Class A roof coverings.



      Exceptions:



      1.   Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of
brick, masonry and exposed concrete roof deck.



      2.   Class A roof assemblies include ferrous or copper
shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile, or
slate installed on noncombustible decks.



      3.   Class A roof assemblies include minimum 16 ounces per
square foot copper sheets installed over combustible decks.



      4.   Class A roof assemblies include slate installed over
underlayment over combustible decks.



   Subsection 902.2 is deleted.



   Subsection 905.7 is deleted. No new wood shingles shall be allowed to
be installed in the City.



   Subsection 905.8 is deleted. No new wood shakes shall be allowed to be
installed in the City.



   Chapter 34 through 43 are deleted.



   All Appendixes are adopted and incorporated herein for all purposes
except for Appendix R and Appendix S.



   (D)   2014 National Electrical Code adopted.



      (1)   The city adopts the 2014 National Electrical Code
("Code"), published by the National Fire Protection Association, with the
exception of such sections and subsections hereinafter deleted, modified, or
amended.



      (2)   A copy of the 2014 National Electrical Code shall be
maintained by the city either in hard copy or electronic format. If any part
of this section is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning,
building, fire, safety, health ordinance, or any regulation adopted pursuant
thereto or any other ordinance or code or regulation of the city, the
provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion of health
and safety shall control.



      (3)   Amendments. The 2014 National Electrical Code shall be
amended as follows:



         (a)   Any reference to the authority having jurisdiction
in the Code shall mean the City of Meadows Place, Texas.



         (b)   The city hereby adopts Informative Annex H with
amendments as follows:



            1.   The first sentence of Subsection 80.13(2) is
amended as follows: When the use of any electrical equipment or its
installations is found to be dangerous to human life or property, the city
shall be empowered to have the premises disconnected from its source of
electric supply.



            2.   Subsection 80.13(5) is amended by adding a
new sentence to the end of the Subsection to read as follows: The city may
apply for an inspection warrant to gain entry onto a premise if entry is
denied.



            3.   The second sentence of Subsection 80.13(13)
is amended as follows: The city shall be notified when the installation is
ready for inspection and shall conduct the inspection within a reasonable
time.



            4.   Section 80.15 is deleted.



            5.   Subsection 80.17(A) is deleted and a new
subsection 80.17(A) is added to read as follows: The city shall keep records
as mandated by state law.



            6.   Subsection 80.17(B) is deleted.



            7.   Subsection 80.19(D) is deleted.



            8.   Subsection 80.19(F)(1) is deleted and a new
Subsection 80.19(F)(1) is added to read as follows: Upon completion of any
electrical work that has been installed under a permit, it shall be the duty
of the person, firm, or corporation making the installation to notify the
city's Electrical Inspector, who shall inspect the work within a reasonable
time.



            9.   Subsection 80.19(F)(3) is deleted and a new
Subsection 80.19(F)(3) is added to read as follows: When any portion of the
electrical installation within the jurisdiction of an Electrical Inspector is
to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of the building,
the person, firm, or corporation installing the equipment shall notify the
Electrical Inspector, and such equipment shall not be concealed until it has
been approved by the Electrical Inspector, provided that on large
installations, where the concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the
person, firm, or corporation installing the equipment shall give the
Electrical Inspector due notice in advance, and inspections shall be made
periodically during the progress of the work.



            10.   The first sentence of Subsection 80.19(F)(4)
is amended to read as follows: At regular intervals, the city's Electrical
Inspector shall visit all buildings and premises where work may be done under
a permit and shall inspect all electrical equipment installed under such
permit since the date of the previous inspection.



            11.   The first sentence of Subsection 80.19(G)(2)
is amended to read as follows: Any attempt to defraud or otherwise
intentionally or knowingly design, install, service, maintain, operate, sell,
represent for sale, falsify records, reports, or applications or other
related activity in violation of the requirements prescribed by the Code
shall be a violation of this Code.



            12.   Subsection 80.19(G)(3) is deleted and a new
Subsection 80.19(G)(3) is added to read as follows: Revocation shall be
effective upon permittee receiving Notice of revocation. Permittee is deemed
to have received Notice if Notice is posted at the premises or upon the land
of the premises where a suspected violation occurs; or if Notice is sent by
certified mail with return receipt requested, then permittee is deemed to
have received Notice three (3) days after the Notice was deposited in the
mail; or if permittee is personally served with Notice.



            13.   Subsection 80.19(H)(2) is deleted and a new
Subsection 80.19(H)(2) is added to read as follows: Applications for permits
shall be made to the city on forms provided by the city and shall include all
information as set forth on such application as required by the city.



            14.   Subsection 80.23(A)(1) is deleted and a new
Subsection 80.23(A)(1) is added to provide as follows: Whenever the city
determines that there is a violation or violations of this Code, a written
notice of violation may be issued requesting correction of such violation
within a specified time period. The city is not required to issue a notice of
violation prior to issuing a citation or summons to the city's municipal
court or taking any other action deeded necessary by the city.



            15.   Subsection 80.25(A) is deleted and a new
Subsection 80.25(A) is added to read as follows: Except as allowed by this
Section, it shall be unlawful for any persons, firm, or corporation to make
connection to supply of electricity or to supply electricity to any
electrical equipment installation for which a permit is required yet not
obtained or that has been disconnected or ordered disconnected.



            16.   Subsection 80.25(B) is amended by deleting
the last sentence of the Subsection.



            17.   Subsections 80.25(C) and (D) are deleted.



            18.   Subsection 80.25(E) is deleted and a new
Subsection 80.25(E) is added to read as follows: Where a connection is made
to an installation that has not been inspected, as outlined in the preceding
paragraphs of this Section, the supplier of electricity shall notify the
city. The city may allow the premise to correct any nonconforming issues or
it may order disconnection of electrical service.



            19.   Section 80.27 is deleted and a new Section
80.27 is added to read as follows: Electrical inspectors shall be a Master
Electrician with a minimum of ten (10) years’ experience working for a
political subdivision of the state or have been licensed as a Master
Electrician by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation for ten (10)
years.



            20.   Section 80.29 is deleted and a new Section
80.29 is added to read as follows: Article 80 shall not be construed to
affect the responsibility or liability of any party owning, designing,
operating, controlling, or installing any electrical equipment for damages to
persons or property caused by a defect therein, nor shall the city or its
employees, contractors, officials, or officers be held as assuming any such
liability by reason of the inspection, reinspection, or other examination
authorized.



         (c)   Regardless of any provision in the Code to the
contrary, the Code is amended as follows:



            1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to
perform electrical work within the city which is regulated by the Code unless
the person is a licensed Master Electrician by the State or a person is
performing electrical work under the direct supervision and control of a
licensed Master Electrician. It shall be unlawful to employ or permit a
person to perform electrical work within the city which is regulated by the
Code if such person performing electrical work does not hold a Master
Electrician license from the State.



            2.   All services for 1 and 2 family dwellings
shall be a minimum of 125 ampere capacity and shall have a minimum of two
spare breaker slots.



            3.   In residential installations, not more than
eight (8) current-consuming receptacles per circuit shall be installed.
Conductors for general wiring shall be No. 12 AWG or larger.



            4.   Nonmetallic sheathed cable shall not be
installed in any non-residential building, premises, structure, or
improvement.



            5.   All wiring shall be ninety-eight percent
(98%) pure copper only, except aluminum wiring may be used in commercial and
industrial services and subfeeders only 4/0 and larger including the neutral
and shall be terminated with approved equipment and materials, and shall not
be used in any other installation. Aluminum wiring may be used for temporary
services. All other wiring shall be copper. Triplex or quadruplex aluminum
cable No. 6 or larger may be used as aerials in free air and must be
terminated at approved weather heads, with approved connectors designed for
use with copper and aluminum wires.



            6.   Wiring in residential dwellings shall be no
smaller than No. 12 AWG.



            7.   Any non-residential building, premises,
structure, or improvement shall contain full-size/non-tandem (wide style)
branch circuit breakers only.



            8.   Above grade installations shall be limited to
GRC, IMC, EMT and Schedule 80 PVC types of raceway materials. All underground
services shall be a minimum of Schedule 40 conduit.



            9.   Subsection 230.70(A)(1) of the Code is
deleted and a new Subsection 230.70(A)(1) is added to provide as follows:



               Readily Accessible Location. The service
disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location
either outside of a building or structure or inside nearest the point of
entrance of the service conductors. Service disconnecting means shall be
located so that the height to the center of the operating handle shall be not
less than four (4) or more than six (6) feet in height above the finished
grade, except when installed in freestanding or building type switchgear
built to National Electrical Manufacturers Association specifications.



            10.   Subsection 320.12 is amended by adding a new
(6) to provide as follows:



               (6)   Exposed wiring method unless the AC
cable is not readily accessible and does not present a danger.



            11.   A new Subsection 334.25 is added to the Code
to provide as follows:



               Stairs. Nonmetallic-sheathed cable shall not be
used or installed in stairs unless protected by a one (1) hour fire wall.



            12.   Subsection 680.21(A)(1) is deleted and a new
Subsection 680.21(A)(1) is added to provide as follows:



               General. The branch circuits for
pool-associated motors shall be installed in rigid polyvinyl chloride conduit
and shall be either Schedule 40 or 80. This method shall contain an insulated
copper equipment grounding conductor sized in accordance with Subsection
250.122 of the Code but not smaller than 12 AWG.



            13.   Subsection 720.11 is deleted and a new
Subsection 720.11 is added to provide as follows:



               Mechanical Execution of Work. Circuits
operating at less than 50 volts shall be installed in a neat and workmanlike
manner. Cables shall be supported by the building structure in such a manner
that the cable will not be damaged by normal building use. No installation
shall present a danger or allow physical tampering.



            14.   The utility provider shall not require the
placement of meters on the front or street side of a building or premise
unless the property owner consents to such placement and the city approves
such placement.



            15.   Twenty (20) ampere receptacles with no other
outlet(s) on the circuit being served shall be installed in bathrooms.
Bathroom lighting above a shower or tub shall be protected with a
ground-fault circuit interrupter.



            16.   A licensed journeyman shall be present and
shall supervise all electrical work performed by an apprentice when such
electrical work is regulated by the Code.



            17.   Permits:



               (a)   Any person or entity performing
electrical work in the city which is regulated by the Code or any other
building code or ordinance of the city, shall first file a copy of their
Master Electrician License with the city and then apply for a permit and pay
a fee as set forth by city council in a schedule of fees before commencement
of any such electrical work.



               (b)   Permit applications and any site plan
submissions to the city, other than for single-family residential dwellings,
shall contain a signed agreement between the developer or property owner and
the authorized utility provider which such agreement shall provide for the
payment of any franchise fees by the developer or property owner, provisions
that the utility provider place all utility lines away from public street
rights-of-ways and in locations which do not visually obstruct any persons
operating a motor vehicle on a public or private street.



               (c)   Permit applications shall show proof
of a one line diagram, load analysis, panel schedule, and the basic design
for each installation. Such proof shall be submitted by a master electrician
licensed by the city or an electrical engineer.



   (E)   2015 International Plumbing Code adopted.



      (1)   The city adopts the 2015 International Plumbing Code
published by the International Code Council, with the exception of such
sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended and the same
is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as if the same was copied in full
herein, and the provisions thereof shall be the building regulations within
the corporate limits of the city.



      (2)   The following amendments and deletions to the 2015
International Plumbing Code are made:



         Section R101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as
the International Plumbing Code of the City of Meadows Place, hereinafter
referred to as “this code.”



      (3)   A copy of the 2015 International Plumbing Code shall be
maintained by the city. If a provision of said code is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health
ordinance or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto or any other ordinance
or code or regulation of the city, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion of health and safety shall control.



   (F)   2015 International Mechanical Code adopted. 



      (1)   The city adopts the 2015 International Mechanical Code
published by the International Code Council, with the exception of such
sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended and the same
is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as if the same was copied in full
herein, and the provisions thereof shall be the building regulations within
the corporate limits of the city.



      (2)   The following amendments and deletions to the 2015
International Mechanical Code are made:



         Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as
the International Mechanical Code of the City of Meadows Place, hereinafter
referred to as “this code.”



      (3)   A copy of the 2015 International Mechanical Code shall
be maintained by the city. If a provision of said code is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health
ordinance or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto or any other ordinance
or code or regulation of the city, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion of health and safety shall control.



   (G)   2012 International Property Maintenance Code adopted.



      (1)   The city adopts the 2012 International Property
Maintenance Code published by the International Code Council, with the
exception of such sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or
amended and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as if the same
was copied in full herein, and the provisions thereof shall be the building
regulations within the corporate limits of the city.



      (2)   A copy of the 2012 International Property Maintenance
Code shall be maintained by the city.  If this or any part of this section
is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire,
safety, or health ordinance or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto or any
other ordinance or code or regulation of the city, the provisions which
establishes the higher standards for the promotion of health and safety shall
control.



      (3)   Amendments.  The 2012 International Property
Maintenance Code shall be amended to read as follows:



         (a)   Subsection 101.1 is amended to read as follows:



            Subsection 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be
known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Meadows
Place, Texas, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”



         (b)   Sections 103, 104, 107, 108, 110, and 111 are
deleted.



         (c)   Section 106 is deleted and a new Section 106 is
added to read as follows:



            Section 106 Violations.



            106.1  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a
person, entity, firm, or corporation to violate of any of the provisions of
this code. Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits another to
violate any provision of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$500 unless such violation implicates fire safety, zoning, or public health
and sanitation including dumping of refuse in which case the fine amount
shall not be more than $2,000.  Each occurrence of any violation of this
code shall constitute a separate offense. Each day on which any violation of
this code occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in
lieu of the penalty provided for above, the city attorney may institute any
civil or criminal proceeding authorized by law to correct, abate, remove,
restrain, or prosecute a violation of this code or to prevent illegal
occupancy of a building, structure, improvement, or premises, or to stop an
illegal act, conduct, business, or utilization of a building, structure,
improvement, or premises.



         (d)   Subsection 112.4 is deleted.



         (e)   302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks,
walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept
in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
Driveways which contain a vertical difference of two (2) inches or more of
the surface, a ho4rizontal separation of two (2) inches or more of the
surface, or which have a low or sunken surafece causing water to stand or
pool all constitute hazardous conditions.



         (f)   Subsection 302.4 is deleted.



         (g)   Subsection 302.8 is deleted and a new Subsection
302.8 is added to read as follows:



            302.8 Vehicles. Painting of vehicles is prohibited
unless conducted inside an approved spray booth. Major vehicle repairs shall
be performed only inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and
approved for such purposes. Major vehicle repairs shall include but not
limited to the removal of engines, rebuilding of engines, repair of the
internal components, repair or removal of differentials or axles, dismantling
of vehicles, body work, or other similar repair work but excludes
maintenance, repair, or replacement of the alternator, generator, starter,
water pump, battery, brakes or part thereof; minor tune-up which consists of
distributor cap, rotor and spark plug replacement; change of oil and filter,
fan belt, or hoses; lamp replacement; repair of flat tires; lubrication; or
other similar minor repair work.



         (h)   Subsection 303.1 is deleted and a new Subsection
303.1 is added to read as follows:



            Subsection 303.1 Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs.
Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, and in good repair.



   (H)   2015 International Fuel Gas Code adopted.



      (1)   The city adopts the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code
published by the International Code Council, with the exception of such
sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended and the same
is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as if the same was copied in full
herein, and the provisions thereof shall be the building regulations within
the corporate limits of the city.



      (2)   The following amendments and deletions to the 2015
International Fuel Gas Code are made:



         Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as
the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Meadows Place, hereinafter referred to as
“this code.”



      (3)   A copy of the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code shall be
maintained by the city. If a provision of said code is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health
ordinance or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto or any other ordinance
or code or regulation of the city, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion of health and safety shall control.



   (I)   2015 International Fire Code adopted.



      (1)   The city adopts the 2015 International Fire Code,
published by the International Code Council with the exception of such
sections and subsections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or
amended and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as if the
same were copied in full herein, and the provisions thereof shall be building
regulations within the corporate limits of the city. Furthermore, the City
adopts all appendices contained in the 2015 International Fire Code, except
for Appendix A.



      (2)   A copy of the 2015 International Fire Code shall be
maintained by the city. If any part of this division (I) is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health
ordinance or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto or any other ordinance
or code or regulation of the city, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion of health and safety shall control.



      (3)   Amendments. The 2015 International Fire Code shall be
amended to read as follows:



         (a)   Subsection 101.1 is amended to read as follows:



            101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the
Fire Code of the City of Meadows Place, Texas, hereinafter referred to as
"this Code" or "the Code."



         (b)   Section 103 is deleted and a new Section 103 is
added to provide as follows:



            SECTION 103 AGREEMENT WITH CITY OF STAFFORD, TEXAS.



            103.1 General. The City of Meadows Place, Texas,
contracts with the City of Stafford, Texas, for the administration and
enforcement of this Code, specifically any reference in this Code to the Fire
Official shall refer to the City of Meadows Place, Texas designated Fire
Official. The City of Meadows Place, Texas, hereby designates the Fire Chief
at the City of Stafford, Texas, whether permanent, temporary, or interim, as
the City of Meadows Place, Texas, Fire Official.



            103.2 Permits, general. The City of Meadows Place,
Texas, shall issue all permits under this Code.



            103.3 Administration and enforcement. The City of
Meadows Place, Texas, may solely or jointly administer and enforce any
provision of this Code. The City may contract with any municipality, county,
or other political subdivision of the state to administer and enforce this
Code.



         (c)   Subsection 105.3.7.1 is deleted and a new
Subsection 105.1 is added to provide as follows:



            105.3.7.1 Applying for a permit. The application for
a permit shall be made in the form prescribed by the fire code official,
shall be submitted to the City of Meadows Place, Texas, along with the
required application fee, which such fees shall be set by the City Council of
the City of Meadows Place, Texas, in a schedule of fees and contain the
following information:



            a.   The applicant's name, telephone number,
mailing address, and street address, if different, and the signature of the
applicant.



            b.   Proof of ownership of the premises in the
form of a copy of a deed or other evidence of legal title. If the applicant
is not the owner, proof in the form of a lease or affidavit, signed by the
owner, that the intended use of the building or structure or intended
operation to be conducted on the premises by the applicant is authorized by
the owner.



            c.   A statement of the intended use of the
building or structure or operation to be conducted on the premises.



            d.   Plans when required by the fire code official.



            e.   If applicable, a completed hazardous
materials application.



            f.   If applicable, a completed hazardous
materials management plan.



            g.   If applicable, a completed hazardous
materials inventory statement.



            h.   Copies of insurance certificates indicating
types of liability coverage and coverage limits for personal injury,
including death, and property damage.



            i.   The telephone number and name of the person
who may be contacted by members of the public for information about the
intended use of the premises.



            j.   Any other information reasonably reguired by
the fire code official for purposes of processing the application.



         (d)   Subsection 105.6 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            105.6  Required operational permits. The fire code
official is authorized to issue operational permits for the operations set
forth in sections 105.6.1 through 105.6.21.



            105.6.1 Adult or child day care facility. An
operational permit is required to operate an adult or child day care facility.



            105.6.2 Auto repair business. An operational permit
is required for operation of repair garages.



            105.6.3 Carbon dioxide systems used in beverage
dispensing applications. An operational permit is required for carbon dioxide
systems used in beverage dispensing applications having more than 100 pounds
of carbon dioxide.



            105.6.4 Carnivals or fairs. An operational permit is
required to conduct a carnival or a fair.



            105.6.5 Compressed gases. An operational permit is
required for the storage, use or handling at normal temperature and pressure
(NTP) of compressed gases in excess of the amounts listed in Table 105.6.5.



            Exception: Vehicles equipped for and using compressed
gas as a fuel for propelling the vehicle.



 




Table 105.6.5
Permit Amounts for Compressed Gases




Type of Gas

 

Amount
(Cubic Feet at NTP)



Corrosive
 
200


Flammable
(except cryogenic fluids and liquefied petroleum gases)
 
200


Highly toxic
 
Any amount


Inert and simple asphyxiant
 
6,000


Oxidizing (including oxygen)
 
504


Pyrophoric
 
Any amount


Toxic
 
Any amount


For SI: 1 cubic foot = 0.02832m3




 



            105.6.6 Dry cleaning. A operational permit is
required to engage in the business of dry cleaning or to change to a more
hazardous cleaning solvent used in existing dry cleaning equipment.



            105.6.7 Explosives. An operational permit is required
for the manufacture, storage, handling, sale or use of any quantity of
explosives, explosive materials, fireworks, pyrotechnic special effects
materials, or pyrotechnic special effects within the scope of Chapter 56.



            Exception: Storage in Group R-3 occupancies of
smokeless propellant. black powder and small arms primers for personal use,
not for resale and in accordance with section 5606.



            105.6.8 Foster home. An operational permit is
required to operate a foster home.



            105.6.9 Fire Safety Permit. An operational permit is
required to operate a business.



            105.6.10 Flammable and combustible liquids. An
operational permit is required:



               1.   To store, handle or use Class I liquids
in excess of 5 gallons (19 L) in a building or in excess of ten gallons (37.9
L) outside of a building, except that a permit is not required for the
following:



                     1.1   The storage or use of
Class I liquids in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft, motorboat,
mobile power plant or mobile heating plant, unless such storage, in the
opinion of the fire code official, would cause an unsafe condition.



                     1.2   The storage or use of
paints, oils, varnishes or similar flammable mixtures when such liquids are
stored for maintenance, painting or similar purposes for a period of not more
than 30 days.



               2.   To store, handle, or use Class II or
Class IIIA liquids in excess of 25 gallons (95 L) in a building or in excess
of 60 gallons (227 L) outside a building, except for fuel oil used in
connection with oil-burning equipment.



            105.6.11 Gates/barriers blocking access. An
operational permit is required for the installation of or modification to a
gate or barricade across a fire apparatus access road.



            105.6.12 Hazardous materials. An operational permit
is required to store, transport on site, dispense, use or handle hazardous
materials in excess of the amounts listed in Table 105.6.12.



 




Table 105.6.12
Permit Amounts for Hazardous Materials




Type of Material

 

Amount



Combustible liquids
 
See section 105.6.8


Corrosive materials


   Gases
 
See section 105.6.4


   Liquids
 
55 gallons


   Solids
 
1,000 pounds


Explosive materials
 
See section 105.6.6


Flammable materials


   Gases
 
See section 105.6.4


   Liquids
 
See section 105.6.8


   Solids
 
100 pounds


Highly toxic materials


   Gases
 
See section 105.6.4


   Liquids
 
Any amount


   Solids
 
Any amount


Oxidizing materials


   Gases
 
See section 105.6.4


   Liquids


      Class 4
 
Any amount


      Class 3
 
1 gallon a


      Class 2
 
10 gallons


      Class 1
 
55 gallons


For SI: 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1 pound = 0.454 kg


a   20 gallons when Table 5003.1.1(1) Note k applies and hazard
identification signs in accordance with section 5003.5 are provided for
quantities of 20 gallons or less.




 



 




Table 105.6.12
Permit Amounts for Hazardous Materials




Type of Material

 

Amount



Oxidizing materials (Cont'd)


   Solids


      Class 4
 
Any amount


      Class 3
 
10 pounds b


      Class 2
 
100 pounds


      Class 1
 
500 pounds


Organic peroxides


   Liquids


      Class I
 
Any amount


      Class II
 
Any amount


      Class III
 
1 gallon


      Class IV
 
2 gallons


      Class V
 
No permit required


   Solids


      Class I
 
Any amount


      Class II
 
Any amount


      Class III
 
10 pounds


      Class IV
 
20 pounds


      Class V
 
No permit required


Pyrophoric materials


   Gases
 
Any amount


   Liquids
 
Any amount


For SI: 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1 pound = 0.454 kg


b   200 pounds when Table 5003.1.1(1) Note k applies and hazard
identification signs in accordance with section 5003.5 are provided for
quantities of 200 pounds or less.




 



 



 




Table 105.6.12
Permit Amounts for Hazardous Materials




Type of Material

 

Amount



Pyrophoric materials (Cont'd)


   Solids
 
Any amount


Toxic materials


   Gases
 
See section 105.6.4


   Liquids
 
10 gallons


   Solids
 
100 pounds


Unstable (reactive materials)


   Liquids


      Class 4
 
Any amount


      Class 3
 
Any amount


      Class 2
 
5 gallons


      Class 1
 
10 gallons


   Solids


      Class 4
 
Any amount


      Class 3
 
Any amount


      Class 2
 
50 pounds


      Class 1
 
100 pounds


Water-reactive materials


   Liquids


      Class 3
 
Any amount


      Class 2
 
5 gallons


      Class 1
 
55 gallons


   Solids


      Class 3
 
Any amount


      Class 2
 
50 pounds


      Class 1
 
500 pounds


For SI: 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1 pound = 0.454 kg




 



            105.6.13 Health care facility. An operational permit
is required to operate a health care facility, provided that state licensing
or registration is required for the operation of such facility.



            105.6.14 Helicopter (Public Space). An operational
permit is required for the operation of a helicopter in public space.



            105.6.15 High-piled storage. An operational permit is
required to use a building or portion thereof as a high-piled storage area
exceeding 500 square feet (46 m2).



            105.6.16 Hot work operations. An operational permit
is required for the application of roof coverings with the use of an
open-flame device.



            105.6.17  Lumberyard/roofing (outside stock
storage). An operational permit is required for the storage or processing of
lumber and or roofing facilities.



            105.6.18 Paint Spray Booth. An operational permit is
required to conduct a spraying or dipping operation utilizing flammable or
combustible liquids, or the application of combustible powders regulated by
Chapter 24.



            105.6.19 Places of assembly. An operational permit is
required to operate a place of assembly.



            105.6.20 Residential care facility. An operational
permit is required to operate a residential care facility, provided that
state licensing or registration is required for the operation of such
facility.



            105.6.21 Tent use. An operational permit is required
to operate an air-supported temporary membrane structure, a temporary stage
canopy or a tent having an area in excess of 400 square feet (37 m2).



            105.6.22 Temporary storage tanks. An operational
permit is required for the use of temporary storage tanks containing
flammable/combustible liquids or compressed gasses.



         (e)   Section 108 is hereby deleted.



         (f)   Subsection 109.3.5 is hereby added to provide as
follows:



            109.3.5 Time limit. Except as provided otherwise
under chapter 38 of this code, a time limit, not to exceed 15 working days,
from the date any order or notice has been issued is permitted for
compliance. Dependent upon the hazard and condition created by the violation,
the fire code official may limit the compliance time to fewer than 15 days.
An extension of time, for a period to be determined by the fire code
official, may be allowed for compliance with conditions or correction of
violations provided the extension is requested in writing, to the fire code
official, and justifiable cause is demonstrated. If the extension is not
permitted by the fire code official, such refusal shall be in writing and
shall contain the reasons for refusal.



         (g)   Subsection 109.4 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            109.4 Violation penalties.  Persons who shall
violate a provision of this chapter, this code or any amendment thereto or
who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, of a
permit or certificate issued under provisions of this code or of a decision
of the construction board of adjustments and appeals, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, or the owner of the building or
premises or part thereof where anything in violation of this chapter shall be
permitted to exist, or any person, contractor, agency or corporation employed
in connection therewith, or any driver, owner or operator of any material,
vehicle, tank, trailer or piece of equipment who may have assisted in the
commission of such violation, shall be subject to a fine as set forth in
section 1-12. Each day that a violation continues or each occurrence of any
violation shall be deemed a separate offense



         (h)   Subsection 110.5 is hereby added to provide as
follows:



            110.5 Occupancy overloading. Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this code or the technical codes therein adopted and
amended, whenever the fire code official shall deem that a dangerous or
unlawful number of persons are accumulated in any building or premises, or on
any property or in any area of a building, premises or property, the fire
code official shall immediately notify the owner or the person in control of
the building, premises or property to have the condition corrected
immediately. If the condition is not immediately corrected, the fire code
official shall order the building, premises or property or area closed and
all occupants to be vacated until such condition is corrected.



         (i)   Subsection 111.4 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            111.4 Failure to comply.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to continue any work after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition.



         (j)   Subsection 111.5 is hereby added to provide as
follows:



            111.5 Condemnation tags. The fire code official may
affix a condemnation tag prohibiting the use of any equipment, operation or
procedure which he determines to be unsafe or defective or which creates a
fire hazard. When affixed, such tag may be removed only by the fire code
official and may be removed only when the hazard to which the order pertains
has been corrected in an approved manner. Until removed, that item or device,
operation or procedure, which has caused the hazard, shall not be used or
permitted to be used. It shall be unlawful to remove such condemnation tag
without the required authorization.



         (k)   The definition of Foster Care Facilities in
section 202 is hereby deleted.



         (l)   The definition of Institutional Group 1-2 in
section 202 is hereby amended to provide as follows:



            Institutional Group 1-2. Institutional Group 1-2
occupancy shall include buildings and structures used for medical care on a
24-hour basis for more than five persons who are not capable of
self-preservation. This group shall include, but is not limited to, the
following:



               Detoxification facilities.



               Hospitals.



               Nursing homes.



               Psychiatric hospitals.



            Occupancy Conditions. Buildings of Group 1-2 shall be
classified as one of the following occupancy conditions:



               Condition 1. This occupancy condition shall
include facilities that provide nursing and medical care, but do not provide
emergency care, surgery, obstetrics, or in-patient stabilization units for
psychiatric or detoxification treatment, including, but not limited to,
nursing homes.



               Condition 2. This occupancy condition shall
include facilities that provide nursing and medical care and could provide
emergency care, surgery, obstetrics, or in-patient stabilization units for
psychiatric or detoxification treatment, including, but not limited to,
hospitals.



               Five or fewer persons receiving medical care. A
facility with five or fewer persons receiving medical care shall be
classified as Group R-3 or shall comply with the International Residential
Code, provided an automatic sprinkler system is installed in accordance with
section 903.3.1.3 or with section P2904 of the International Residential Code.



         (m)   Section 202 is hereby amended by adding the
following definitions:



            SECTION 202 GENERAL DEFINITIONS



               Foster home. A residential dwelling licensed by
the state, including, but not limited to, a foster home, as such term is
defined by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 42.002, in which custodial
care is provided for six or less children under the age of 18.



               Health care facility. A facility, not including
a Residential Group R facility, that provides inpatient medical care or
medical treatment to persons who are not capable of self-preservation without
physical assistance or in which the liberty of the occupants is restricted.



               Residential care facility. A Residential Group
R facility in which medical care, including, but not limited to, assisted
living facility services, as such services are described in the definition of
"assisted living facility" by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 247.002,
are provided to one or more persons who are unrelated to the proprietor of
the establishment.



         (n)   Subsection 315.7 is hereby added to provide as
follows:



            315.7 Transportation of combustible waste and refuse.
Vehicles or conveyances used to transport combustible waste or refuse over
public thoroughfares shall have all cargo spaces tightly covered and so
maintained as to ensure against ignition from external fire sources.



         (o)   Subsection 401.3 is hereby amended as follows:



            401.3 Emergency responder notification. Notification
of emergency responders shall be in accordance with sections 401.3.1 through
401.3.4.



         (p)   Subsection 401.3.4 is hereby added to provide as
follows:



            401.3.4 Other hazardous events. Any person, upon
discovering or being apprised of any leak, spill, dumping or other condition
which involves an uncontrolled hazardous gas leak, hazardous material, or
flammable or combustible liquid which he believes or has reason to believe
has been heretofore unreported to the fire department, shall immediately
notify the fire department.



         (q)   Subsection 503.1 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            503.1 Where required. Fire apparatus access roads
shall be provided and maintained in accordance with sections 503.1.1 through
503.1.3 and with Appendix D.



         (r)   Subsection 503.2.4 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            503.2.4 Turning radius. The minimum inside turning
radius shall be 25 feet with a minimum outside turning radius of 50 feet.



         (s)   Subsection 503.2.7 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            503.2.7 Grade. The grade of the fire apparatus access
road shall not exceed ten percent.



            Exception: The grade of the fire access road may
exceed ten percent with the approval of the fire code official based on the
fire departments apparatus.



         (t)   Subsection 503.2.8 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            503.2.8 Angles of approach and departure. Angles of
approach and departure for fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed eight
degrees.



         (u)   Subsection 503.3 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            503.3 Marking. Where required by the fire code
official, approved signs or other approved notices or markings shall be
provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit
the obstruction thereof. Signs, notices or markings shall be maintained in a
clean and legible condition at all times and shall be replaced or repaired
when necessary to provide adequate visibility. The owner, manager, or person
in charge of any new or existing building or property for which fire lanes
have been approved or required by the fire code official shall mark and
maintain said fire lanes as provided in this subsection. It is unlawful for
any person to occupy, continue to occupy, or make use of any building until
the requirements for fire lane markings applicable to the real property where
the building is located have been met.



               503.3.1 Curb marking. All curbs and curb ends
shall be painted red with white lettering at least four inches high with at
least one half-inch stroke, stating "FIRE LANE NO PARKING TOW-AWAY ZONE".
Wording shall not be spaced more than twenty feet (20') increments along the
entire length of the fire lane showing the exact boundary of the fire lane.
The text painted on the surface should have about twelve inches (12") of
separation between each statement, "FIRE LANE" "NO PARKING" "TOW-AWAY ZONE"
with about a twenty- foot separation before repeating the statement.



               503.3.2 Continuous curb unavailable. In areas
where fire lanes are required but no continuous curb is available, one of the
following methods shall be used, in conjunction with curb markings where
possible, to indicate that the fire lane is continuous:



               503.3.2.1 Signs. Signs that comply with
Appendix D section D103.6 shall be mounted conspicuously along the edge of
the fire lane, spaced no more than 25 feet apart, and shall have lettering at
least two inches high with three-eighths inch stroke.



               503.3.2.2 Stripes. From the point the fire lane
begins to the point the fire lane ends, there shall be painted one continuous
red stripe having a minimum width of at least six inches. Fire lanes shall be
stenciled every 20 feet apart, stating "FIRE LANE NO PARKING TOW-AWAY ZONE".
Wording shall not be spaced more than twenty feet (20') increments along the
entire length of the fire lane showing the exact boundary of the fire lane.
The text painted on the surface should have about twelve inches (12") of
separation between each statement, "FIRE LANE" "NO PARKING" "TOW- AWAY ZONE"
with about a twenty- foot separation before repeating the statement. Fire
lanes shall be so marked in accordance with Appendix D sections D103.6.1 and
D103.6.2.



               503.3.2.3 Exempt locations. The fire code
official is authorized to exempt the driving surface behind parking stalls
and driving aisles from the requirement for markings and stripes.



         (v)   Subsection 503.6 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            503.6 Security gates. The fire code official must
approve the placement of any barriers, gates and blocking devices, and all
other controlled vehicular access devices or systems, located at the
entrances to streets, fire lanes, parking lots, access roads and driveways.
Such approval will be granted whenever, in his opinion, such barriers meet
the requirements of this chapter and do not cause an unreasonable threat to
the health, safety and welfare of persons or property.



               503.6.1 Whenever access to any public or
private street, fire lane or other way allowing for vehicular access has
barriers, gates, blocking devices or other controlled vehicular access
devices or systems which make it difficult for fire apparatus, police patrol
vehicles, ambulances and similar emergency type vehicles to pass, and where
immediate access is necessary for lifesaving, firefighting or police
purposes, application for and issuance of a permit by the fire code official
must be obtained before installing, erecting, altering or maintaining such
controlled vehicular access devices or systems.



               503.6.2 The installation, construction,
erection and maintenance of controlled vehicular access devices or systems
requiring a permit as set forth in this section shall, at a minimum, meet the
following criteria:



                  1.   Barriers across streets shall
have a minimum unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet when opened.



                  2.   Electric barriers shall have an
approved key lock box or some other type of system allowing access by the
city fire and rescue services department installed in an accessible approved
location. The key box or other system shall contain keys, codes or devices to
gain access through the barrier.



                  3.   Electric barriers shall have an
approved key switch installed that will override the access controller.



                  4.   Electric barriers shall have an
emergency power backup or a manual disconnect.



                  5.   A padlock may be installed on all
gates or barriers not equipped with automatic gate openers provided such
padlock is approved by the fire code official.



               503.6.3  The controlled vehicular access
device or system must be properly installed, erected and maintained. The city
reserves the right to remove any controlled vehicular access device or system
whenever such removal is immediately necessary to preserve the health, safety
and welfare of the general public and regardless of whether such device or
system is permitted. In the event of removal, the city shall not be held
liable for any resulting damage or destruction.



         (w)   Subsection 507.1 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            507.1 Required water supply. An approved public water
supply capable of supplying the required fire flow for fire protection shall
be provided to premises upon which facilities, buildings, or portions of
buildings are hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction.



         (x)   Section 510 is hereby deleted.



         (y)   Subsection 609.2 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            609.2  Where required. Type I hoods shall be
installed where cooking appliances produce grease vapors. In addition, the
following specified locations shall reguire a Type I hood:



               1.   Group E and I occupancies where
commercial cooking appliances are used for any purpose.



               2.   Group A occupancies, with an occupant
load over 49 persons, where commercial cooking appliances are used for any
purpose.



               Exception:



                  1.   A Type I hood shall not be
reguired for an electric cooking appliance where an approved testing agency
provides documentation that the appliance effluent contains five mg/m3 or
less of grease when tested at an exhaust flow rate of 500 cfm (0.236 m3/s) in
accordance with UL 710B.



                  2.   A Type I hood shall not be
reguired where domestic or residential cooking appliances are installed and
not used for commercial purposes.



         (z)   Subsection 903.2 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler
systems shall be provided in new nonresidential buildings with a total area
of 7,500 square feet or more and in new buildings and structures where
provided by this code.



               1.   All commercial and multi-family
dwellings over 7,500 square feet shall have an automatic sprinkler system
provided.



               2.   All existing structures over 7,500
square feet to have an automatic sprinkler system installed throughout the
entire structure when a building permit and or a demo permit application is
submitted for remodel/renovated.



               3.   All commercial occupancies to have a
monitored fire alarm system regardless of need for sprinkler system.



               4.   All Group I occupancy structures shall
have a monitored fire protection system provided.



               Exceptions:



                  1.   Spaces or areas in
telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications
equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and
standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with
an automatic fire alarm system and are separated from the remainder of the
building by fire barriers consisting of not less than one-hour
fire-resistance-rated walls and two-hour fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling
assemblies.



                  2.   Water and wastewater treatment
facilities constructed exclusively of non-combustible materials with an
occupant load not exceeding 50 persons, but not including areas of such
facilities containing uses which are classified as Group H occupancy.



         (aa)   Subsection 903.2.1.1 is hereby amended to provide
as follows:



            903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided for fire areas containing Group A-1 occupancies and
intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions
exists:



               1.   The fire area exceeds 7,500 square feet
(696 m2);



               2.   The fire area has an occupant load of
300 or more;



               3.   The fire area is located on a floor
other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies; or



               4.   The fire area contains a multi-theater
complex.



         (bb)   Subsection 903.2.1.3 is hereby amended to provide
as follows:



               903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler
system shall be provided for fire areas containing Group A-3 occupancies and
intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions
exists:



                  1.   The fire area exceeds 7,500
square feet (696 m2);



                  2.   The fire area has an occupant
load of 300 or more; or



                  3.   The fire area is located on a
floor other than the level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.



         (cc)   Subsection 903.2.1.4 is hereby amended to provide
as follows:



            903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided for fire areas containing Group A-4 occupancies and
intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions
exists:



               1.   The fire area exceeds 7,500 square feet
(696 m2);



               2.   The fire area has an occupant load of
300 or more; or



               3.   The fire area is located on a floor
other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.



         (dd)   Subsection 903.2.3 is hereby amended to provide
as follows:



               903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided for Group E occupancies as follows:



               1.   Throughout all Group E fire areas
greater than 7,500 square feet (696 m2) in area.



               2.   Throughout every portion of educational
buildings below the lowest level of exit discharge serving that portion of
the building.



            Exception: An automatic sprinkler system is not
required in any area below the lowest level of exit discharge serving that
area where every classroom throughout the building has at least one exterior
exit door at ground level and the total building area is 7,500 square feet or
less.



         (ee)   Subsection 903.2.4 is hereby amended to provide
as follows:



            903.2.4 Group F-1. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group F-1 occupancy
where one of the following conditions exists:



               1.   A Group F-1 fire area exceeds 7,500
square feet (696 m2);



               2.   A Group F-1 fire area is located more
than three stories above grade plane;



               3.   The combined area of all Group F-1 fire
areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 7,500 square feet (696
m2); or



               4.   A Group F-1 occupancy used for the
manufacture of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet
(232 m2).



         (ff)   Subsection 903.2.6 is hereby amended by deleting
the second exception thereof and substituting therefor a new exception to
provide as follows:



            Exceptions:



            2.   An automatic sprinkler system is not required
where: Group 1-4 day care facilities are at the level of exit discharge,
every room in which care is provided has at least one exterior exit door, and
the total building area is less than 7,500 square feet (696 m2).



         (gg)   Subsection 903.2.7 is hereby amended to provide
as follows:



            903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be provided throughout buildings containing a Group M occupancy where one of
the following conditions exists:



               1.   A Group M fire area exceeds 7,500
square feet (696 m2);



               2.   A Group M fire area is located more
than three stories above grade plane:



               3.   The combined area of all Group M fire
areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 7,500 square feet (696
m2); or



               4.   A Group M occupancy used for the
display and sale of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 5,000 square
feet (464 m2).



         (hh)   Subsection 903.2.8 is hereby amended to provide
as follows:



            903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system
installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all
buildings with a Group R fire area, including attached balconies, patios,
porches, breezeways, carports, and porte-cocheres, regardless of fire
separation. In addition, an automatic sprinkler system installed in
accordance with section 903.3.1.3 shall be provided throughout all townhouses.



         (ii)   Subsection 903.2.9 is hereby amended to provide
as follows:



            903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group S-1 occupancy
where one of the following conditions exists:



               1.   A Group S-1 fire area exceeds 7,500
square feet (696 m2);



               2.   A Group S-1 fire area is located more
than three stories above grade plane;



               3.   The combined area of all Group S-1 fire
areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 7,500 square feet (696
m2);



               4.   A Group S-1 fire area used for the
storage of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square
feet (464 m2): or



               5.   A Group S-1 occupancy used for the
storage of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet (232
m2).



         (jj)   Subsection 903.2.9.1 is hereby amended to provide
as follows:



            903.2.9.1 Repair garages. An automatic sprinkler
system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as repair garages in
accordance with section 406.8 of the International Building Code, where one
of the following conditions exists:



               1.   A building has two or more stories
above grade plane, including a basement, with a fire area containing a repair
garage exceeding 7,500 square feet (696 m2);



               2.   A building of not more than one story
above grade plane, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding
7,500 square feet (696 m2);



               3.   A building with repair garages
servicing vehicles parked in basements; or



               4.   A Group S-1 fire area used for the
repair of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square
feet (464 m2).



         (kk)   Subsection 903.2.10 is hereby amended to provide
as follows:



            903.2.10 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages. An
automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings classified
as enclosed parking garages in accordance with section 406.6 of the
International Building Code where either of the following conditions exist:



               1.   Where the fire area of the enclosed
parking garage exceeds 7,500 square feet (696 m2); or



               2.   Where the enclosed parking garage is
located beneath other groups.



               Exception: Enclosed parking garages located
beneath Group R-3 occupancies.



         (ll)   Subsection 903.3.7 is hereby added to provide as
follows:



            903.3.7 Fire department connections. Fire department
connections for automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed in accordance
with section 912. A fire hydrant shall be located within 300 feet of the fire
department connection measured along an approved fire apparatus access road.
The fire department connection shall have a five-inch Storz connection.



         (mm)   Subsection 905.8 is hereby added to provide as
follows:



            905.8 Dry standpipes. Dry standpipes are prohibited
unless approved by the fire code official. The fire code official is
authorized to approve dry standpipes where access to a portion of a single
story building at grade level is limited by the location on property,
topography, waterways, nonnegotiable grades or other similar conditions and
the dry standpipe hose connections are to be installed on the exterior only
and at grade level adjacent to an access door.



         (nn)   Subsection 907.5.3 is hereby added to provide as
follows:



            907.5.3 Evacuation. Upon activation of a fire alarm
notification system, all occupants of the structure for which such activation
occurred shall evacuate and shall remain outside the structure until the fire
department has determined that no fire or danger exists.



         (oo)   Subsection 912.2.3 is hereby added to provide as
follows:



            912.2.3 Remote locations. Where fire department
connections are located in fire vaults or where one fire department
connection serves multiple buildings, the fire department connection shall be
provided with a sign indicating the address to the building or buildings to
which such connection serves. The sign shall have the address numbers at
least six inches in height and the street name in letters at least two inches
in height. All such signs shall be subject to the approval of the fire code
official.



         (pp)   Subsection 912.3.1 is hereby added to provide as
follows:



            912.3.1 Locking fire department connection caps. A
fire department connection shall have a five-inch Storz connection and shall
include an approved locking cap as specified by the fire code official.



         (qq)   Subsection 5601.1 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            5601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall
govern the possession, manufacture, storage, handling, sale and use of
explosives, explosive materials, fireworks and small arms ammunition.



            Exceptions:



               1.   The Armed Forces of the United States,
Coast Guard or National Guard while performing official duties.



               2.   Explosives in forms prescribed by the
official United States Pharmacopoeia.



               3.   The possession, storage and use of
small arms ammunition when packaged in accordance with DOT packaging
requirements.



               4.   The possession, storage, and use of not
more than one pound (0.454 kg) of commercially manufactured sporting black
powder, 20 pounds (nine kg) of smokeless powder and 10,000 small arms primers
for hand loading of small arms ammunition for personal consumption.



               5.   The use of explosive materials by
federal, state and local regulatory, law enforcement and fire agencies acting
in their official capacities.



               6.   Special industrial explosive devices
which, in the aggregate, contain less than 50 pounds (23 kg) of explosive
materials.



               7.   The use of fireworks by a railroad
employee or other transportation agency employee for signal purposes or
illumination.



               8.   The sale or use of blank cartridges for
a show, the theater, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or
sports.



               9.   The possession, storage and use of
blank industrial-power load cartridges when packaged in accordance with DOT
packaging regulations.



               10.   Transportation in accordance with DOT
49 CFR Parts 100—185.



               11.   Items preempted by federal regulations.



         (rr)   Subsection 5601.1.3 is hereby amended to provide
as follows:



            5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture,
storage, sale, transportation, handling, and use of fireworks within the city
and within the area immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city limits
and extending 5,000 feet outside such city limits, provided that such area is
not located within the territory of any other incorporated city, town, or
village, are prohibited.



            5601.1.3.1 Aiding; minors. It shall be unlawful for
any parent or guardian of a minor child below the age of ten to permit or
allow such minor child to possess, manufacture, store, sell, transport,
handle, or use fireworks in violation of this code.



            5601.1.3.3 Nuisance declaration. The possession,
manufacture, storage, sale, transportation, handling, or use of any fireworks
within the city and within the area immediately adjacent and contiguous to
the city limits and extending five thousand (5,000) feet outside such city
limits in violation of this code, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
Except as provided in this subsection 5601.1.3, the fire official is directed
and reguired to seize and cause to be safely destroyed any open packages of
fireworks found in violation of this code, and any authorized member of the
fire department or any police officer of the city or any other duly
constituted peace officer is empowered to stop the transportation of and
detain any fireworks being transported illegally or to close any building
where any fireworks are being stored illegally until the fire official can be
notified in order that such fireworks may be seized and destroyed in
accordance with the terms of this section.



            Exceptions:



               1.   The storage and use of fireworks for
fireworks displays as permitted in section 5608.



               2.   The transportation of Fireworks 1.4G by
motor vehicles that meet federal, state, and city reguirements for
transporting Fireworks 1.4G is allowed, provided that such vehicles shall be
eguipped with at least one ten-pound fire extinguisher capable of
extinguishing Type B fires, as defined by the National Fire Protection
Association. A motor vehicle used for the transportation of fireworks shall
display signs on both sides of such vehicle reading, "Fireworks." The sign
shall consist of a white background and red letters at least six inches in
height with a minimum width of three-fourths of an inch.



            Affirmative defense: It shall be an affirmative
defense to prosecution for possession of fireworks that a person was
operating or was a passenger in a motor vehicle that was being operated in a
public place, and the fireworks were not in the passenger area of the motor
vehicle. For the purposes of this section, the "passenger area" of a motor
vehicle means the area of the motor vehicle designed for the seating of the
operator and the passengers of the vehicle. The term does not include:



               1.   A locked glove compartment or similar
locked storage area;



               2.   The trunk of a vehicle; or



               3.   The area behind the last upright seat
of a vehicle that does not have a trunk.



         (ss)   Subsection 5601.4 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            5601.4 Qualifications. Before a permit is issued, as
reguired by section 5601.2, for magazines, blasting, fireworks display or
pyrotechnic special effect operations, the applicant shall submit proof that
such applicant has met state licensing and permit reguirements. The names of
the experienced operators shall be designated on the permit issued.



         (tt)   Section 5608.2 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            5608.2 Permit application. Prior to issuing permits
for a fireworks display, plans for the display, plans for the fireworks
inspections of the display site and demonstrations of the display operations
shall be approved. An applicant for a fireworks display permit shall first
make written application for a permit at least ten days in advance of the
date of the proposed display. A plan establishing procedures to follow and
actions to be taken in the event that a shell fails to ignite in, or
discharge from, a mortar or fails to function over the fallout area or other
malfunctions shall be provided to the fire code official. A permit shall be
issued for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours. No permit shall authorize
more than two displays in each 24-hour period. The transfer of a permit
issued pursuant to this section is prohibited.



         (uu)   Subsection 5608.3.1 are hereby added to provide
as follows:



            5608.3.1 Firefighters to be present during display.
Not less than two city firefighters shall be in attendance during each
fireworks display. The expense of such firefighters shall be paid in advance
at the time of the application for the permit. The firefighters shall be
subject to the fire code official's orders at all times when so employed and
shall be in uniform and remain on duty during the times so deemed by the fire
code official.



         (vv)   Section 5608.5 is hereby amended to provide as
follows:



            5608.5 Storage of fireworks at display site.
Materials to be used for a permitted fireworks display shall be brought in to
the city on the day of the fireworks display. Such materials shall be taken
immediately to the display site for further handling and storage. The storage
of fireworks at the display site shall comply with the reguirements of this
section and NFPA 1123 or NFPA 1126.



         (ww)   Table C.102.1 of Appendix C is hereby amended to
provide as follows:



 




Table C.102.1
Number and Distribution of Fire Hydrants



 
 

Average Spacing
Between Hydrants
a, b, c (feet)




Fire-Flow
Requirements
(gpm)

 

Minimum
Number of
Hydrants

 

Commercial

 

Residential



1,750 or less
 

1

 

300

 

500



2,000 - 2, 250
 

2

 

300

 

500



2,500
 

3

 

300

 

500



3,000
 

3

 

300

 

500



3,500 - 4,000
 

4

 

300

 

500



4,500 - 5,000
 

5

 

300

 

500



5,500
 

6

 

300

 

500



6,000
 

6

 

300

 

500



6,500 - 7,000
 

7

 

300

 

500



7,500 or more
 

8 or moree

 

300

 

500



For S: one foot = 304.8 mm, one gallon per minute - 3.785 L/m


a   Reduce by 100 feet for dead-end streets or roads.

b   Where streets are provided with median dividers which can be crossed
by fire fighters pulling hose lines, or where arterial streets are provided
with four or more traffic lances and have a traffic count of more than 30,000
vehicles per day, hydrants spacing shall average 500 feet on each side of the
street and be arranged on an alternating basis up to a fire-flow requirement
of 7,000 gallons per minute and 400 feet for higher fire-flow requirements.

c   Where new water mains are extended along streets where hydrants are
not needed for protection of structures or similar fire problems, fire
hydrants shall be provided at spacing not to exceed 1,000 feet to provide for
transportation hazards.

d   Reduce by 50 feet for dead-end streets or roads.

e   One hydrant for each 1,000 gallons per minute or fraction thereof.




 



         (xx)   Subsection D103.3 of Appendix D is hereby amended
to provide as follows:



            D103.3 Turning radius. The minimum inside turning
radius shall be 25 feet with a minimum outside turning radius of 50 feet.



         (yy)   Subsection 0104.3 of Appendix D is hereby amended
to provide as follows:



            D104.3 Remoteness. Where two fire apparatus access
roads are reguired, they shall be placed a distance apart egual to not less
than one half of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the
lot or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses.



            Exception: The fire code official is authorized to
approve a reduced distance between fire apparatus accesses where topography
would prevent meeting the distance reguirement and where the reduction will
not pose a threat to public safety.



      (4)   A copy of the 2015 International Fire Code shall be
maintained by the city. If a provision of said code is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health
ordinance or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto or any other ordinance
or code or regulation of the city, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion of health and safety shall control.



   (J)   2012 International Energy Conservation Code adopted.



      (1)   The city adopts the 2012 International Energy
Conservation Code published by the International Code Council, with the
exception of such sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or
amended and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as if the same
was copied in full herein, and the provisions thereof shall be the building
regulations within the corporate limits of the city.



      (2)   A copy of the 2012 International Energy Conservation
Code shall be maintained by the city.  If any part of this section is found
to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or
health ordinance or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto or any other
ordinance or code or regulation of the city, the provisions which established
the higher standard for the promotion of health and safety shall control.



      (3)   Amendments.  The 2012 International Energy Conservation
Code shall be amended to read as follows:



         (a)   Subsection C101.1 is amended to read as follows:



            Subsection C101.1 Title. This code shall be known as
the International Energy Conservation Code of the City of Meadows Place,
Texas, and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as “this
code.”



         (b)   Subsection C103.3.2 is deleted.



         (c)   Subsection C107.2 is deleted.



         (d)   Subsection C107.3 is deleted.



         (e)   Subsection C107.5 is deleted.



         (f)   Subsection C108.4 is amended to read as follows:



            C108.4 Failure to comply.  Any person who shall
continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be in violation of this code and the city’s code of
ordinances.



         (g)   Section C109 is deleted.



         (h)   Subsection R101.1 is amended to read as follows:



            Subsection R101.1 Title. This code shall be known as
the International Energy Conservation Code of the City of Meadows Place,
Texas, and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as “this
code.”



         (i)   Subsection Rl03.3.2 is deleted.



         (j)   Subsection R 107.2 is deleted.



         (k)   Subsection R107.3 is deleted.



         (l)   Subsection R107.5 is deleted.



         (m)   Subsection R108.4 is amended to read as follows:



            R108.4 Failure to comply.  Any person who shall
continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be in violation of this code and the city’s code of
ordinances.



         (n)   Section R109 is deleted.



   (K)   Adoption of the 2012 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.



      (1)   The city adopts the 2012 International Swimming Pool and
Spa Code, published by the International Code Council, with the exception of
such sections and subsections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified,
or amended and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as if the
same were copied in full herein, and the provisions thereof shall be building
regulations within the corporate limits of the city.



      (2)   A copy of the 2012 International Swimming Pool and Spa
Code shall be maintained by the city. If any part of this section is found to
be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or
health ordinance or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto or any other
ordinance or code or regulation of the city, the provision which establishes
the higher standard for the promotion of health and safety shall control.



      (3)   Amendments. The 2012 International Swimming Pool and Spa
Code shall be amended to read as follows:



         (a)   Subsection 101.1 is amended to read as follows:



            Subsection 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be
known as the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of Meadows
Place, Texas, hereinafter referred to as “this code”.



         (b)   Sections 103, 104, and 108 are deleted.



         (c)   Section 107 is deleted and a new Section 107 is
added to read as follows: Section 107 Violations.



            107.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a
person, entity, firm, or corporation to violate any of the provisions of this
code. Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits another to violate
any provision of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 unless
such violation implicates fire safety, zoning, or public health and
sanitation including dumping of refuse in which case the fine amount shall
not be more than $2,000.  Each occurrence of any violation of this code
shall constitute a separate offense. Each day on which any violation of this
code occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of
the penalty provided for above, the city attorney may institute any civil or
criminal proceeding authorized by law to correct, abate, remove, restrain, or
prosecute a violation of this code or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure, improvement, or premises, or to stop an illegal act,
conduct, business, or utilization of a building, structure, improvement, or
premises."



      The City Council ratifies any action or inaction of any city
officer, official, employee, representative, contractor, or any such similar
person or position acting on behalf of or at the request of the city in the
enforcement of any prior swimming pool code.



(Prior Code, § 9-2)  (Ord. 2009-17, passed 7-28-2009;  Ord. 2013-19,
passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 2013-20, passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 2013-21, passed
9-24-2013; Ord. 2013-30, passed 12-17-2013; Ord. 2014-02, passed 1-28-2014;
Ord. 2014-07, passed 4-27-2014; Ord. 2015-05, passed 2-24-2015; Ord. 2016-13,
passed 7-26-2016; Ord. 2017-05, passed 2-28-2017; Ord. 2018-24, passed
9-25-2018; Ord. 2018-25, passed 9-25-2018; Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-25-2018;
Ord. 2018-27, passed 9-25-2018; Ord. 2018-28, passed 9-25-2018)  Penalty,
see § 150.99



§ 150.03  RESERVED.



§ 150.04  DEED RESTRICTION CERTIFICATION.



   Any applicant for a construction permit, for the construction or
erection of improvements or the alteration of existing improvements in the
city, shall acknowledge, in writing, that the city is not, in any manner,
required to examine deed restrictions applicable to the property which is the
subject of the permit application and shall further certify, in writing and
in conjunction with the filing of the application, that the proposed
construction is in accord with the deed restrictions and does not violate and
is not contrary to any deed restrictions or covenants running with the land.



(Prior Code, § 9-4)  (Ord. 84-17, § 5, passed 2-6-1984; Ord. 84-026, § 1,
passed 2-28-1984)



§ 150.05  INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All prime contractors must have on file a certificate showing
coverage by the following insurance:



      (1)   Public liability insurance to the extent of $500,000 for
any one accident and $100,000 for any one person; and



      (2)   Property damage insurance to the extent of $100,000 for
any one accident and $500,000 in the aggregate.



   (B)   The insurance shall be written by an accredited company under
the supervision of the State Board of Insurance Commissioners.



   (C)   All certificates shall include an endorsement thereon that the
city shall be notified at least ten days in advance of the policy's or
policies' cancellation or expiration.



(Prior Code, § 9-5)  (Ord. 88-023, § 1, passed 6-28-1988; Ord. 91-23, §
1, passed 7-23-1991)



§ 150.06  RESERVED.



§ 150.07  REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS.



   (A)   Registration required. Any person who engages in or works at
the actual construction, installation, alteration, repair and renovation of
equipment or structures in the city shall apply for and receive a
registration certificate from the city.  This section includes but is not
limited to general, irrigation, sign, mechanical, fencing, fire
alarm/sprinkler, drain, homeowner, roofing, electrical and plumbing
contractors.



   (B)   Application. Application for a registration certificate shall
be made in writing to the city on a form furnished by the city for such
purpose, which shall contain at a minimum the name, address, and telephone
number of the applicant.  The applicant shall provide a statement as to
their practical experience in actual construction, installation, alteration,
repair, and renovation of equipment or structures.  If the applicant is
require by the state to be licensed, applicant shall furnish a copy of the
valid license to the city at time of application.



   (C)   Any person who violates any provisions of this section may be
subject to the provisions of § 150.99.



   (D)   Contractors shall pay a registration fee as set forth by City
Council in a schedule of fees.  Plumbing contractors are exempt from paying
the registration fee.



(Ord. 2004-41, passed 11-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2012-24, passed 6-26-2012) 
Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.08  MARKING OF VEHICLES.



   Any company vehicle, used in the city by any licensee under the terms
and provisions of this subchapter, shall be clearly and permanently marked,
with the lettering at least two inches in height, bearing the company name,
the company phone number and the license number of the licensee.  Magnetic
signs shall not be permitted.



(Prior Code, § 9-7)  (Ord. 84-039, § 3, passed 4-24-1984)



§ 150.09  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED; FEE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to use or occupy
any building, structure, or premise unless a certificate of occupancy has
been issued for such building, structure, or premise in accordance with this
section.



   (B)   The owner of a building, structure, or premise desiring a
certificate of occupancy shall first file an application with the city and
shall pay a residential or commercial certificate of occupancy fee, as
applicable, as set forth by City Council in a schedule of fees. The
application shall be on a form provided by the city, and shall:



      (1)   Identify the building, structure, or premise with
reasonable certainty;



      (2)   Indicate that the building, structure, or premise is
intended to be used or occupied primarily for either residential or
commercial purposes;



      (3)   Identify each owner of the building, structure, or
premise; and



      (4)   Identify each tenant or lessee of the building,
structure, or premise, if any, unless the building, structure, or premise is
intended to be used or occupied primarily for commercial purposes as a
multi-family residential property, including an apartment.



   (C)   Promptly after the city receives the application and fee
required by this section, the Building Official or other designee as
appointed by the Mayor shall inspect the building, structure, or premise
identified on the application. For purposes of this section, “promptly”
shall mean without unreasonable delay. Upon completion of the inspection, the
building official or designee shall:



      (1)   Issue a certificate of occupancy in the name of each
owner and tenant or lessee identified on the application if the Building
Official or designee determines that the building, structure, or premise is
suitable for occupancy; or



      (2)   Identify in writing the reason or reasons why the
building, structure, or premise is not suitable for occupancy and provide a
copy of the writing to the owner.



   (D)   The owner of the building, structure, or premise shall apply
for and obtain a new certificate of occupancy upon the addition of any new
owner, tenant, or lessee, and shall pay the applicable fee therefor.



   (E)   The electric utility shall disconnect the electrical service
to any building, structure, or premise intended to be used or occupied
primarily for commercial purposes as indicated on the application required by
this section upon the addition of any new owner, tenant, or lessee. The
electric utility shall not connect or reconnect utility service to the
building, structure, or premise until the city provides written authorization
to the electric utility. The city will provide written authorization to the
electric utility once the certificate of occupancy required by division (D)
has been issued.



   (F)   For purposes of this section, the addition of a new owner,
tenant, or lessee occurs when an owner, tenant, or lessee who is not named in
the certificate of occupancy is vested with an enforceable right to
possession of all or part of the building, structure, or premise, provided
that divisions (D) and (E) shall not apply to the addition of a new tenant or
lessee if such new tenant or lessee is not required to be identified on the
application required by this section.



   (G)   If electrical utility service or running water is terminated
to the building, structure, or premise for failure to pay the amounts due
therein, or for other violations of state or local codes, then the Building
Official or designee may revoke the certificate of occupancy. Any person or
entity in whose name the revoked certificate of occupancy is issued may
appeal the revocation by the building official or designee to the City
Council by filing a written appeal with the City Secretary no later than the
tenth day after the date the building official or designee revoked the
certificate of occupancy. If an appeal is timely filed, the City Council
shall hold a public hearing to determine whether to sustain or overturn the
action of the building official or designee. The determination by the City
Council shall be final and binding on all parties.



   (H)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the
building, structure, or premise has running water, which such running water
shall be in compliance with all regulations of this Code.



   (I)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued if the driveway of
a building, structure, or premises is in a hazardous condition as set forth
by § 150.02(G)(3)(e) of the Code of Ordinances.



   (J)   Any person who shall aid, assist, permit, or knowingly allow a
building, structure, or premises to be used or occupied in violation of this
section shall be deemed in violation of this section, even if the person did
not personally use or occupy the building, structure, or premise.



   (K)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (A) that the
person or entity used or occupied the building, structure, or premise for the
sole purpose of:



      (1)   Inspecting the building, structure, or premise; or



      (2)   Repairing, removing, securing, or demolishing the
building, structure, or premise.



(Ord. 2014-03, passed 1-28-2014; Ord. 2015-11, passed 4-29-2015)



§ 150.10  CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR PRIVATE PARKING AREAS IN
RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL ZONED DISTRICTS.



   (A)   This section shall be deemed to control and regulate the
construction and/or reconstruction of all areas upon private property for the
ingress and egress of motor vehicles and the parking of the same and shall
control the construction of such areas in excess of 2,000 square feet in
residential zoned districts and 500 square feet in commercial zoned districts.



   (B)   All construction or reconstruction of parking areas, under the
terms and provisions of this section, shall be in accord with the
requirements hereinafter set out. These requirements shall be deemed the
minimum requirements. However, if at any time in the opinion of the Building
Official, special circumstances shall necessitate construction in accord with
more restrictive and/or higher standards, then the Building Official may
specify the requirements, which shall be deemed to supersede and shall be
controlling as to any other requirements herein provided with which they
shall be in conflict.



      (1)   In all cases, the subgrade (natural ground) shall be
scarified to a depth of six inches and stabilized with 5% lime (23 lbs/s.y.).



      (2)   Parking areas may be paved with either concrete or
asphalt materials subject only to such additional standards, conditions or
technical specifications as shall from time to time be reasonably imposed or
promulgated by the Building Official and to the following:



         (a)   Concrete construction. Five-inch thickness, 3,000
psi, minimum five sacks of cement per cubic yard of ready mixed concrete, #3
reinforcing bars on 24-inch centers.



         (b)   Asphalt construction. Six inches of crushed
limestone base course or equivalent with two inches of hot mix, D.O.T.
(Department of Transportation) Standard #340 Type "D" Modified, compacted to
95% Proctor (density).



         (c)   Concrete and asphalt paving systems. 



            1.   Concrete and asphalt paving systems designed
by an engineer who is licensed to practice in the state may be accepted in
lieu of the above requirements. Engineering calculations and anticipated
loads shall be shown on drawings submitted for permit. Any plan for concrete
and asphalt paving systems submitted under the terms of this division
(B)(2)(c) shall be accompanied by a certification by a registered state
engineer that the proposal as submitted for an alternative paving system
design is, in the opinion of the engineer, comparable to and at least equal
to the precise requirements set out in divisions (B)(2)(a) or (B)(2)(b) above.



            2.   The city shall retain the right to seek an
opinion by an engineer of the city's choosing to qualify the paving design
submitted and to determine that the design is equal to or exceeds the
requirements as set out in divisions (B)(2)(a) or (B)(2)(b) above. In the
event the city shall elect to have the plan reviewed by a competent
registered state engineer of the city's own choosing, the review shall be at
the expense of the person or persons submitting the application for the
permit and prior to the review of the plans, an appropriate deposit shall be
made with the city to cover the anticipated cost that the city might incur.
In any event, all costs incurred by the city for engineering reviews shall be
paid by the entity seeking the permit (applicant) before any permit shall be
issued.



         (d)   A testing laboratory approved by the city shall
monitor the construction progress during all phases of construction and
submit interim reports to the city for review. Upon completion of the
installation, the testing laboratory shall submit to the city a final report
certifying full compliance with the submitted plans and specifications.



         (e)   In the areas of a parking lot that may be
subjected to heavy loads imposed by service/delivery vehicles (such as
gasoline tankers and the like), the paving required shall be the equivalent
of those for street paving (such as concrete paving).



(Ord. 95-20, § 1, passed 5-23-1995)



      (3)   The Building Standards Commission of the city shall have
the power and authority, upon application and hearing, to allow the use of
materials other than those herein specified or other methods of construction
not herein specifically provided, provided the Building Standards Commission
shall find that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the
intent of this section and that the material, method or work offered is, for
the purposes intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this
section in quality, strength, effectiveness, durability and safety. The
Building Standards Commission shall require that sufficient evidence or proof
be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding the use.



      (4)   The Building Official shall have the authority, in the
case of an emergency or other overriding public necessity, to permit the
construction of a parking area not in accord with the terms and provisions of
this section when the same shall be deemed necessary by the Building Official.



(Prior Code, § 9-9)  (Ord. 88-032, § 1, passed 8-23-1988)



§ 150.11  SPECIAL SWIMMING POOL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any property owner having a swimming pool shall be charged
with the responsibility of maintaining the required fence as provided for
under this code in good repair. If the Building Official of the city finds
and determines that a fence is in need of repair, he or she or his or her
authorized agent may enter upon the property where the swimming pool is
located and may repair, replace, secure or otherwise remedy any enclosure or
fence that is damaged, deteriorated, substandard, dilapidated or otherwise in
a state that poses a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city.



   (B)   Unless in the case of an emergency or matter of urgent public
necessity, the Building Official shall give notice to the property owner and
an opportunity to be heard in accordance with the provisions of the code of
ordinances of the city, and the city may provide for the repair, replacement,
securing or remedying and enclosure of a fence of a swimming pool determined
to be in violation.



   (C)   If the city incurs expenses in requiring compliance of this
section of the code of ordinances, the city may assess and shall have a lien
against the property on which the swimming pool that is in violation is
located. The lien shall be satisfied if the property owner or other person
having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the city for
all expenses incurred.



   (D)   The lien as herein provided attaches to the property upon
which the work is completed, and the Building Official and the City Secretary
are authorized to file an appropriate lien in the office of the County Clerk.
The lien notice must contain the name and address of the owner of the
property, if that can be determined, a legal description of the real property
on which the swimming pool or the enclosure or fence is situated, the amount
of expense incurred by the city and the balance due. The lien as herein
provided is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and all
previously recorded bona fide mortgage liens attached to the real property to
which the city's lien attaches.



   (E)   The Building Official or other person authorized by the
Building Official may, under the authority as provided for under Tex. Local
Government Code § 214.101, enter any unoccupied premises at any reasonable
time to inspect, investigate or enforce the powers granted herein.



   (F)   In the event the premises are occupied, the Building Official
or his or her designee shall first give 24 hours' notice to the occupant and
may after having given such notice enter upon the premises to inspect,
investigate or enforce the powers granted by the provisions of this code.



   (G)   The provisions as contained herein shall be in addition to
such other powers as may be from time to time exercised by the Building
Official or other officer of the city in addressing conditions which are
inherently dangerous and contrary to the health, safety and well-being of the
residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-10)  (Ord. 94-11, § 1, passed 3-22-1994)



§ 150.12  CONNECTION TO SEWER SYSTEM.



   The city shall require as a condition of occupancy and/or the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy that all property owners and persons seeking to
reside upon private property shall connect to the existing sanitary sewer
system serving the property if the property is served by a publicly
maintained sanitary sewer system. Any person attempting to reside on any
property in the city that is served by a sanitary sewer system who fails to
connect shall be deemed in violation of this code and may be punished as in
the case of any violation of this code and may be denied a certificate of
occupancy or have any existing certificate of occupancy revoked.



(Prior Code, § 9-11)  (Ord. 94-14, § 1, passed 4-26-1994)  Penalty, see
§ 150.99



§ 150.13  MOLD REMEDIATION WORK PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   (A)   Permit required. No person, firm, association or corporation
may test, treat, contain, dispose and/or remediate mold contamination without
first obtaining a permit from the Building Official of the city as provided
in this section. Permits issued under this section are not transferable.



   (B)   Application for permit. No mold remediation work permit shall
be issued unless written application for the issuance of a permit is
submitted to the Building Official of the city. The application shall state
the name, address and telephone number of the applicant; the nature and
location of the work; and other data as may reasonably be required by the
Building Official. The application shall be accompanied by plans showing the
scope and dimensions of the proposed work, the location of the work and such
other information as may be prescribed by the Building Official. The Building
Official shall approve the application and plan or make changes as necessary
to serve the best interest of the city, and the issuance of a permit shall be
conditioned upon performance of the work as shown on the approved application
and plan.



   (C)   Insurance. A permit holder, prior to the commencement of mold
remediation work as provided in this section, shall furnish the city
satisfactory evidence in writing that the permit holder has in force and will
maintain in force, during the performance of the work and the period of the
permit, public liability insurance of not less than $100,000 for any one
person and $500,000 for any one accident and property damage insurance of not
less than $100,000 for any one accident and $500,000 in the aggregate duly
issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state.



   (D)   Duration of permit. No permit shall exceed 180 days and shall
provide for automatic termination upon abandonment or upon any violation of
ordinance or statute. The Building Official of the city may suspend any
permit for any violation of an ordinance or statute and for the creation of a
nuisance or hazard. The permit holder may appeal the suspension to the City
Council for final determination, if the appeal is filed with the City
Secretary within ten days of the suspension.



   (E)   Work site. The city shall provide a mold remediation work
permit to each person meeting the requirements under this section. The permit
shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the person performing
the work. It shall be the duty of any permit holder to keep the permit posted
in a conspicuous place at the site of the work. It shall be unlawful for any
person to exhibit the permit at or about any work not covered by the permit
or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the
site.



   (F)   Liability of the city. This section shall not be construed as
imposing upon the city or any official or employee any liability or
responsibility for damages to any person injured by the performance of any
work for which a mold remediation work permit is issued under this section,
nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be deemed to have
assumed any such liability or responsibility because of inspections
authorized under this section, the issuance of any permit or the approval of
any mold remediation work.



   (G)   Fee. Applicants shall pay a permit fee as set forth by City
Council in a schedule of fees.



(Ord. 2003-03, passed 1-28-2003; Am. Ord. 2012-25, passed 6-26-2012) 
Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.14  RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY LICENSING AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CRITICAL VIOLATION.  A violation of this code, state or federal
law that is capable of causing or contributing to injury or illness of
occupants.



      DWELLING UNIT.  A building or portion of a building designed to
provide independent living facilities for not more than one family and that
contains bathroom facilities and not more than one kitchen.



      LICENSE. A residential rental property license issued under this
subchapter.



      LIFE SAFETY VIOLATION.  A violation of this code, state or
federal law that results in an imminent threat of death or injury to persons
on the premises of a dwelling unit.



      RENT. The offering or leasing of a dwelling unit to an occupant
other than the owner and involves the payment of a rental amount.



      SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING.



         (a)   A building that contains only one dwelling unit
and has open space on all sides of the building; or



         (b)   A building that contains dwelling units located on
separately platted lots that are joined to other dwelling units on one or
both sides by a common wall that separates the individual dwelling units.



   (B)   License required.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to rent an unlicensed
single-family dwelling unit to another.



      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this
subchapter that the single-family dwelling unit was rented for a period of
less than six months to a person who was the immediate past owner of the
dwelling unit or who will be the immediate next owner of the dwelling unit.



   (C)   License requirements.



      (1)   License applications must be made on the forms provided
by the city and accompanied with the application fees.



      (2)   Licenses are not assignable or transferable and are
valid for one year.



      (3)   An application for a new license must be submitted to
the city within 30 days of any change in ownership of a single-family
dwelling unit.



      (4)   Within 30 days from the date the city receives a
completed license application the city will issue a license or notify the
applicant that it refuses to issue a license.



   (D)   Denial of license.  The city may deny a license for life
safety or critical violations. If the city refuses to issue a license, the
city will give written notice of the denial to the applicant as soon as
reasonably possible, but not more than five business days after the decision
is made to deny the license. The written notice will include:



      (1)   A clear statement of the reason for the city's denial;
and



      (2)   A statement that the applicant may appeal the denial of
the license to the city's Building Standards Commission by filing a written
notice of appeal with the city within 15 business days of the effective date
of the denial.



   (E)   Revocation of license.  The city may revoke a license for
life safety or critical violations. To revoke a license, the city will send
written notice of the city's intent to revoke the license not less than 30
business days prior to the date of revocation. The notice will include:



      (1)   A clear statement of the reason the city intends to
revoke the license;



      (2)   The date the revocation will become effective, which
will be not less than 30 business days from the date written; and



      (3)   A statement that the license holder may file a written
appeal of the proposed revocation to the city's Building Standards Commission
within 15 business days of the date of the notice.



   (F)   Appeals.



      (1)   The city's Building Standards Commission will hold a
hearing on an appeal as soon as is reasonably possible, but not more than 15
business days after the date the appeal is properly filed. The city, the
person appealing and any other interested party may present evidence and
argument to the Commission. An audio recording of the hearing will be made.



      (2)   After completion of the hearing, the Commission will
render a written decision on the appeal that includes a summary of the
evidence that supports the decision. The Commission may issue appropriate
orders to implement any decision made. A copy of the written decision will be
provided to the person filing the appeal.



      (3)   The appeal provisions in this section govern over any
other conflicting provision in this code.



   (G)   Inspections.  Upon application or renewal of a license, the
city will inspect the exterior of the single-family dwelling unit to
determine and ensure that the dwelling unit is not a public nuisance or
substandard and that the unit meets all zoning, health and safety
requirements of the code.



   (H)   Interior inspection and right of entry.



      (1)   The city may inspect the interior of a single-family
dwelling unit to ensure that the dwelling unit does not have any critical or
life safety violations if:



         (a)   There is a change in occupancy;



         (b)   An inspector notes an exterior code violation that
indicates a potential critical or life safety violation; or



         (c)   An inspection is requested by the tenant. The city
will contact the license holder and allow him or her to be present during the
inspection.



      (2)   An inspector may enter into a single-family dwelling
unit for an interior inspection at a reasonable time when the officer:



         (a)   Obtains the consent of an adult lawfully occupying
the dwelling unit;



         (b)   Obtains the consent of the license holder for an
unoccupied dwelling unit; or



         (c)   Obtains a warrant from a court to inspect the
dwelling unit.



   (I)   Repairs.  Violations noted during an inspection must be
completed as follows:



      (1)   License holders must take steps to safely isolate
tenants from the dangers of life safety violations immediately and must make
repairs within a reasonable period of time. Life safety violations must
remain isolated from tenants until all repairs are complete.



      (2)   License holders must take steps to safely isolate
tenants from the dangers of critical violations within 72 hours of notice and
must make repairs within a reasonable period of time.



(Ord. 2008-23, passed 8-26-2008)  Penalty, see § 150.99



BUILDING IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



§ 150.25  RESIDENTIAL ROOFING REQUIREMENTS.



   In addition to the applicable provisions of the Building Code, as
adopted in §§ 150.01 through 150.12, the following additional requirements
shall control as to the issuance of roofing permits and as to roofing
materials to be used in roof construction and/or roof replacement for all
residential dwellings and in all residential districts within the city. The
provisions of this section shall apply to all new construction of the type
specified herein, as well as to replacement of existing roofing.



   (A)   In addition to the information which an applicant for a
roofing permit is required to provide to the city pursuant to the provisions
of the Building Code, prior to the issuance of the permit, the applicant
shall furnish to the city written proof that the materials to be used in
residential roofing, whether new or replacement, meet or exceed all of the
requirements set forth in division (D) of this section which are applicable
to the specific type of materials to be used. The written proof shall be a
certificate or other document prepared and furnished by the manufacturer or
the seller of the roofing materials to be used, which describes the materials
in sufficient detail that compliance with the requirements of division (D) of
this section is evident from the face thereof. Failure to provide the written
proof shall constitute grounds for denial of the permit.



   (B)   Each application for a roofing permit shall be signed by the
applicant, and the application form for the permit shall contain the
following statement:



By signature of this application, the applicant agrees to install the roofing
materials for which a permit is issued in accordance with the manufacturer's
directions and specifications for installation and further in accordance with
certain guidelines as promulgated by the Building Official of the City of
Meadows Place and furnished to the City of Meadows Place and furnished to the
applicant; and the applicant further affirms, under penalty of perjury, that
the roofing materials to be installed meet the requirements of the code of
ordinances of the City of Meadows Place.



   (C)   (1)   As a part of the application for a roofing permit,
the applicant shall submit a written statement signed by the owner and/or the
person having the legal right to occupy the premises where the roofing
materials are to be installed, which statement shall provide as follows:



By signature hereof, the undersigned agrees to permit the Building Official
of the City of Meadows Place and/or his or her designee to enter upon the
property which is the subject of a roofing permit application made to the
city for work to be performed at ______________ (street address), at any
time, without further consent or permission by me, for the purpose of
performing such on-site inspections of the roofing materials and any partial
or complete roofing installation as may be deemed necessary by employees of
the City of Meadows Place to ensure compliance with all applicable provisions
of the code of ordinances of the City of Meadows Place. The undersigned
states that he or she is the owner and/or person having the legal right to
occupy the premises made the subject of the application.



      (2)   In the event that the applicant is unable to obtain the
owner's or legal occupant's statement at the time of filing the permit
application by reason of the owner's or occupant's absence from the property
or other circumstance making it impossible for the applicant to obtain the
statement in a timely manner, and if, in the sound judgment of the Building
Official or his or her designee, a delay in the issuance of a permit and
subsequent replacement or repair of the subject roof might result in damage
to the property or other irreparable harm or injury to the owner or legal
occupant, then the applicant may execute an affidavit of inability to obtain
the necessary statement and of intent to obtain and submit the same within a
period of seven days. Upon the filing of the affidavit together with an
otherwise complete application and upon determining that the applicant would
otherwise be entitled to the issuance of a permit, the city shall issue a
provisional permit which shall be valid for a period of seven days from the
date of issuance.



      (3)   The holder of a provisional permit shall obtain and
submit the required owner's/occupant's statement within the seven-day period.
If the statement is not filed with the city within the time specified, the
provisional permit shall lapse; and any roofing materials installed as of
that date pursuant to the provisional permit shall be deemed to have been
installed without a permit. The installation shall constitute a violation of
this code, and the city and its officers and agents shall enforce the terms
and provisions of this section as hereinafter specified for unpermitted
installations of roofing materials.



      (4)   The affidavit to be executed by the applicant under the
terms and provisions of this division shall be in the following form:



   STATE OF TEXAS



   COUNTY OF FORT BEND



   BEFORE ME, the undersigned Notary Public, on this day personally
appeared________________________,  known to me to be the person whose name
is subscribed to the above and foregoing application for a roofing permit,
who, after being by me first duly sworn, on his or her oath, deposed and said:



   My name is___________________, and I am the applicant for a roofing
permit under the terms and provisions of the code of ordinances of the City
of Meadows Place for roofing work to be performed at 
______________________________ (street address). I state that at the date of
execution of this Affidavit, I am unable to obtain the written statement of
the owner and/or legal occupant of such premises granting permission for
on-site inspection of roofing materials and installation on the premises,
which statement is required as a part of the permit application herein, and
that I am unable to do so for the following reasons:



   _____________________________________________________________________



   _____________________________________________________________________



   _____________________________________________________________________



   _____________________________________________________________________



   I further state that immediate installation of roofing materials on the
subject premises is necessary and that delay in doing so may result in damage
to the property or other irreparable harm or injury to the owner or legal
occupant of the premises for the following reasons:



   _____________________________________________________________________



   _____________________________________________________________________



   _____________________________________________________________________



   I state that I will obtain the required statement and will file the
same with the City of Meadows Place no later than seven days after the date
of issuance of a provisional roofing permit. I understand and acknowledge
that the provisional permit will be valid only for a period of seven days
from the date of issuance and that upon failure by me to obtain and file the
required owner's/occupant's statement within that period of time, the
provisional permit will lapse and the roofing installation made pursuant to
such provisional permit will be deemed to have been made with a permit and
that as such, the continued maintenance of such installed roofing materials
will constitute a violation of the terms and provisions of the code of
ordinances of the City of Meadows Place.



                        ____________________________



                        Affiant



   SWORN TO AND SUBSCRIBED TO before me this the _________ day of
________, 20___.



                        ____________________________



                        Notary Public



                        State of Texas



                        My Commission Expires:



                        ____________________________



   (D)   Subject to § 150.02(C) of this Code, the following allowable
residential roofing materials may be installed in new or replacement roof
construction:



      (1)   (a)   Architectural asphalt or composition shingles
may be installed if such shingles have:



            1.   A  minimum  10%  blend of
copper-containing granules incorporated uniformly across the shingle surface;



            2.   Uniform distribution of copper-containing
granules on the shingle and the hip and ridge;



            3.   Third party laboratory testing for compliance;



            4.   A warranty of not less than 30 years;



            5.   A uniform design and texture; and



            6.   A Class “A” fire rating.



         (b)   The city may maintain a list of approved
architectural asphalt and composition shingles. If the city does not maintain
a list of approved architectural asphalt and composition shingles or if a
desired shingle product is not on such list, then the Building Official shall
approve the type of architectural asphalt and composition shingle before
installation and, only approved products shall be installed.



         (c)   Where the existing roof has two or more
applications of any type of roof covering, the existing roof coverings shall
be removed before installation of architectural asphalt or composition
shingles.



      (2)   Vitrified clay tile, ceramic tile, or performed precast
concrete tile may be installed if its finished appearance resembles ceramic
tile.



      (3)   Membrane-type roof systems, such a thermoplastic,
thermoset, and bitumen, approved by a certified testing laboratory or
accepted by the International Code Council, may be installed on a roof with a
slope of not more than three inches in 12 inches.



      (4)   Standing seam metal roofing system may be installed if:



         (a)   All roofing exposed to the weather is corrosion
resistant;



         (b)   All ferrous sections or shapes are not less than
No. 26 galvanized sheet gauge;



         (c)   All aluminum sections or shapes are not less than
.027 gauge;



         (d)   All copper or lead coated sections or shapes are
not less than .0217 gauge standard thickness;



         (e)   All shaped sheets or sections are designed to
support the required live load between supporting members;



         (f)   The roof deck is at least one-half inch CDX
exterior plywood;



         (g)   Thirty-pound felt or greater is applied over the
roof deck;



         (h)   Standing seam gauge steel, aluminum, or copper
roof coverings are approved by the city; and



         (i)   If a  new roof covering is to replace as existing
roof, all existing roof material shall be removed first before installation
of the new roof.



      (5)   Aluminum roof systems, which are approved by a certified
testing laboratory or accepted by the International Code Council, may be
installed if:



         (a)   All roofing exposed to the weather is corrosion
resistant;



         (b)   All aluminum sections or shapes are not less than
.027 gauge;



         (c)   All shaped sheets or sections are designed to
support the required live load between supporting members;



         (d)   The roof deck is at least one-half inch CDX
exterior plywood;



         (e)   Thirty-pound felt or greater is applied over the
roof deck; and



         (f)   If a new roof covering is to replace an existing
roof, all existing roof material shall be removed first before installation
of the new roof.



      (6)   Solid roof sheathing, one-half inch minimum exterior
plywood and approved minimum one-half inch OSB board shall be used for new
roof construction where applicable.



      (7)   All roofing materials shall be installed in accordance
with manufacturer’s recommendations as contained in such literature as from
time to time is published and disseminated by the manufacturer.



   (E)   The following additional requirements shall be met for
replacement roofing:



      (1)   If placing fiberglass composition shingles over existing
wood shingles, fiberglass composition shingles meeting the requirements of
division (D)(1) above, with one course minimum 30# felt paper, shall be used;



      (2)   If removing wood shingles for replacement by fiberglass
composition shingles, a one-half inch minimum exterior treated plywood or an
approved minimum one-half inch OSB board for the sub-base or sheathing shall
be used with a minimum 15# felt paper, with a minimum four-inch in 12-inch
slope shall be used; and



(Ord. 99-19, passed 8-24-1999)



      (3)   If the existing wood roof is to be covered, the edge of
the wood shingle must be trimmed back to the fascia board. If the valley is
exposed, the valley metal must be acid washed, primed and painted with a
quality metal paint.



   (F)   Failure to obtain a roofing permit as required herein and the
installation of roofing materials without a permit shall constitute a
violation of this code. The violation shall be punishable by fine in the
Municipal Court in an amount of not less than the maximum jurisdictional
amount provided for under the laws of the state for violations of municipal
ordinances of this type, unless the defendant charged with the offense shall,
prior to the court date set in the citation issued for the violation, comply
with the requirements specified in division (G) below, in which event the
Judge of the Municipal Court may, in the exercise of his or her sound
discretion, assess a fine in a lesser amount.



   (G)   Each and every person or entity who has filed to obtain a
roofing permit required by this section prior to the installation of roofing
materials shall make application to the city for a permit to maintain the
installed roofing materials, and the requirements for the application and the
issuance of the permit shall be the same as for a roofing permit properly and
timely issued prior to the installation of the roofing materials; provided,
however, that a permit shall only be issued under this division following
inspection of the completed roofing installation and approval of the
application by the Building Official or his or her designee. A permit
obtained under the provisions of this division may be produced in court as
evidence that the roofing materials installed are in compliance with this
code.



   (H)   (1)   The maintenance of installed residential roofing
materials without a permit shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
roofing materials are not in conformity with this code and are of a class or
grade inferior to the requirements of this code. As such, each day that the
roofing materials installed without a permit issued pursuant to divisions (A)
through (E) of this section shall be permitted to remain on a residential
structure without a permit issued under division (G) of this section shall
constitute a separate violation of this code.



      (2)   Each separate and distinct daily violation of this code
shall be punishable by fine in the Municipal Court in an amount of not less
than the maximum jurisdictional amount provided for under the laws of the
state for violations of municipal ordinances of this type, unless the
defendant charged with the offense shall, prior to the court date set in any
citation issued for the violation, comply with the requirements for a
post-installation permit as specified in division (G) above, in which event
the Judge of the Municipal Court may, in the exercise of his or her sound
discretion, assess a fine for each such violation in a lesser amount.



   (I)   In the event of violation of any provision of this section,
the property owner(s), occupants, contractors, employees and any persons
acting in concert with the named persons or entities to permit the violation
to continue shall each be deemed guilty of a separate violation and be
subject to fine and penalty to the extent as herein provided.



   (J)   (1)   The City Council finds that the maintenance of
installed unpermitted residential roofing materials in the city constitutes a
hazard and a threat to the health, safety and well-being of all residents,
citizens, inhabitants and property owners of the city. As such, the Mayor,
the Building Official or their designees are hereby authorized to enter upon
private property, without further authorization, to remove the unpermitted
materials and are further authorized to proceed directly or in any court of
competent jurisdiction to require the immediate vacation of any structures to
which the materials are applied, including, without limitation, boarding up
the structure and erecting appropriate safeguards to prevent re-entry.



      (2)   In the event that the Building Official shall make a
determination that a noncomplying roof exists, the Mayor and the Building
Official, or either of them, are hereby authorized to revoke the certificate
of occupancy for the premises and to immediately notify all servicing
utilities that further occupation and use of the premises is unlawful and
illegal and to request that servicing utilities immediately terminate utility
services of every type provided to the premises.



   (K)   The following additional requirements shall be met for
installation of solar energy devices:



      (1)   In this section, “solar energy device” means a
system or series of mechanisms designed primarily to provide heating or
cooling or to produce electrical or mechanical power by collection and
transferring solar-generated energy.  The term includes a mechanical or
chemical device that has the ability to store solar-generated energy for use
in heating or cooling or in the production of power.



      (2)   Prior to the installation of a solar energy device, the
owner shall apply for and obtain a solar energy device permit and pay the
application fee as set forth by City Council in a schedule of fees.



      (3)   On a roof with a slope of not more than three inches of
rise in 12 inches of run, a solar energy device may be installed where it is
not visible from any public street right-of-way.



      (4)   On a roof with a slope of at least three inches of rise
in 12 inches or run or greater, a solar energy device may be installed on the
back slope of the roof apex parallel to a public street right-of-way that is
not also a front slope of a roof apex parallel to another public street
right-of-way.



      (5)   The building official or their designee shall inspect
the proposed installation location of the solar energy device prior to the
issuing of the permit.



(Prior Code, § 9-50)  (Ord. 88-017, § 1, passed 5-24-1988; Ord. 2013-05,
passed 4-23-2013; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-28-2014; Ord. 2016-30, passed
11-22-2016)  Penalty, see § 150.99



SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS



§ 150.35  BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Building Official or other
designee as appointed by the Mayor to inspect all buildings reported or
believed to be in violation of the minimum standards for continued use and
occupancy set forth in this subchapter, to present preliminary reports on the
inspections to the City Council, to give all notices required by this
subchapter and to present evidence at all public hearings required by this
subchapter.



   (B)   For any notice required to be given under this subchapter, the
Building Official or other designee as appointed by the Mayor shall make a
diligent effort to identify the person or entity entitled to receive notice
and to identify the post office address of such person or entity by searching
the following records:



      (1)   County real property records of the county in which the
building is located;



      (2)   Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in
which the building is located;



      (3)   Records of the Secretary of State;



      (4)   Assumed name records of the county in which the building
is located;



      (5)   Tax records of the City of Meadows Place; and



      (6)   Utility records of the City of Meadows Place.



(Ord. 2013-25, passed 10-22-2013)



§ 150.36  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR CONTINUED USE AND OCCUPANCY.



   Any building in the city meeting one or more of the following
descriptions, regardless of the date of construction, shall be in violation
of the minimum standards for continued use and occupancy:



   (A)   Building that is dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human
habitation. A building that is dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human
habitation and a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare due to any
of the following conditions:



      (1)   Deteriorated building. A building which has become
deteriorated through natural causes or by damage as a result of exposure to
the elements to the extent that the roof, windows and doors or portions of
the building which protect from the weather will no longer reasonably protect
from the elements.



      (2)   Fire hazard. A building which, because of its wiring,
construction or present status, constitutes a fire hazard.



      (3)   Pestilence. A building in or around which there exist
conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation, or other matter
that creates breeding and living places for insects and rodents.



      (4)   Structural deformities. A building which has been built
or constructed in such a manner as to be in jeopardy of collapse or not
reasonably capable of withstanding customary and ordinary exposure to the
elements or which is unsafe or dangerous because of the deficiency of its
materials, methods or means of construction, including the foundation,
structural elements, wiring or apparatus, plumbing and fixtures, entrances or
exits.



      (5)   Inadequate fire safety provisions. A building in or
around which exist conditions constituting inadequate fire safety provisions
because of the materials used, types of construction or design, warning
devices, sprinklers or other fire suppression devices, availability of water
supply for extinguishing fires, or location, design or width of the entrances
or exits.



      (6)   Other. A building in or around which there exist
conditions or circumstances which may from time to time be delineated under
the terms and provisions of law and within the scope of authority of the City
Council to be a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare.



   (B)   Unoccupied building. A building which has been unoccupied by
its owners, lessees, or other invitees for a period of 90 days unless the
owner has:



      (1)   Secured the building from unauthorized entry to the
extent that it cannot be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited
persons as a place of harborage and cannot be entered or used by children,
provided that the securing of a building by means of boarding up with plywood
or other similar material shall be prohibited;



      (2)   Posted emergency contact information in a conspicuous
place near each entrance to the building that faces a public right-of-way,
which shall be printed on a rigid, weather-resistant material and shall
include the words "UNOCCUPIED BUILDING" in all capital letters, followed by
the owner's name, the owner's post office address, and a telephone number
where the owner or an agent of the owner authorized to respond in the case of
an emergency can be reached 24 hours a day, seven days a week;



      (3)   Submitted to the Building Official or other designee as
appointed by the Mayor a plan for bringing the building back into occupancy,
which shall indicate the owner's intent to sell, lease, demolish or otherwise
bring the building back into occupancy and shall set forth steps the owner
plans to take to accomplish same; and



      (4)   Submitted to the Building Official or other designee as
appointed by the Mayor a certificate showing coverage by the following
minimum insurance, which shall be written by an accredited company under the
supervision of the State Board of Insurance Commissioners and shall not
exclude coverage due to the building being unoccupied:



         (a)   Public liability insurance to the extent of
$500,000 for any one accident and $100,000 for any one person; and



         (b)   Property damage insurance to the extent of
$100,000 for any one accident and $500,000 in the aggregate.



   (C)   Inadequately secured building. A building that is secured in
any manner if:



      (1)   The building constitutes a danger to the public even
though secured from entry; or



      (2)   The means used to secure the building are inadequate to
prevent unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by
vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be
entered or used by children, provided that the securing of a building by
means of boarding up with plywood or other similar material shall be
prohibited.



(Ord. 2013-25, passed 10-22-2013)



§ 150.37  PROCEDURE FOR DETERMINATION OF SUBSTANDARD BUILDING.



   (A)   After reviewing the preliminary reports provided by the
Building Official or other designee appointed by the Mayor or on its own
initiative, the City Council may hold a public hearing to determine whether a
building violates the minimum standards for continued use and occupancy. At
such hearing, the owner of the building shall have the burden of proof to
demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the
minimum standards for continued use and occupancy and the time it will take
to reasonably perform the work.



   (B)   The Building Official or other designee as appointed by the
Mayor shall give notice to the owner of a building subject to a hearing
authorized by this section on or before the tenth day before the date of the
hearing by posting the notice at the building and by personal delivery, by
certified mail with return receipt requested, or by delivery by the United
States Postal Service using signature confirmation service to the owner's
post office address. If a notice is mailed in accordance with this section
and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or
"unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is
considered delivered. The notice required by this section shall contain:



      (1)   An identification of the date, time and location set for
the hearing;



      (2)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal
description, of the building and the property on which it is located;



      (3)   A description of each violation of the minimum standards
for continued use and occupancy believed to be present at the building;



      (4)   A statement that the City Council may order the owner to
vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish the building or relocate the
occupants of the building if the City Council determines that the building
violates the minimum standards for continued use and occupancy; and



      (5)   A statement that the owner will be required to submit at
the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply
with the minimum standards for continued use and occupancy and the time it
will take to reasonably perform the work.



(Ord. 2013-25, passed 10-22-2013)



§ 150.38  PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT OF SUBSTANDARD BUILDING.



   (A)   If after a hearing authorized by § 150.37 the City Council
determines that the building violates the minimum standards for continued use
and occupancy, the City Council may order the owner to:



      (1)   Secure the building from unauthorized entry within 30
days; or



      (2)   Repair, remove, or demolish the building within a
reasonable time not to exceed:



         (a)   Thirty days, unless at the hearing the owner
establishes that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days and
the order establishes specific time schedules for the commencement and
performance of the work and requires the owner to secure the property in a
reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed,
as determined by the hearing official; and



         (b)   Ninety days, unless at the hearing the owner
establishes that because of the scope and complexity of the work, the work
cannot reasonably be completed with 90 days and submits a detailed plan and
time schedule for the work and the order requires the owner to regularly
submit progress reports to the Building Official or other designee appointed
by the Mayor to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules established
for commencement and performance of the work.



   (B)   If the City Council allows the owner more than 90 days to
repair, remove, or demolish the building and the owner owns property,
including structures or improvements on property, within the municipal
boundaries of the city that exceeds $100,000 in total value, the city may
require the owner to post a cash or surety bond in an amount adequate to
cover the cost of repairing, removing, or demolishing the building. In lieu
of a bond, the city may require the owner to provide a letter of credit from
a financial institution or a guaranty from a third party approved by the
city. The bond must be posted, or the letter of credit or third party
guaranty provided, not later than the 30th day after the date the city issues
the order.



   (C)   An order by the City Council to demolish a building shall
explicitly find that repairs to the building cannot be made without
substantial reconstruction and that the building is a hazard to the public
health, safety and welfare, which findings shall be subject to review under
the substantia! evidence rule as provided by Tex. Government Code § 2001.174.



   (D)   if the City Council orders the owner to vacate, secure,
repair, remove or demolish the building as authorized by this section, the
Building Official or other designee as appointed by the Mayor shall promptly
mail by certified mail with return receipt requested, deliver by the United
States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, or personally
deliver a notice of the order and a copy thereof to the owner of the building
and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building.



   (E)   Within ten days after the date that an order authorized by
this section is issued, the Building Official or other designee as appointed
by the Mayor shall:



      (1)   File a copy of the order in the office of the City
Secretary; and



      (2)   Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city a notice containing:



         (a)   The street address or legal description of the
property;



         (b)   The date of the hearing;



         (c)   A brief statement indicating the results of the
order; and



         (d)   Instructions stating where a complete copy of the
order may be obtained.



   (F)   If the owner does not vacate, secure, repair, remove or
demolish the building within the time allotted under an order authorized by
this section, the Building Official or other designee as appointed by the
Mayor shall make a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder
having an interest in the building or having an interest in the property on
which the building is located and shall mail by certified mail with return
receipt requested, deliver by the United States Postal Service using
signature confirmation service, or personally deliver a notice to each
mortgagee or lienholder identified. The notice required by this section shall
contain:



      (1)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal
description, of the building and the property on which it is located;



      (2)   A description of each violation of the minimum standards
for continued use and occupancy determined to be present at the building; and



      (3)   A statement that the municipality will vacate, secure,
repair, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants of the
building if the ordered action is not taken within an additional reasonable
time equal to the time provided in the order for action by the owner.



   (G)   If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or
demolished, or the occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the
city may, at its own expense:



      (1)   Vacate, secure, or remove the building or relocate the
occupants;



      (2)   Repair the building, unless the city assesses a civil
penalty against the owner for failure to repair the building, but only to the
extent necessary to bring the building into compliance with the minimum
standards for continued use and occupancy and only if the building is a
residential building with ten or fewer dwelling units; or



      (3)   Demolish the building, provided that the city shall not
demolish the building until 30 days have elapsed since the date the last
owner, mortgagee, or lienholder receives a copy of the order by personal
delivery, first class mail with certified return receipt requested, or
delivery by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation
service.



   (H)   If the city vacates, secures, removes, or demolishes the
building or relocates the occupants at its own expense, the city may assess
the expenses it incurs on, and the city has a lien against, unless it is a
homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, the property on which the
building is located. If the city repairs the building at its own expense, the
city shall assess the expenses it incurs on and shall impose a lien against
the land on which the building stands, and promptly after such lien is
imposed, shall file for record, in recordable form in the office of the
County Clerk of the county in which the land is located, a written notice of
the imposition of the lien, which must contain a legal description of the
land.



   (I)   Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record of property
jointly or severally aggrieved by an order of the City Council issued under
this section may appeal such order as provided by Tex. Local Government Code
§ 214.0012.



(Ord. 2013-25, passed 10-22-2013)



§ 150.39  AUTHORITY TO SECURE SUBSTANDARD BUILDING.



   (A)   The City Council may order the Building Official or other
designee as appointed by the Mayor to secure a building if the City Council
determines that:



      (1)   The building violates the minimum standards for
continued use and occupancy; and



      (2)   The building is unoccupied or is occupied only by
persons who do not have a right of possession to the building.



   (B)   Before the 11th day after the date the building is secured,
the Building Official or other designee as appointed by the Mayor shall give
notice to the owner by:



      (1)   Personally serving the owner with written notice;



      (2)   Depositing the notice in the United States mail
addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address;



      (3)   Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day
period in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the
building is located if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's
post office address is unknown; or



      (4)   Posting the notice on or near the front door of the
building if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office
address is unknown.



   (C)   The notice required under this section must contain:



      (1)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal
description, of the building and the property on which it is located;



      (2)   A description of the violation of the minimum standards
for continued use and occupancy that is present at the building;



      (3)   A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as
the case may be, the building; and



      (4)   An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a
hearing about any matter relating to the city's securing of the building.



   (D)   If within 30 days after the date the building is secured, the
owner files with the City Council or the Building Official or other designee
as appointed by the Mayor a written request for a hearing, the City Council
shall conduct a hearing within 20 days after the date the request is filed,
at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or written information
about any matter relating to the securing of the building.



   (E)   The city may assess the expenses it incurs in exercising its
authority under this section on, and the city has a lien against, unless it
is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, the property on which
the building was located.



(Ord. 2013-25, passed 10-22-2013)



§ 150.40  ASSESSMENT OF CIVIL PENALTY.



   (A)   If the city orders a property owner to repair, remove, or
demolish a building as authorized by this subchapter and the owner fails to
take the required action within the time allotted, the city may assess a
civil penalty against the owner for failure to repair, remove, or demolish
the building and provide for that assessment, the mode and manner of giving
notice, and the means of recovering the assessment, provided the city shall
not assess a civil penalty against the owner for failure to repair the
building if the city repairs the building at its own expense. If the city
assesses a civil penalty as authorized by this section the city shall impose
a lien against the land on which the building stands or stood, unless it is a
homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, to secure the payment of
the civil penalty. Promptly after imposition of the lien, the city shall file
for record, in recordable form in the office of the County Clerk of the
county in which the land is located, a written notice of the imposition of
the lien, which must contain a legal description of the land.



   (B)   In addition to the city's authority to require the vacation,
relocation of occupants, securing, repair, removal, or demolition of a
building under this subchapter, the city by order may assess and recover a
civil penalty against a property owner at the time of an administrative
hearing on violations of an ordinance, in an amount not to exceed $1,000 a
day for each violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the
owner's lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed $10 a day for each
violation, if the city proves:



      (1)   The property owner was notified of the requirements of
the ordinance and the owner's need to comply with the requirements; and



      (2)   After notification, the property owner committed an act
in violation of the ordinance or failed to take an action necessary for
compliance with the ordinance.



(Ord. 2013-25, passed 10-22-2013)



§ 150.41  PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION HEARING.



   (A)   Before the city assesses a civil penalty as authorized by this
subchapter, the city shall conduct an administrative adjudication hearing as
provided by this section.



   (B)   At the hearing authorized by this section, the Mayor shall
preside as the hearing officer and shall, at the conclusion of the hearing,
issue an order stating:



      (1)   Whether the owner of the property is liable for either
violation of the minimum standards for continued use and occupancy or for
failure to repair, remove, or demolish the building in the time allotted as
ordered by the City Council; and



      (2)   The amount of a civil penalty assessed against the owner.



   (C)   On or before the tenth day before the date fixed for the
hearing, the Building Official or other designee as appointed by the Mayor
and authorized to do so shall issue a citation to the owner of the building
charged with violation of the minimum standards for continued use and
occupancy, which shall:



      (1)   Notify the owner of the requirements of the ordinance or
order that they are charged with violating and of their need to comply with
the requirements;



      (2)   Notify the owner that they have the right to a hearing;
and



      (3)   Provide information as to the time and place of the
hearing.



   (D)   After the hearing authorized by this section, the city may
assess a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000 a day for each
violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the owner's lawful
homestead, in an amount not to exceed $10 a day for each violation, if the
city proves:



      (1)   The property owner was notified of the requirements of
the ordinance or order and the owner's need to comply with the requirements;
and



      (2)   After notification, the property owner committed an act
in violation of the ordinance or order or failed to take an action necessary
for compliance with the ordinance or order.



   (E)   Any owner who is found by the hearing officer to have violated
an ordinance or order under this section may appeal the determination as
provided by Tex. Local Government Code § 54.044.



(Ord. 2013-25, passed 10-22-2013)



§ 150.42  LIABILITY OF CITY.



   Neither the city nor any authorized agent acting under the terms of
this subchapter shall be liable or have any liability by reason of orders
issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2013-25, passed 10-22-2013)



LANDSCAPE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT



§ 150.55  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Land and development covered.  The provisions of this
subchapter shall apply to all land located in the city which is either in
commercial use or which may come into commercial use subsequent threreto. 
The term COMMERCIAL USE shall be used to denote any use of land other than as
a building site for single-family and two-family residences where only one
structure is constructed per lot.



   (B)   One structure on lot.  The requirements herein shall be
deemed applicable to all property other than property in single-family and
multi-family use where only one structure is constructed per lot.



(Prior Code, § 9-300)  (Ord. 95-03, § 2, passed 1-24-1995)



§ 150.56  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words and phrases as herein set out are deemed to be
words and phrases of unique or special meaning and are defined as being
applicable to the provisions of this subchapter. Other words and phrases of
customary and common meaning and understanding shall be applicable even
though not directly set out herein, and any words defined herein shall not be
applicable to other parts, subchapters or chapters of this code.



   BERM. A human-made earthform covered by vegetation consisting of a
minimum height of 36 inches above surrounding finished grade and possessing a
maximum slope of 3:1, excluding retaining walls or terracing improvements.



   CALIPER. The diameter of a tree measured six inches above the ground
when planted for any tree up to six inches in diameter size. For any tree
larger than six inches in diameter at six-inch height from planting grade,
the D.B.H. or "diameter at breast height" shall be measured for calculations
toward the satisfaction of requirements of this subchapter. (International
Society of Aboriculture Standards for Tree Evaluation, latest edition)



   LANDSCAPED AREA. The area within the boundaries of a given lot or where
applicable, the adjoining street right-of-way, which is devoted to and
consists of plant material, including but not limited to grass, trees,
shrubs, flowers, vines and other groundcover, native plant materials,
planters, brick, stone, natural forms, water forms, aggregate and other
landscape features, but not including the use of smooth concrete or asphalt;
provided, however, that the use of brick, stone, aggregate or other inorganic
landscape materials shall not exceed 20% of the required LANDSCAPE AREA.



   STREET YARD. The area of a lot which lies between the street
right-of-way and the actual front wall line of the building. It is intended
that the term "front wall or front building line" shall be the front of the
building wall fronting on a street, whether regular or irregular in dimension.



      (1)   In the case of corner lots or other irregularly
configured lots, the STREET YARD shall include that portion of property that
may be on two streets as determined by the actual location of the front
building wall which shall include that portion of the building wall on the
abutting corner street or an irregularly configured lot. In determining the
actual building wall of the building for the purposes of street yard, steps
and unenclosed porches shall be excluded, but the building wall lines shall
follow and include the irregular indentions of the building. As such, the
building wall line shall extend from the outward corner of the building until
the imaginary extensions of the front building line intersect with side
property lines.



      (2)   When there are multiple buildings on a lot, the STREET
YARD shall consist of all the area of the lot between the street right-of-way
line(s) and an imaginary line, or building line, beginning at one side of the
property line, running parallel to the street, connecting to the front most
corner of the building wall fronting the street and nearest the side property
line, then following and connecting the front most walls of all buildings
fronting on the street, and then extending to the other property line,
running parallel to the street. If a building has a rounded front, the front
building wall corners shall be the points closest to the side boundaries.



(Prior Code, § 9-301)  (Ord. 95-03, § 2, passed 1-24-1995)



§ 150.57  HORTICULTURAL SITE PLAN FOR STREET YARD DEVELOPMENT REQUIRED.



   (A)   When an application is made for a horticultural site plan
approval or an approval preliminary to the issuance of a building permit, a
plan under this section is required to be submitted by the owners or
developers of all property covered under this subchapter.



   (B)   The horticultural site plan required shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   The date, graphic scale, north arrow, title and name of
owner;



      (2)   The location of existing boundary lines, easements and
dimensions of the tract;



      (3)   The approximate location of existing water courses; the
approximate location of significant drainage features; and the location and
size of existing and proposed streets and alleys, existing and proposed
easements on or adjacent to the lot, and existing and proposed paving/walks
or any other similar improvement;



      (4)   The location, size, and type (tree or shrub, groundcover
or grass) of proposed landscaping in proposed landscaped areas; and the
location and size of proposed landscaped areas;



      (5)   The location and species of existing trees in the street
yard and parking lots having trunks eight inches caliper or larger and the
approximate size of their crowns;



      (6)   The proposed plan shall identify the requirements of
this subchapter and shall state whether or not all the requirements have been
met by certification of the plat preparer or owner and a statement as to
whether or not there is any qualification for bonus credit;



      (7)   An indication of how the applicant plans to protect the
existing trees which are proposed to be retained from damage during
construction;



      (8)   The proposed irrigation system as required under this
subchapter; and



      (9)   The certification by an architect, landscape architect
or professional engineer, currently registered in the state. This
certification shall state that the plans fully satisfy the requirements of
this subchapter and other provisions of the code of ordinances of the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-302)  (Ord. 95-03, § 2, passed 1-24-1995)



§ 150.58  REQUIREMENTS.



   In order for a plan to be approved under the terms and provisions of
this subchapter, the following requirements must be met:



   (A)   At least 20% of the street yard must be landscaped unless the
City Council, upon the request of a property owner, shall grant a variance to
the provisions of this section under the procedures as herein set out;



   (B)   On lots having a street yard of 10,000 square feet or less, up
to 50% of the requirement as herein provided under division (A) of this
section may be placed in the non-paved street right-of-way abutting the lot;



   (C)   On lots having a street yard in excess of 10,000 feet, up to
25% of the requirements as specified under division (A) of this section may
be placed in the non-paved street right-of-way abutting the lot;



   (D)   No existing newly planted trees in the right-of-way shall at
any time be counted toward the satisfaction of any requirements as herein set
out;



   (E)   In order for the property owner to use the right-of-way for
any purposes, the right-of-way must be landscaped; however, all landscaping
in the right-of-way shall be subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   The city shall at all times reserve the right to remove,
replant or destroy the landscaping and the city, its contractors or its
employees contractors or agents shall have no liability of any kind, nor
shall a claim lie for the removal, transplanting or destruction;



      (2)   Prior to the installation of any planting materials as
may be otherwise provided for by this subchapter, the same shall be approved
by the Building Official of the city to be in accordance with the
requirements of all other provisions of this code or interpretations thereof
provided by the Building Official of the city;



      (3)   No planters or other permanent structures may at any
time be placed within the right-of-way. In the event of a conflict as to
whether or not a proposed landscape development is or shall constitute a
planter or permanent structure, the Building Official shall provide an
interpretation which shall be deemed final; and



      (4)   All landscaping installed as herein required shall be
maintained by the property owner or persons designated by the property owner
and/or the property owner may require as a condition of the leasehold or
lease rights that the maintenance occur. In the event the landscaping as
herein required shall not be maintained in a healthy and well-planned
environment as shall be determined by the Building Official, no further
permits or certificates of occupancy for any remodeling, additions or
continued construction as may be sought and required under this chapter may
be issued.



   (F)   (1)   The City Council, upon application of a property
owner, may grant a variance to the provisions of this section upon the City
Council finding the existence of one or both of the following circumstances
and conditions:



         (a)   Unusual size and configuration of property that
makes compliance impossible or impracticable; and/or



         (b)   Pre-existing development and/or landscaping that
would make literal compliance impossible or impracticable.



      (2)   In addition, the City Council may approve a variance if
the City Council finds the existence of such other facts and circumstances
relating to existing or proposed development, including existing or proposed
landscaping, which require a differing approach to accomplish the objectives
of this subchapter or any part thereof.



      (3)   If a variance is requested, the City Council may, at its
discretion, consider the request and conduct the hearings and/or
investigations as it may deem just or prudent. However, in no event shall the
City Council be required to receive, hear or decide a request for variance
if, in the discretion of the City Council, the best interests of the city and
the objectives of this subchapter require some other disposition.



      (4)   A variance may be granted by the City Council by motion
made, seconded and carried. No amendatory ordinance shall be necessary, and
the City Secretary shall be instructed to attach a copy of the portion of the
Council minutes granting the variance to any request for a building permit or
other permit as necessary under any other provision of this code.



(Prior Code, § 9-303)  (Ord. 95-03, § 2, passed 1-24-1995)



§ 150.59  REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW TREES.



   All newly planted trees shall be planted in a pervious area no less
than five feet wide in any direction. In the street yard, at least one tree
of at least one and one-half inch caliper (either existing or planted) shall
be included and replaced as necessary to maintain the following minimum
ratios:



   (A)   In street yards up to 10,000 square feet, one tree per 1,000
square feet, or fraction thereof, of street yard;



   (B)   In street yards between 10,000 and 110,000 square feet, one
tree per 2,500 square feet, or fraction thereof, of street yard over 10,000
square feet is added to the requirement of ten trees; and



   (C)   In street yards over 110,000 square feet, one tree per 5,000
square feet, or fraction thereof, of street yard area over 110,000 square
feet, is added to the requirement of 50 trees.



(Prior Code, § 9-304)  (Ord. 95-03, § 2, passed 1-24-1995)



§ 150.60  VEHICULAR USE AREAS, PARKING LOTS AND AREAS ADJACENT TO PUBLIC
STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   The following provisions shall be applicable to all vehicular use
areas, public areas, parking lots or lots adjacent to public street
rights-of-way and shall control any development thereof.



   (A)   If a vehicular use area, parking area or parking lot,
including the vehicles contemplated to be parked thereon, shall have
effective buffering from street view in lieu of a berm or wall, the plant
material must be no more than 36 inches on center and five-gallon size when
installed. (Standard: American Association of Nurserymen, American Standards
for Nursery Stock, latest edition.)



   (B)   In all vehicular use areas and parking areas of a street yard,
a minimum of 90 square feet for each 12 parking spaces shall be devoted to
landscaped islands, peninsulas or medians.



   (C)   The number, size and shape of required islands, peninsulas and
medians in street yards shall be at the discretion of the owner of the
property. However, no parking space shall be located farther than 50 feet
from a tree in a pervious landscaped island, peninsula or median. All
islands, peninsulas and medians required in the areas stated above shall be
more or less evenly distributed throughout the parking areas, respectively;
however, the distribution and location of landscaped islands, peninsulas and
medians may be adjusted to accommodate existing trees or other natural
features so long as the total area requirement for landscaped islands,
peninsulas and medians for the respective parking areas is satisfied. Only
landscaped islands, peninsulas and medians in the street yard shall count
toward fulfilling the requirements of this section.



   (D)   All landscaping which is in required landscaped areas and
which is adjacent to pavement shall be protected with concrete curbs.



   (E)   The existing natural landscape character (including but not
limited to native oaks, elms and pecan trees) shall be preserved to the
extent reasonable and feasible. The plan as herein required for the proposed
landscape shall identify the trees to be removed and shall clearly show the
reasons that the removal is necessary and appropriate.



   (F)   No horticultural plan shall be approved if the proposed
landscaping does or will likely obstruct the view between the street and
access drives and parking isles near the street yard entries and exits, nor
shall any landscape which is likely to create an obstruction of view be
approved which is located in the radius of any curb turn.



(Prior Code, § 9-305)  (Ord. 95-03, § 2, passed 1-24-1995)



§ 150.61  CREDIT/BONUSES.



   The following system of credit/bonuses shall be applicable to the
required horticultural site plan for street yard development as well as other
requirements of this subchapter.



   (A)   Each square foot of pervious landscaped area within the
dripline of a tree at least four inches caliper shall count as two square
feet of landscaped area for the purpose of satisfying the provisions of this
subchapter.



   (B)   In order to encourage the early maturation of landscaped
cover, newly planted trees between four and eight inches caliper, such trees
may receive special credit for twice the area of the dripline, provided that
the increased credit area contiguous to the dripline is pervious. This credit
shall not apply to palm trees or such other trees as shall be determined by
the Building Official as being inappropriate and not in accord with the
requirements of this division which relates to wooded trees.



   (C)   Any existing tree which is at least eight inches caliper or at
least six inches caliper and at least 15 feet tall shall be considered as two
trees for the purpose of satisfying the requirements as herein specified.



   (D)   The following shall not be eligible for 200% credit:



      (1)   Overlapping dripline areas;



      (2)   Dripline areas with less than 50% pervious cover; and



      (3)   Dripline areas that have had damaging changes in the
original grade. Changes in grade required by city ordinances or action by the
city such as sidewalks, curbing, driveway approaches or other similar
improvements shall not be considered as damaging changes.



   (E)   In no case shall the actual landscaped area in the street yard
be less than 50% of the required minimum percentages as herein provided.



(Prior Code, § 9-306)  (Ord. 95-03, § 2, passed 1-24-1995)



§ 150.62  FEES AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Mayor of the city shall from time to time prescribe a fee
schedule in such an amount as is reasonable and necessary to cover all costs
incurred by the city in accordance with the administering of the requirements
of this subchapter and approval of all plans as may be submitted. The fee
schedule shall be promulgated in a manner sufficient to recover for the city
such costs as it may incur in administering the requirements of this
subchapter.



   (B)   The Building Official may inspect each site prior to the
issuance of any permits or certificates of compliance with the plan as
required. In the event for other reasons it is not practicable to cause the
landscaping to be put in place, in order to secure the issuance of other
permits as may be required, the developer/owner shall, in accordance with
such procedures as may be from time to time established by the Mayor and/or
the City Council of the city, provide a bond, certificate of deposit or
letter of credit payable to the order of the city in a form provided by the
city as set forth by City Council in a schedule of fees to ensure that the
required landscaping will be installed.



   (C)   Any developer/owner wishing to make the payment in lieu of
installation shall, upon acceptance by the city, be deemed to have granted
the city permission to enter upon the land owned or controlled by the
developer/owner which is subject to the payment for the purpose of installing
the required landscaping in the event that the landscaping is not in place at
such time as determined reasonable by the Building Official. The city shall
release any bond, certificate of deposit or letter of credit if the
landscaping is put in place and approved by the Building Official within 90
days of the issuance of the required certificate of occupancy.



(Prior Code, § 9-307)  (Ord. 95-03, § 2, passed 1-24-1995; Am. Ord.
2012-27, passed 6-26-2012)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.63  EXHIBITS.



   In order to provide for administration of the terms and provisions of
this subchapter, the City Council adopts certain illustrative exhibits which
shall be entitled "Street Yard Graphic Examples," and although the same are
examples, orders the same to be filed and codified as a part of this code and
as Exhibit "A" attached to Ord. 95-03, which is hereby adopted by reference
as if set out in full herein. The illustrations are approved for exemplary
purposes only and in the event of conflict with or the same is alleged not to
be in accordance with the terms and provisions of this subchapter, the
provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed controlling and not otherwise
superseded by the examples.



(Prior Code, § 9-308)  (Ord. 95-03, § 2, passed 1-24-1995)



§ 150.64  OBSTRUCTIVE VEGETATIVE GROWTH.



   (A)   In the event the Building Official shall at any time determine
that any vegetative growth has become excessive and a potential hindrance to
the health, safety and well-being of the residents, citizens and inhabitants
of any property or of the city in that the same obstructs the view between
the street and access drives and parking isles near street yard entries and
exits, or has created an obstruction of view in the radius of any curb, the
Building Official is authorized to notify the property owner, managing
owner's agent or other person responsible of the necessity to prune, remove,
cut back or otherwise alter the vegetation. The Building Official shall
provide notice by hand delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested,
and upon receipt of the notice, it shall be the duty of the property owner,
managing owner's agent or other person responsible to cause appropriate
action to be taken to remove the obstruction.



   (B)   In the event the property owner, managing owner's agent or
other person responsible fails to take such action within the period of time
as herein provided, then each day beyond the provided ten days shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation of the code and may be punished
as required by law.



   (C)   In addition, the Building Official shall be authorized to
enter upon the private property or public street right-of-way maintained by a
property owner to remove the offending vegetation and may place a lien upon
the property either adjoining the public street right-of-way where the work
is to be accomplished or abutting thereto, if the right-of-way is to any
extent used by the abutting property owner, to pay the cost incurred.



(Prior Code, § 9-309)  (Ord. 95-03, § 2, passed 1-24-1995)



§ 150.65  LANDSCAPE AREAS TO BE MAINTAINED FREE OF DEBRIS AND LITTER.



   It shall be unlawful for any property owner or abutting property owner
having control of a street yard to permit the area to be strewn with debris
and litter. Failing to remove the debris and litter upon notification shall
constitute a violation of this code.



(Prior Code, § 9-310)  (Ord. 95-03, § 2, passed 1-24-1995)  Penalty, see
§ 150.99



§ 150.66  REPLACEMENT OF DEAD, DYING OR DISEASED LANDSCAPING MATERIALS.



   In the event the Building Official determines that any required
vegetative landscaping material has died, is dying or is so badly diseased
that the same cannot be saved or otherwise rehabilitated, the Building
Official may direct the property owner being in control of the street yard to
replace the dead, dying or diseased vegetative materials with like or similar
replacement materials. It shall be a violation of the code in the event the
same is not replaced upon direction of the Building Official.



(Prior Code, § 9-311)  (Ord. 95-03, § 2, passed 1-24-1995)



§ 150.67  PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   No permits or certificates of occupancy shall at any time be issued for
any property unless a plan has been submitted, approved and has been complied
with in accordance with the terms and provisions of this subchapter. The
Building Official shall further be authorized to deny any permits otherwise
required or subject to being issued under this code if there exist any
violations of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 9-312)  (Ord. 95-03, § 2, passed 1-24-1995)



§ 150.99  PENALTY. 



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any provision of the
standards adopted or established in the codes adopted in § 150.02 shall be
deemed to have committed a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
punished by a fine in an amount as provided in Tex. Local Government Code §
54.001(b).



(Ord. 2009-17, passed 7-28-2009)



      (2)   Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits
another to violate any provision of § 150.02(G), (J) or (K) shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $500 unless such violation implicates fire safety,
zoning, or public health and sanitation including dumping of refuse in which
case the fine amount shall not be more than $2,000. Each occurrence of any
such violation of § 150.02(G), (J) or (K) shall constitute a separate
offense. Each day on which any such violation of § 150.02(G), (J) or (K)
occurs shall constitute a separate offense.



   (C)   Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits another
to violate any provision of §§ 150.07, 150.09, 150.13, 150.25, or 150.62
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punishable by a fine of nor more than $500.  Each occurrence of any such
violation of §§ 150.07, 150.09, 150.13, or 150.62 shall constitute a
separate offense.  Each day on which any such violation of §§ 150.07,
150.09, 150.13, 150.25, or 150.62 occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.(Ord. 2004-41, passed 11-22-2004)



   (D)   Any person who violates or causes, allows, or permits another
to violate any provisions of § 150.25 shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $500 unless such violation implicates fire safety, zoning, or
public health and sanitation including dumping of refuse in which case the
fine amount shall not be more than $2,000. Each occurrence of any such
violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. Each day on
which any such violation of this section occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.



   (E)   The civil penalty for failure to comply with an order of the
City Council, as set forth in § 150.39, shall not exceed $1,000 per day for
violation of this code.



(Prior Code, § 9-104)  (Ord. 2005-07, passed 1-25-2005; Ord. 2012-02,
passed 1-24-2012;  Ord. 2012-23, passed 6-26-2012; Ord. 2012-24, passed
6-26-2012; Ord. 2012-25, passed 6-26-2012; Ord. 2012-26, passed 6-26-2012;
Ord. 2012-27, passed 6-26-2012; Ord. 2013-05, passed 4-23-2013; Ord. 2013-19,
passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 2013-20, passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 2013-21, passed
9-24-2013; Ord. 2016-30, passed 11-22-2016)



CHAPTER 151:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods



   151.01   Statutory authorization



   151.02   Findings of fact



   151.03   Statement of purpose



   151.04   Methods of reducing flood losses



Words and Meanings



   151.15   Definitions



General Regulations



   151.25   Lands to which this article applies



   151.26   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard



   151.27   Establishment of development permit



   151.28   Compliance



   151.29   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   151.30   Interpretation



   151.31   Warning and disclaimer of liability



Administration



   151.45   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator



   151.46   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator



   151.47   Permit procedures



   151.48   Variance procedures



Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction



   151.60   General standards



   151.61   Standards for subdivision proposals



 



   151.99   Penalty



STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS



§ 151.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control
Insurance Act, Tex. Water Code, § 16.315 delegated the responsibility of
local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood
losses.  Therefore, the city does ordain as follows.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 151.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
flood proofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 151.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Protect human life and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in floodplains;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future
flood blight areas; and



   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in
a flood area.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 151.04  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.



   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety
or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve those uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase flood damage; and



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



WORDS AND MEANINGS



§ 151.15  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING.   Flooding occurring on the surface of an
alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is
characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment
transport and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.



   APEX.   A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the
flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and
alluvial fan flooding can occur.



   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE.  A structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.



   AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD.  The land area that would be
innudated by the 1% annual chance (100 year) flood based on future conditions
hydrology.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.   A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO
zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% chance or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. This flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.   The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM).
After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication
of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-A30, AE,
A-99, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.



   BASE FLOOD.   The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for
Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface
elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or
exceeding that level in any given year - also called the BASE FLOOD .



   BASEMENT.   Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BREAKAWAY WALL.  A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.



   CRITICAL FEATURE.   An integral and readily identifiable part of a
flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the
entire system would be compromised.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved and unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.



   ELEVATED BUILDING.   For insurance purposes, a non-basement building,
which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective
date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by
a community.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.   The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FLOOD or FLOODING.   A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY.  An examination, evaluation and determination
of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations,
or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow)
and/or flood-related erosion hazards.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).   An official map of a community, on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY.   See FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY .



   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA.   Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of FLOODING ).



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.   The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.   Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes state
or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for
the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.



   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which
funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with
sound engineering standards.



   FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOODWAY.   See REGULATORY FLOODWAY .



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:



         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.



   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.



   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that
the enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of 44 CFR 60.3 of the National
Flood insurance Program regulations.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.   A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL.  For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program,
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which
base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.



      (1)   For the purpose of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structures.



      (2)   For floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION
means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after
the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to the structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projections;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light-duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.



   RIVERINE.  Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  See AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD .



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.   For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. No.
97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START
OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE.   For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.   Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before start of construction
of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain  management regulation.  (For full requirements see § 60.6 of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)



   VIOLATION.   The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION.   The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 151.25  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   The chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 151.26  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   Since areas of special flood hazard have not been identified, water
surface elevations have not been provided, nor has sufficient data
identifying the floodway or coastal high hazard area been provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the community shall obtain,
review, and reasonably utilize data available from other federal, state or
other sources.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2000-22, passed 8-22-2000; Ord.
2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 151.27  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A floodplain development permit shall be required for all development
within the community to ensure conformance with the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 151.28  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its
use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 151.29  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 151.30  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 151.31  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any
official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 151.45  DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Public Works/Utilities Director of the city is hereby appointed the
Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this
chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 C.F.R. (Emergency Management and
Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to
floodplain management.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 151.46  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include but not be limited to the following:



   (A)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records
pertaining to the provisions of this chapter;



   (B)   Review permit application to determine whether proposed
construction or other development, including the placement of manufactured
homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding;



   (C)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development
permits required by adoption of this chapter;



   (D)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies (including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334) from which prior approval
is required;



   (E)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation;



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 151.47  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and may include but
not be limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. 
Additionally, the following information is required:



      (1)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;



      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;



      (3)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of § 151.61(B);



      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or
natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development; and



      (5)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance
with § 151.46(A).



   (B)   Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:



      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of that damage on the individual
owner;



      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and
bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems;



      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;



      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location,
where applicable; and



      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject
to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 151.48  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Appeal Board as established by the community shall hear
and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal
only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.



   (C)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal
Board may appeal the decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.



   (E)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the
procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.



   (F)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in § 151.47 have
been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre,
the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.



   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent
of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting
of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of
this chapter stated in § 151.03.



   (H)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.



   (I)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.



   (J)   Prerequisites for granting variances:



      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief;



      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



      (3)   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with
the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost
of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting
from the reduced lowest floor elevation.



   (K)   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction
and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:



      (1)   The criteria outlined in divisions (A) through (I) above
are met; and



      (2)   The structure or other development is protected by
methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 151.60  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are
required for all new construction and substantial improvements:



   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;



   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;



   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;



   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;



   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;



   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and



   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 151.61  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   (A)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with §§
151.02, 151.03 and 151.04.



   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including
the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet
development permit requirements of § 151.27; § 151.47; and the provisions
of §§ 151.60 and 151.61.



   (C)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (D)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this court
and other applicable regulations.  Violation of the provisions of this court
order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations
of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor.  Any person who violated this court order or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $500 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs
and expenses involved in the case.  Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.  Each occurrence of any such violation of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense.  Each day on which any such violation
of this chapter occurs shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 2014-06, passed 3-25-2014)



CHAPTER 152:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   152.01   Authority



   152.02   Purpose



   152.03   Applicability



   152.04   Withholding improvements until approved



   152.05   Shared access and parking facilities for nonresidential
tracts



   152.06   Development plats; coverage under state law



§ 152.01  AUTHORITY.



   The Planning Commission and the City Council shall have the authority
and responsibility for the approval of all subdivision plats within the city
in accordance with Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 212, and the provisions
of this chapter are adopted in the exercise of the power granted to
municipalities by that statute.



(Prior Code, § 23-1)



§ 152.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to achieve orderly urban development
through land subdivision and assemblage to assure the best possible community
environment in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of the city, to provide
for adequate municipal services and safe streets, and to protect and promote
the public health, safety and general welfare. The provisions of this chapter
shall be the minimum requirements; and whenever the principles, standards or
requirements of any required permit or any other applicable provisions of the
code of ordinances of the city are higher or more restrictive, then the
latter shall control.



(Prior Code, § 23-2)



§ 152.03  APPLICABILITY.



   All property proposed for subdividing or resubdividing within the city
shall hereafter be laid out in accordance with this chapter for approval by
the city's Planning Commission and the City Council, and no other subdivision
will be recognized by the city.



(Prior Code, § 23-3)



§ 152.04  WITHHOLDING IMPROVEMENTS UNTIL APPROVED.



   The city will withhold improvements of whatsoever nature, including the
maintenance of streets and furnishing of sewerage and water service, from all
additions, the subdivision of which has not been approved by the Commission
and the City Council and developed in accordance with the code of ordinances
and regulations of the city. No permits of any nature should ever be issued
by the Building Official for any development in a subdivision not approved in
accordance with this code. Nothing herein shall in any way prohibit or
restrict development in a subdivision lawfully approved under prior law.



(Prior Code, § 23-4)



§ 152.05  SHARED ACCESS AND PARKING FACILITIES FOR NONRESIDENTIAL TRACTS.



   (A)   Unless otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, all plats for commercial or industrial tracts shall provide for
shared access and parking facilities, and the plat shall contain a note on it
to that effect.



   (B)   Cross access controls. The intent of this section is to
provide for cross-access and shared driveways between compatible land uses to
reduce conflict points and minimize traffic flow interruptions on an
adjoining road. Cross-access easements create a service drive providing
vehicular across between two or more contiguous parcels so that motorists or
pedestrians or both do not need to reenter the adjoining road to gain access
to adjacent uses. Cross-access between adjacent properties reduces vehicular
conflict points between motorists on the main street and motorists entering
and leaving driveways. Reduced traffic conflicts result in fewer accidents
and improved traffic flow on the adjacent road.



(Ord. 2014-20, passed 12-16-2014)



§ 152.06  DEVELOPMENT PLATS; COVERAGE UNDER STATE LAW.



   Adoption of Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 212, Subchapter B.  The
city hereby elects to be covered under Tex. Local Government Code Chapter
212, Subchapter B.



(Ord. 2018-05, passed 2-27-2018)



CHAPTER 153:  PLANNING AND ZONING



Section



Title, Authority, Purpose, Policies and Applicability



   153.001   Title



   153.002   Authority



   153.003   General purpose and policies



   153.004   Comprehensive Plan; purpose and policies



   153.005   Applicability



   153.006   Effective upon enactment



Definitions and Interpretation



   153.015   Interpretation



   153.016   Definitions



Decision-Making and Administrative Bodies



   153.030   City Council



   153.031   Planning and Zoning Commission



   153.032   Board of Adjustment



   153.033   Office of Planning and Zoning



   153.034   Office of Inspections



Planning Documents and Official Map



   153.045   Comprehensive Plan; review; amendments



   153.046   Capital Improvement Plan



   153.047   Official Zoning District Map



Zoning Districts and Regulations of General Applicability



   153.060   Districts established



   153.061   Permitted uses



   153.062   Specific uses



   153.063   Planned development



   153.064   Temporary uses



   153.065   Subdivision regulations



   153.066   Use of nonconforming residential lots



   153.067   Structure and area regulations



   153.068   Use and land regulations



   153.069   Accessory uses and structures



   153.070   Performance standards



   153.071   Fence regulations



   153.072   Landscaping, screening and buffering



   153.073   Off-street parking and loading



   153.074   Special off-street parking regulations



   153.075   Parking on unsurfaced area prohibited



   153.076   Home occupations



   153.077   Expansion of nonconforming residential structures



   153.078   Specific use permit required for commercial structures or
development located within the boundaries of two cities or located within the
boundaries of the City of Meadows Place and the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of another city



   153.079   Window installed electrical mechanical devices prohibited



   153.080   Generators



   153.081   Distance requirements for smoking paraphernalia
establishments



Zoning District Regulations



   153.090   R-1 Residential District



   153.091   R-2 Residential District



   153.092   R-3 Residential District



   153.093   C-M Commercial-Residential Mixed Use District



   153.094   C-1 Light Commercial District



   153.095   C-2 Commercial District



   153.096   C-3 Special Commercial District



   153.097   Architectural commercial aesthetics



   153.098   Architectural residential aesthetics



Zoning District Prohibitions



   153.110   Prohibited uses



Amendatory Procedure



   153.125   Purpose



   153.126   Types of amendment



   153.127   Application for amendment to written text or official
zoning district map



   153.128   Application for planned development amendment



   153.129   Application for specific use amendment



   153.130   Amendments initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and City Council



   153.131   Call of public hearings



   153.132   Notice required



   153.133   Content of notice



   153.134   Publication



   153.135   Required signs



   153.136   Conduct of public hearings



   153.137   Expeditious action



   153.138   Reports and recommendations of the Planning and Zoning
Commission



   153.139   Standards applicable to all planned development amendments
and specific use amendments



   153.140   Amendments to this chapter



   153.141   Final action by the City Council



   153.142   Notification of decision



   153.143   Final plan for planned development districts



   153.144   Successive applications



Variances, Special Exceptions, Appeals and Nonconformities



   153.155   Variances



   153.156   Special exceptions



   153.157   Nonconformities



   153.158   Appeals



Planned Development Amendments



   153.170   Amendments adopted



Specific Use Amendments



   153.180   Amendments and permits adopted



Signs



   153.190   Purpose



   153.191   Definitions



   153.192   Enforcement responsibility



   153.193   Violations



   153.194   General provisions



   153.195   Signs exempted from permits



   153.196   Prohibited signs



   153.197   Signs; residential



   153.198   Signs; commercial/office



   153.199   Stop orders; revocation of permit; repair or removal
required



   153.200   Variances and special exceptions



 



   153.999   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Illustrations



   Appendix B:   Angles of elevation



   Appendix C:   Affidavit of posting; certificate of Zoning Official



   Appendix D:   Official zoning district map



TITLE, AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, POLICIES AND APPLICABILITY



§ 153.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the Code of Planning and Zoning
Regulations of the City of Meadows Place.



(Prior Code, § 24-101)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.002  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the Constitution of the State of
Texas and provisions of Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 212, Tex. Loc.
Government Code Chs. 211 and 216, and all other provisions of the laws of the
state which are currently applicable or which may be later enacted or
determined applicable.



(Prior Code, § 24-102)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.003  GENERAL PURPOSE AND POLICIES.



   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of promoting and protecting the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents, citizens and
inhabitants of the city and for the general welfare of the community. The
provisions of this chapter are the requirements necessary to accomplish these
purposes as specifically delineated in this chapter. This chapter is further
adopted in order to regulate the use of land within the city so as to promote
orderly and healthful development, good government, peace and order of the
city and the trade and commerce thereof, as may be necessary or proper to
carry into effect the powers vested in the city by the Constitution and laws
of the state.



(Prior Code, § 24-103)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.004  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN; PURPOSE AND POLICIES.



   (A)   The purpose of this Comprehensive Plan.



      (1)   This Comprehensive Plan is adopted as a present
statement of policy by the city and as a guide for future land use decisions
within the city. The policies contained herein are intended as a guide for
and to be implemented by the city's land use regulations, capital improvement
expenditures and other programs, including cooperative efforts with other
governmental agencies and the private sector. The plan should be reviewed by
the Planning and Zoning Commission on an annual basis, and the Commission
should submit an annual report together with recommended changes, if any, to
the City Council.



      (2)   If the City Council determines at any time that any of
the policies of this plan should be modified, each and every policy contained
herein should be re-evaluated because of their interrelated nature.



   (B)   Policies.



      (1)   General. The City of Meadows Place is predominately a
residential community. One of the city's greatest attributes is its ability
to protect the integrity of its residential neighborhoods and to minimize any
adverse effects of commercial development on existing residential
neighborhoods through its zoning power. To this end, maximum height limits
and minimum setbacks are established.  Deed restrictions are also enforced
in residential neighborhoods and should be considered in determining land use
policies.



      (2)   Residential.



         (a)   Existing residential neighborhoods and existing
residences should be maintained and protected through land use controls and,
where possible, enhanced by public and private investment and improvements.



            1.   The density of new or replacement residential
development in existing residential neighborhoods should be consistent with
and comparable to the densities permitted in the neighborhoods under the
zoning classifications in this chapter.



            2.   The city's land use controls should promote
and facilitate the improvement, rehabilitation and, where necessary, the
replacement of the city's existing residences.



            3.   The city should make capital improvements,
including sewer and water service systems and neighborhood roadways, which
will support and upgrade existing residential neighborhoods.



         (b)   All development in or adjacent to existing
residential neighborhoods should be designed and located so as to minimize
any adverse effects on existing residential uses and, where possible, to
ensure that new development constitutes a benefit to the residential
neighborhood.



            1.   Where nonresidential structures are permitted
adjacent to residential neighborhoods, a buffer zone shall exist to allow a
transition with respect to size and floor area for structures immediately
adjacent to the residential neighborhood.



            2.   Ingress and egress to all new development
near to adjacent to existing residential neighborhoods should be designed so
that nonlocal traffic to and from the proposed development will not pass
through an existing residential neighborhood except by way of primary or
secondary arterials.



            3.   All new nonresidential development or
residential development, other than single-family detached dwelling units,
should be buffered and screened so that the new uses, to the maximum extent
practicable, are not visible from or intrusive to existing residential uses.



      (3)   Business District.



         (a)   Undeveloped and developed land located along and
north of West Airport Boulevard, between U.S. Highway 59 and Kirkwood Road,
excluding present residential areas, will become the center of the city's
Business District; and the city shall encourage the location of new
commercial uses in this area.



         (b)   The economic vitality of the Business District
should be promoted. The land use regulations of the city should permit and,
where possible, encourage the development of structures in the District.



         (c)   The city should restrict the Business District to
those uses which are compatible with or which would enhance commercial retail
uses. Office and retail uses which would support the commercial activity in
the Business District should be encouraged.



         (d)   To further promote commercial activity in the
Business District, the land use regulations of the city should permit parking
lots only as accessory uses to commercial, retail or office use developments.



      (4)   U.S. Highway 59.



         (a)   To the extent that the land lying adjacent to and
in close proximity to U.S. Highway 59 is affected by noise and air pollution
and traffic from the highway, it constitutes a distinct area within the city.
The city should take whatever steps it can to mitigate these ill effects
through orderly and protective planning.



         (b)   The intensity of development on those lands lying
adjacent to U.S. Highway 59 should be governed by the proximity of any
proposed structures to existing residential uses. This development should not
adversely impact traffic circulation or water or sewer facilities.



      (5)   Lands abutting arterials.



         (a)   Lands abutting West Airport Boulevard west of
Kirkwood Road may be appropriate for low intensity commercial and/or upper
medium density residential uses, provided that ingress and egress is limited
so as not to unduly interrupt traffic flow on West Airport Boulevard, and
provided that new development is screened and landscaped to avoid the
appearance of continuous strip development.



         (b)   Lands abutting West Bellfort Avenue may be
appropriate for low intensity commercial uses, provided that new development
is screened and landscaped to provide a buffer to the adjacent existing
residential neighborhoods.



      (6)   Public services.



         (a)   To the maximum extent permitted by law, no
development should be permitted within the city unless the applicant agrees
to provide the service infrastructure needed to support the proposed
development, including but not limited to water, sewer and streets.



         (b)   The adequacy and efficiency of the services
provided should be maintained at or above present design characteristics.



         (c)   The city believes that the development of open
green space contributes to the health, safety and well-being of its
residents. Therefore, existing parks should be maintained and improved, and
acquisition of additional parks and recreational areas should be encouraged.
To this end, private funds and donations should be sought in addition to
state and federal funds; and citizen participation in park expansion and
development should be encouraged.



      (7)   Circulation.



         (a)   The existing traffic circulation system of the
city has adequate road lane capacity for the citizens of the city. However,
existing streets and roads should be maintained at or above their present
standard.



         (b)   The capacity of the city's roadways should be
increased only as is necessary to serve the circulation needs of the
residents and property owners of the city.



         (c)   The city should encourage and support forms of
transportation which are alternates to the private automobile, including
pedestrian and bicycle.



         (d)   The owners of commercial properties within the
city should be encouraged to design and construct accessory use parking lots
to provide adequate ingress and egress to and from their developments while
at the same time minimizing the impact of traffic from such developments on
adjacent public streets and rights-of-way. Whenever possible, traffic from
commercial developments should be directed away from the adjacent residential
neighborhoods.



      (8)   Implementation.



         (a)   Relatively uncomplicated forms of development,
such as detached single-family residences, should be permitted as of right;
and a developer of these uses should only be required to demonstrate
compliance with city requirements to city staff in order to secure a building
permit.



         (b)   The city's land use regulations should guarantee
the rights and interests of neighboring landowners and the general public by
providing for notice and participatory rights to citizen groups and
neighbors. Notice of a proposed change in zoning or a proposed zoning
amendment shall be provided to all landowners in the neighborhood affected by
the amendment.



         (c)   The city's land use regulations should protect the
rights and interests of neighboring landowners and the general public by
carefully controlling development which could create or allow significantly
increased glare, light, shade, wind, traffic, noise, noxious fumes or
rainwater runoff to the existing landowners.



(Prior Code, § 24-104)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.005  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   General application. this chapter shall apply to all
structures and the uses of land within the corporate limits of the city.
Existing structures and uses which are inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter shall be permitted only as provided for in §§ 153.155 through
153.158. All applications for development approval shall be required to meet
the requirements of this chapter which are in effect on the date of any
permit or authority issued hereunder.



   (B)   General prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to
carry out any development or to modify in any way any use or structure
existing upon any land within the city, which is inconsistent with the
requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   Building permits issued prior to enactment of this chapter. 
This chapter shall not affect lawfully issued building permits which have
been finally issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, save and
except those building permits so issued which shall have expired, lapsed or
been revoked.



(Prior Code, § 24-105)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985) 
Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.006  EFFECTIVE UPON ENACTMENT.



   The provisions of this chapter shall become final, binding and
effective upon all property within the city upon the same being finally
enacted as evidenced by the ordinance of enactment duly executed by the Mayor
and the City Secretary of the city, the provisions of which shall form a part
of this code.



(Prior Code, § 24-106)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION



§ 153.015  INTERPRETATION.



   This chapter shall be construed liberally to effect the purposes
hereof, and the rules of this section shall be observed except when the
context clearly requires otherwise.



   (A)   Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other
tenses or derivative forms.



   (B)   Words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in
the plural shall include the singular.



   (C)   The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the
feminine shall include the masculine.



   (D)   The words "shall" or "will" are mandatory.



   (E)   The word "may" is permissive.



   (F)   In the event that this chapter shall contain provisions which
are in conflict or provide differing regulations as to the same type of
requirement, property or use, then in that case, the most restrictive
provision shall be deemed controlling.



   (G)   In the event of a conflict between the test of this chapter
and any caption, illustration, table or map, the text shall control.



   (H)   In the event of obvious mistake in drafting or other
misstatement in the text of this chapter, in any amendment hereto or order or
decision issued hereunder where it reasonably appears that the error was
inadvertent and an obvious mistake, the error or mistake shall not prevent
the plain intent from being given to the provisions of this chapter,
amendment, decision or order.



   (I)   In the event of conflict between any of the provisions or
sections of this chapter, or in the event the meaning or intent of any of the
provisions or sections of this text is not plain and obvious, the City
Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Board of Adjustment, if
any of them be the body designated to act with respect to applicable
provisions or sections of this chapter, shall interpret the same and shall
note, as part of their decision, order or recommendation, the interpretation
provided. However, in the event that any decision, order or recommendation
made by any board, commission or individual is subject to final action or
review by the City Council, the City Council shall not be bound to the
interpretation as established by the Board, Commission or individual, but
shall be free under the terms and provisions of this chapter to act as if it
were considering the question de novo and to provide appropriate
interpretation. Any final interpretation provided hereunder shall be deemed
controlling on any further action concerning the decision, order or
recommendation.



   (J)   In the event that the member or members of city staff,
designated under the terms and provisions of this chapter to perform a
certain function or to carry out a certain duty, obligation or
responsibility, cannot perform the function, the staff member or members may,
subject to the provisions of this code, delegate to someone else the duties
and responsibilities imposed upon them herein; and the designee shall serve
with the same powers, responsibilities and obligations imposed on the
principal staff member or members herein. Any reference to any staff member
or members in this chapter shall constitute a reference to any such designee.



(Prior Code, § 24-201)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.016  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESS. Any point of ingress or egress between streets, driveways,
sidewalks or any combination thereof.



   ACCESSORY USE. A structure or use which:



      (1)   Is subordinate and incidental to and serves a principal
building or a principal use;



      (2)   Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the
principal structure or principal use served;



      (3)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of
the occupants, business or industry in the principal structure or use; and



      (4)   Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or
its use.



   ADVERTISING. To seek the attraction of or to direct the attention of
the public to any goods, services or merchandise whatsoever.



   ALLEY. A public space or thoroughfare which affords only secondary
means of access to property abutting thereon and not over 30 feet in
right-of-way width.



   AMUSEMENT, COMMERCIAL INDOORS. An amusement enterprise wholly enclosed
in a building which is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the
enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding property line, and including
but not limited to a bowling alley or billiard parlor.



   ANGLE OF ELEVATION. The angle between the horizon and the line of sight.



   ANTENNA. A device used to radiate or receive an electromagnetic wave
signal.



   AREA, SIGN. The area of any sign shall be computed by calculating the
area enclosed within the boundaries created by connected straight lines,
which straight lines shall connect all outermost points of the frame of the
sign and any extremities thereof (excluding sign supports) and of any
wording, numbers, figures, devices, designs or trademarks set out on the
sign, by which anything is made known; provided that where it is possible to
connect the outermost points in more than one manner, thereby creating
boundaries enclosing differing areas, those boundaries producing the lowest
calculated area shall be used.



   ART GALLERY or MUSEUM. An institution for the collection, display and
distribution of objects of art or science and which is operated by a public
or quasi-public agency and which facility is open to the general public.



   ATHLETIC FACILITIES/CLUBS. Commercial swimming, tennis, racquetball or
other athletic facilities that are privately owned and operated as private
clubs or that are open to the public.



   AUTO OR MOTORCYCLE SALES. A place wherein automobiles or motorcycles
are on the premises within a building or within a screened storage area and
are available for sale to the ultimate consumer.



   AUTO PARTS SALES. A place wherein automobile parts, including but not
limited to tires and/or mufflers, are on the premises within a building or
within a screened storage area and are available for sale to the ultimate
consumer.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICES. A place where automobiles, trucks, light trucks
and/or other motorized vehicles are serviced, repaired, refurbished, painted
or repainted either mechanically or aesthetically.



(Ord. 96-12, § 1, passed 2-27-1996)



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. Any building, structure or land used
primarily for supplying automobile fuel and motor oil, at retail direct to
the customer, including the supplying of accessories, replacement parts and
services essential to the normal operation of automobiles, but not including
body or fender work, painting or major motor repairs.



   BERM. The raised earthen slope that fronts and runs parallel to the
city streets.



   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. (Hereinafter referred to as Board.) A board having
powers and duties as provided in other sections of this chapter, without
limitation, to hear matters on appeal concerning interpretation of the
provisions of this chapter, to grant variances and special exceptions. The
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT may, in addition, require the discontinuance of
nonconforming uses of lands or structures.



   BOAT. A vessel of any size designed to transport people or cargo across
water.



   BUFFER (BUFFER ZONE). The area, space or physical means which is
established to protect or insulate one land use or one building from another.



   BUILDING. A structure lawfully erected under the terms and provisions
of the code of ordinances of the city, having a roof and designed or built
for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals,
chattels or property of any kind. The BUILDING may have common party walls
when erected in accordance with the code of ordinances of the city.



   BUILDING LINE. The line drawn on the subdivision plat indicating the
front or outermost line or point where a building may be erected or the line
established by reference to this code as being the front or outermost line or
point where a building may be erected. In case of conflict between the
provisions of this code and the designated property BUILDING LINE on the
subdivision plat, the line designated providing the greatest setback distance
shall control.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL. A person duly appointed by the Mayor of the city, as
provided in other sections of this chapter, without limitation, charged with
the duty and obligation of issuing permits and certificates of occupancy and
primarily charged with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter.



   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Building Official under the
terms and provisions of Chapter 150 of this code.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT. Wherever used in this chapter, the term BUSINESS
DISTRICT or BUSINESS DISTRICTS shall apply to zoning districts C-1 Light
Commercial District, C-2 Commercial District and C-M Commercial-Residential
Mixed Use District, collectively.



   BUSINESS ENTITY. Any person, corporation or group of persons associated
for the common purpose of engaging in a commercial or mercantile activity
legally permissible under federal, state and local laws.



   CAFETERIA. A place where meals and drinks are served to the public
generally or selected portions of the public, in a manner whereby the meals
or drinks are served at a counter or in a line.



   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certificate issued by the Planning and
Zoning Official which certifies that a proposed development complies with the
terms and provisions of this chapter and code; the certificate shall
constitute a statement as to compliance of proposed buildings with this
chapter and code.



   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate issued by the Building Official
which certifies that a structure has been erected in accordance with this
code and shall have as its effect permitting the occupancy of a building.



   CHURCH. A building or buildings where persons regularly assemble for
organized religious worship, religious education and activities to promote
fellowship among persons who are members or visitors of the organized
religious body occupying the building or buildings.



   CITY COUNCIL. The body established under and by the authority of law as
being the body ultimately responsible for the enactment of ordinances and
enforcement thereof and having the ultimate authority for amendment or repeal
of any provisions of this chapter.



   COLLECTOR LANE. A driveway within a surface parking area designed to
collect and distribute traffic between parking spaces and public streets.



   COLLECTOR STREET. A roadway designed to provide direct access to
residential, commercial, industrial and other activity areas with a primary
function of collecting and distributing traffic between local access streets
and the major thoroughfare system.



   COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION. Any work on the project site pertaining
to the work of the project itself that is in addition to the preliminary work
of locating signs and temporary construction buildings and facilities on the
site, and in addition to clearing and grading the site.



   COMMERCIAL GARAGE. See GARAGE, COMMERCIAL.



   COMMERCIAL PARKING LOT (AREA). See PARKING LOT, COMMERCIAL.



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is used on a regular basis during
working hours to transport persons, goods or services for the purpose of
engaging in business activities.



   CONSUMER. A person or persons who are ultimate users or purchasers of
goods or services.



   CONTRACTUAL INTEREST (PERSON HOLDING). An interest obtained by written
agreement and held by any person, partnership or corporation in real
property. The interest must be capable of being demonstrated and must appear
on its face to be superior to all other interests of a similar nature. In
addition, the interest must not be in conflict with that of the record title
owner.



   CORNER LOT. A lot adjoining the point of intersection of two or more
public streets and in which the interior angle of approximately 135 degrees
or less is formed by the extensions of the street lines in the directions
which they take at their intersections with lot lines other than street lines.



   COURT. An open, unoccupied space bounded on two or more sides by
exterior walls of a building or buildings. An INNER COURT is a court entirely
surrounded by the exterior walls of a building or buildings. An OUTER COURT
is a court having at least one side open to a street, alley, yard or other
permanent space.



   CROWN OF STREET. The highest point of grade elevation of a cross
section of a street, usually at a point approximately on the center line of a
street.



   DAY CARE CENTER. See KINDERGARTEN, NURSERY AND/OR DAY CARE CENTER.



   DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL. The number of dwelling units per gross area of
land.



   DEVELOPMENT. The carrying out of any building operation requiring
permits under the terms and provisions of this code or the making of any
material change in the use or appearance of any structure or land requiring a
permit or other authority under this code.



   DEVELOPMENT INTENSITY. See INTENSITY.



   DEVELOPMENT SITE. A parcel or abutting parcels of land that have
definite boundaries, which is improved or which is to be improved as a single
unit of use.



   DISTRICT. See ZONING DISTRICT.



   DRIVE-IN BANKING FACILITIES. A place where a person or persons may
conduct banking transactions from an automobile without the necessity of
leaving the automobile.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A residential dwelling unit other than a
mobile home, either detached or attached, designed for occupancy by a single
family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.



   DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion of a building which is arranged,
occupied or intended to be occupied by a family as living quarters and
includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping.



   EASEMENT. The lawful right one person or entity has to use the land of
another for a specific or general purpose and for a definite or indefinite
term.



   EMERGENCY.  Any federal, state or local declaration of such or
interruption of electrical service, through no fault of the owner or occupant
of a single-family attached or detached dwelling, for more than three
consecutive hours.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 8-24-2010)



   FACILITIES OWNED AND MAINTAINED BY THE CITY. The buildings of municipal
government and related service facilities, such as but not limited to
libraries or recreational centers or other department offices.



   FAMILY. Any number of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit in which no more than two individuals are unrelated by
blood, marriage or adoption.



   FENCE. A structure used as a means of enclosure or screening primarily
designed to keep people or animals in or out, or used as a visual barrier and
constructed in accordance with the requirements of this code.



   FIELD OF VISION. The normal uninterrupted spectrum of sight enjoyed by
a person while making visual observations without turning or eye movements of
any kind.



   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal surface areas of the
several stories of the building measured from the exterior walls or from the
center line of party walls, excluding parking structures or that portion of
any structure devoted to parking. Stairwells, elevator shafts, atriums and
other open areas shall only be included in the computation of FLOOR AREA as
to the actual floor space of those areas.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). The floor area of the building or buildings on
a lot divided by the area of the lot.



   FRONT. The part or side of a building or lot which has both the main
point of ingress to and egress from the building or structure and abuts a
street or a court. Where the main point of ingress or egress is not certain,
then the FRONT shall be deemed to be the side of a building which has
assigned to it the street number address for that building.



   FRONT YARD. An open, unoccupied space on a lot facing a street,
extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and from the
outermost surface of the main building to the front lot line, with the
minimum distance between the front lot line and the main building line as
specified for the district in which the lot is located.



   FRONTAGE. The length of a building or lot which fronts and abuts a
public parking area or a public street or area. The length of a common
surface parking area abutting a public street or a public way.



   GARAGE, COMMERCIAL. A garage structure (building) offering parking
facilities for the general public for payment of a daily, weekly, monthly or
hourly tariff.



   GARAGE, RESIDENTIAL. An attached or unattached structure being an
enclosure designed to be used in the storage of at least two automobiles.



   GRADE. The line or elevation of the inclination from the horizontal.



   HEIGHT. The vertical distance between the highest part of the main
structure of a building or the highest part of a sign or its supporting
structure, whichever is higher, and that point on the crown of the street
which is nearest to the point on the building or sign which is used to
establish the setback of the building or sign, as setback is hereinafter
defined.



   HOME OCCUPATION. A business, profession or trade conducted within or
from a residential building or accessory structure for gain or support by a
resident of the dwelling, which is incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the building and does not change the essential residential
character of the use.



   HOSPITAL. An institution where sick or injured patients are given
medical or surgical treatment intended to restore them to health and an
active life.



   HOTEL. A building in which lodging is provided or offered to the public
for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is
made through an inside lobby.



   IMPERVIOUS (IMPERMEABLE) SURFACE. Any material applied to the surface
of land which does not permit the natural infiltration or passage of water
into the ground, including the ground area of buildings.



   INTENSITY. A term referring to the types and extent of uses,
activities, coverage, building dimensions and open space existing upon a
designated tract or parcel of land.



   KINDERGARTEN, NURSERY AND/OR DAY CARE CENTER. An establishment where
ten or more children are housed for care and pre-school activities, which
meets licensing requirements as established by the state.



   KITCHEN FACILITIES. A room or area principally designed for or
containing appliances for the cold storage of foods or for the preparation of
hot foods.



   LAND. The earth, water and air, above, below or on the surface, and
including any improvements or structures customarily regarded as LAND.



   LINE OF SIGHT. A line extending upward from a point on the horizon at
an angle to the horizon, the angle being the angle of elevation prescribed by
this code and illustrated in Appendix B to this chapter.



   LOCAL ACCESS STREET. A residential or nonresidential street designed to
provide direct access to individual homes, shops, abutting land and similar
traffic destinations, with no provision for through traffic.



   LOT. A part of a properly platted and recorded subdivision which shall
be readily identifiable upon a plat of the subdivision, which plat shall show
the dimensions of its subdivision lots and dimensions of all streets, alleys,
squares, parks or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to
public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or
adjacent thereto.



   LOT COVERAGE (SITE COVERAGE). The area of a particular lot or tract
which is covered with buildings and other impervious (impermeable) surfaces.



   LOT DEPTH. The average distance between the front and rear property
lines.



   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.



   LOT WIDTH. The average distance between the side property lines.



   MANSARD ROOF. A roof having two slopes on all sides, with the lower
slope steeper than the upper slope.



   MAYOR. The presiding officer of the City Council and chief elected
officer of the city.



   MOBILE HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.



   MOTEL. A building in which lodging is provided or offered to the public
for compensation, which is characterized by ingress to and egress from the
rooms usually through an outside entrance, and which is of a design oriented
to the short-term occupancy needs of tourists traveling by automobile.



   MOTOR HOME. A vehicular unit designed to provide temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, built on or permanently
attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or on a chassis cab or van
which is an integral part of the complete unit.



   NEIGHBORHOOD. A predominantly residential area distinguishable from
surrounding areas by recognizable functional boundaries, such as major
arterials or city limits.



   NONCONFORMING USE. Any use lawfully being made of any land prior to the
enactment of this chapter or any amendment hereto, which upon adoption of
this chapter or any amendment does not comply with all the regulations of
this chapter or any amendment hereto, thus rendering the use nonconforming. A
NONCONFORMING USE may relate to land, building, structure or any parts
thereof.



   NURSERY, DAY CARE. See KINDERGARTEN, NURSERY AND/OR DAY CARE CENTER.



   OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP. The map adopted as a part of this chapter
having delineated thereon all the zoning districts and the boundaries thereof
within the city.



   ON-SITE PARKING, NONRESIDENTIAL. An area set aside for temporary
parking (at no charge) of automobiles being used by persons shopping for
goods or services or by persons there temporarily to conduct business on the
premises.



   ON-SITE PARKING, RESIDENTIAL. A paved area on a residential lot set
aside for the parking of motor vehicles.



   OPEN SPACE. Any area of land or water set aside, open and unobstructed
to the sky.



   OUTERMOST SURFACE. The part of any building, excluding eaves and roof
extensions that do not extend a distance greater than five feet, which is
closest to the street abutting the lot on which the building is located.



   OWNER. Any legal entity, person or otherwise who holds superior title
to and can evidence superior title in real or personal property.



   PARCEL. Any quantity of land capable of being described with such
definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established.



   PARKING LOT. An open paved area set aside as an accessory use to
commercial, retail or office use developments to provide temporary parking
(at no charge) of automobiles being used by persons shopping for goods or
services or by persons there temporarily to conduct business on the premises.



   PARKING LOT, COMMERCIAL. A parking lot, as defined herein, offering
parking facilities for the general public for payment of a daily, weekly,
monthly or hourly tariff.



   PARKING SPACE. An enclosed or unenclosed all-weather surfaced area not
on a public street or alley together with an all-weather surfaced driveway
connecting parking space with a street or alley, permitting free ingress and
egress without encroachment on the street or alley. Any parking adjacent to a
public street wherein the maneuvering is done directly on the public street
shall not be classified as off-street parking in computing the parking
requirement for any use.



   PARTICULATE MATTER. Any material except uncombined water which exists
in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid at standard conditions when
released into the atmosphere.



   PERMANENT GENERATOR.  A generator that is attached to either a
single-family attached or detached dwelling and is fueled by natural gas.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 8-24-2010)



   PERSON. Any natural person or entity created by law, including but not
limited to a corporation (profit or nonprofit), partnership or association.



   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A land development project comprehensively planned
to permit flexibility in location of buildings, mixture of land uses, usable
open spaces and the preservation of significant natural features.



   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT AMENDMENT. An amendment authorizing a
planned development as a zoning district of the city approved in accordance
with provisions of this chapter for amendments to the chapter and Official
Zoning District Map, which has, as a part of the amendment, a site plan for
development of the entire district.



   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of
the city.



   PLANNING AND ZONING OFFICIAL. A person duly appointed by the Mayor of
the city, as provided in other sections of this chapter, without limitation,
charged with the duty and obligation of administering and interpreting the
terms and provisions of this chapter and servicing as department head of the
Office of Planning and Zoning.



   PLAT (SUBDIVISION PLAT), FINAL. A document including a graphic
description of a tract of land by metes and bounds and giving the dimensions
of all streets, alleys, squares, parks and other public areas, and giving the
dimensions of all lots or tracts contained therein and which has been finally
approved under the provisions of this code or prior law.



   PLAT (SUBDIVISION PLAT), PRELIMINARY. A document including a graphic
description of a tract of land by metes and bounds and giving the dimensions
of all streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public places, which has been
submitted for review and possible tentative approval, but has not been filed
with the city for final approval nor for record with Harris County or Fort
Bend County in accordance with Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 212.



   PRIMARY ARTERIAL. A major thoroughfare with limited at-grade access,
which expands and links to the expressway system and is designed primarily
for movement of through traffic. West Airport Boulevard, South Kirkwood Road,
Stiles Lane (Dairy Ashford).



   PRIMARY USE OR SERVICE. The use or service that is the principal use or
service provided.



   PRIVATE CLUB. A place wherein members gather for friendship and
recreation, which has the membership restricted to persons who are actually
on the rolls of membership of the club or their guests.



   PROPERTY BUILDING LINE. See BUILDING LINE.



   REAR YARD. An open, unoccupied space, except for accessory buildings as
permitted, extending across the rear of a lot from one side lot line to the
other side lot line and having a minimum depth between the end of the main
building and the rear lot line as specified for the district in which the lot
is located.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicular type unit primarily designed as
temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or travel use, which either
has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle.



   RESTAURANT. An eating establishment where food and drink are served to
customers in a dining room or in a building or where food is prepared.



   RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS. Establishments for the sale of
consumer goods, commodities and services to ultimate consumers or users.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land either dedicated or owned by the city or
other public agency and used for the purpose of a public way or roadway. The
area designated as a RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not be included in computing the area
or size of a lot or tract.



   SCHOOL. An institution, either public or private, organized and
operated for the purposes of providing facilities for the education of
children and/or adults based upon an organized curriculum or study plan,
accredited by or application for accreditation pending before the appropriate
state agency.



   SCHOOL, BUSINESS OR TRADE. A place of instruction or education wherein
physical, mechanical or other skills that may be used in business or commerce
are taught and which may be operated for profit.



   SCREEN, SCREENING. A wall or fence located in the front, rear or side
yard in accordance with standards herein set forth and erected for the
purpose of providing a visual barrier and privacy and reducing noise impact.



   SECONDARY ARTERIAL. A major thoroughfare which supports the primary
arterial system by providing essential system linkages to expressways,
primary arterials and activity centers of medium intensity.



   SECONDARY USE OR SERVICE. A use or service that is subordinate and
incidental to and serves a principal use or service.



   SERVICE STATION. See AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION.



   SETBACK. The required distance between the outermost part of any
building and the property line, or the required distance between a sign and
the street frontage lot line, the distance being measured along a horizontal
line extending from the point on the sign nearest to any point on a vertical
plane projecting from the street frontage lot line, whether on the face or
surface of the sign, any extremity or portion of the sign or sign supports,
to the nearest point on the vertical plane.



   SIDE YARD. An open space on each side of a building and on the same lot
with the building, situated between the building and side line of the lot and
extending through from the front yard to the rear yard. Air conditioning
units may occupy space in the side yard at the discretion of the Building
Official, provided that the location does not create a violation of the
city's Fire Code or any other code, ordinance, rule or regulation of the
city. Any lot line, not the rear line or a front line, shall be deemed to be
a side line.



   SIGN. Any words, numbers, figures, devices, designs, trademarks or
other symbols, which attract attention to or make known such things as an
individual, firm, profession, business, commodity or service, and which are
visible from any public street. This definition of SIGN shall include any
structure designed to be used for the display. For the purpose of removal,
SIGN shall also include sign supports.



   SIGN, ABANDONED. Any sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts
any person or advertises a bona fide business lessor, owner, product, service
or activity.



   SIGN APPENDAGE. A subordinate or accessory sign or object attached to a
primary sign.



   SIGN, AUXILIARY/PUBLIC INFORMATION. Any sign indicating general
information, such as pricing, trading stamps, credit cards, official notices
or services required by law, trade associations, and signs giving directions
to offices, rest rooms, exits and like facilities.



   SIGN, BILLBOARD. Outdoor advertising by poster panels or bulletins,
multi-prism signs, or painted or printed bulletins, either on or off the
premises being advertised.



   SIGN, CANOPY. Any sign affixed to an ornamental and/or functional roof
type structure extending or projecting from the main building structure.



   SIGN, COMMUNITY SERVICE. Any sign which solicits support for or
advertises a nonprofit community use, public use or social institution. The
signs may include but shall not be limited to seasonal holidays, such as
Christmas or Easter, school activities (including spirit or booster signs for
sports and other school activities), charitable programs or religious
activities, or activities of community service or community interest
organizations (including "Yard of the Month" signs awarded by the Meadows
Home and Garden Club).



   SIGN, DAMAGED. Any sign which has become deteriorated or dilapidated
and requires reconditioning to restore it to an average, normal state of
repair, when the reconditioning and restoration shall include the replacement
of any missing portion of the sign, including letters, numbers, figures or
designs, or the replacement of broken or damaged glass or other materials, or
the straightening of any sign support or other portion of the sign when the
sign structure is leaning to such a degree as to be in danger of falling or
collapse.



   SIGN, ELECTRICAL. Any sign containing electrical wiring but not
including any signs illuminated by an exterior light source.



   SIGN, ELECTRONIC. Any sign capable of displaying advertising by the
illumination of individual electronic segments or pixels, including but not
limited to light emitting diodes (LEDs).



   SIGN, FREE-STANDING. Any sign permanently affixed to the ground and
which is not affixed to a building and which is not used for off-premises
advertising.



   SIGN, FREE-STANDING (MONUMENT). A sign with a display surface that is
an integral part of the support structure, which in turn is affixed or
permanently fixed in the ground, as contrasted to any other free-standing
sign that has separate support or supports attached to the display surface.
For the purposes of interpretation in this subchapter, "free-standing signs"
shall include monument signs, but FREE-STANDING MONUMENT SIGNS shall not
include other types of free-standing signs.



   SIGN, GARAGE SALE. Any sign for sale of 20 or more items of used
personal property from a residence, including "patio sales," "porch sales"
and "driveway sales."



   SIGN, GOVERNMENT. Any sign indicating public works projects, public
services or other programs or activities conducted or required by any
governmental subdivision.



   SIGN, INSTITUTIONAL. Any structure, device, display board, screen,
surface or wall, with characters, letters or illustrations placed thereon or
thereunder, by any method or means whatever, showing names, activities and
services provided by a church or other public service nonprofit institution;
the signs shall be located on property occupied by the church or nonprofit
institution.



   SIGN, MOVING MESSAGE.Any sign which is animated by means of flashing,
traveling or blinking lights, or other means not providing constant
illumination, or which contains reflectors or glaring, rotating, strobe,
flashing, blinking, traveling, moving, fading, revolving, intermittent
illumination, or spot lights, or which features a moving message or
advertising or gives the illusion of animation or movement, or which contains
exposed neon tubing or other similar attention-arresting lighting devices.



   SIGN, MULTI-PARTY. Any sign which is used or intended to be used for
advertising purposes by more than one business entity located on the
development site.



   SIGN, POLITICAL. A sign erected on private property by or with approval
of the property owner solely for the purpose of advocating certain political
candidates or propositions for a specific identifiable date certain election.



   SIGN, PORTABLE. A sign which is not designed or manufactured to be
permanently anchored or affixed to the ground, building or other structure,
but rather is designed or primarily used as a sign which is movable from
place to place and which includes but is not limited to signs affixed to a
trailer or other portable structure and bench signs.



   SIGN, REALTY. A sign located on real property that is for rent, lease
or sale, which sign being for the purpose of advertising the rent, lease or
sale of the property.



   SIGN, ROOF. Any sign which is affixed to a building roof, except a
sloping or mansard roof.



   SIGN, SLOPING OR MANSARD. Any sign affixed to a sloping or mansard roof.



   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign which is displayed, as permitted under the
terms and provisions of this subchapter, for a limited period of time for the
purposes of sales promotion or providing information concerning an event or
activity occurring upon the property where the sign is displayed, which sign
shall be removed promptly upon the conclusion of the sale, event or activity.



   SIGN, WALL. Any sign affixed flat against and parallel to a building
wall. For the purpose of this definition, "wall" shall include window areas.



   SITE. A lot, tract or parcel of property, being described by lot and
block number, metes and bounds and/or parts thereof, developed and/or
intended to be developed by the erection of a building or buildings and which
shall include front, rear and side yards where applicable.



   SITE COVERAGE (LOT COVERAGE). The area of a particular site or tract
which is covered with buildings and impervious (impermeable) surfaces.



   SITE FRONTAGE. The frontage under one development at the time of
application for a sign permit.



   SITE PLAN OR PLANS. A two-dimensional graphic illustration setting
forth minimum and maximum requirements for ingress to and egress from the
property, public or private streets or drives, with adequate right-of-way,
sidewalks, utilities, drainage, maximum lot coverage, yards and open spaces,
screening walls or fences, landscaping and other development and protective
requirements including maintenance considered necessary to create a
reasonable transition to and protection of the adjacent property.



   SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA ESTABLISHMENT.  A retail store where more than
15% of the gross square footage of the establishment is dedicated to the
sale, distribution, delivery, furnishing of smoking paraphernalia, devices,
or instruments that are designed or manufactured for the smoking, ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing in to the body tobacco, products prepared
from tobacco, or controlled substances as defined in the Texas Health and
Safety Code Chapter 481.  SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA includes, but is not limited
to, pipes, bongs and hookahs.  SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA also includes kits
used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, or harvesting any species of plant which is a
controlled substance, or from which a controlled substance can be derived or
in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or
preparing a controlled substance.  SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA does not included
lighters, matches, cigarette holders, and devices used to store or preserve
tobacco, tobacco cigarettes, cigarette papers, or cigars.  For purposes of
this definition, SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA establishments may also be referred to
as “head shops”.



   SPECIAL EXCEPTION. A type of relief granted by the Board of Adjustment
pursuant to the terms and authorization contained in this chapter for
particular and unique situations, which may include expansion of
nonconforming uses.



   SPECIFIC USE. A use permitted by ordinance in a district where it is
not necessarily incompatible but where it might cause harm if not watched.
Exceptions are authorized under conditions which will ensure their
compatibility with surrounding uses.



   SPECIFIC USE AMENDMENT. An amendment authorizing a certain use which,
because of its nature, is not subject to categorizing into specific zoning
districts, subject to such conditions or limitations as the City Council
shall provide.



   STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP. A sworn statement by a person swearing to or
affirming the legal or equitable ownership of real property.



   STORY. The part of a building between the surface of a floor (whether
or not counted for purposes of computing floor area ratio) and the ceiling
immediately above. However, a cellar is not a STORY.



   STREET. Any thoroughfare, road, highway or public driveway other than
an alley, and more than 30 feet right-of-way in width, which has been
dedicated or deeded to the public for public use expressly or by implication.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground,
excluding paved surface access ways and surface parking areas, approved
surface water detention facilities and architectural/landscaping
embellishment.



   SUBDIVISION. A tract of land identifiable upon a plat duly approved and
filed for record in the office of the County Clerk of Fort Bend County, Texas
or the County Clerk of Harris County, Texas, which shall clearly delineate
the location and dimensions of all lots within the subdivision, streets,
alleys, squares, parks or other portions intended for public use or for the
use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, and
which shall be accurately described upon the plat by metes and bounds in
order that the same might be located with respect to an original corner of
the original survey of which it is a part.



   TATTOO STUDIO or BODY PIERCING STUDIO. A building or portion of a
building used for selling and/or applying tattoos (by injecting dyes/inks
into the skin), and/or for piercing the skin with needles, jewelry or other
paraphernalia, primarily for the purpose of ornamentation of the human body.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 4-27-2010)



   TEMPORARY GENERATOR.  A generator that is not attached to either a
single-family attached or detached dwelling and is fueled by gasoline, diesel
or natural gas.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 8-24-2010)



   TRAILER. A vehicular unit mounted on wheels and designed for towing by
another motorized vehicle, including but not limited to trailers used for
moving furniture, boxes or other items for storage or for camping and
recreation.



   USE, LAND USE. The particular type of function or purpose to which land
and/or structure is committed.



   VARIANCE. Relief granted by order of the Board of Adjustment, not
contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions the
literal enforcement of the regulations of this chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship.



   VISIBILITY TRIANGLE. A triangle formed by a diagonal line extending
through points on the two property lines 25 feet from the street corner
intersection of the property lines.



   WALL. The side of a room or building between the floor, foundation and
the ceiling and roof, generally a structure of stone, brick or other material
built to enclose, divide, support or protect, and constructed in accordance
with the requirements of this code.



   YARD. An open space other than a court, on a lot or parcel of land on
which a building is situated and which is unobstructed above the general
ground level of the graded lot to the sky, except as provided for roof
overhang and similar special architectural features and landscape features.



   ZERO LOT LINE. The side lot line of a lot or tract without required
minimum side yards, in order that the wall or structure may be erected on the
side property line.



   ZONING DISTRICT. (Hereinafter referred to as District.) Any district
delineated on the Official Zoning District Map under the terms and provisions
of this chapter or which may hereinafter be created subsequent to the
enactment of this chapter.



   ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. The boundaries of each zoning district as
more fully described in § 153.047(C) of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 24-202)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Am. Ord.
2012-11, passed 5-22-2012; Am. Ord. 2015-01, passed 1-27-2015)



DECISION-MAKING AND ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES



§ 153.030  CITY COUNCIL.



   In addition to any authority granted the City Council by state law or
the code of ordinances of the city, the City Council shall have the powers
and duties set forth in this chapter, including but not limited to the
following:



   (A)   To review and approve, disapprove or modify the capital
improvement program prepared by the Mayor;



   (B)   To call and conduct public hearings on proposals to amend or
modify the provisions of this chapter;



   (C)   To amend the provisions of this chapter upon appropriate
findings, by ordinance, after public hearing and recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission; and



   (D)   To take such other action not otherwise reserved for the
Planning and Zoning Commission that the City Council may deem desirable and
necessary.



(Prior Code, § 24-202)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Am. Ord.
2012-11, passed 5-22-2012)



§ 153.031  PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created the City Planning
Commission. This Commission shall serve also as the Zoning Commission of the
city and shall be known and referred to as the City Planning and Zoning
Commission.



   (B)   Purpose. The Commission is created for the purpose of
fulfilling, in a manner consistent with the laws of the state, those planning
and zoning responsibilities delegated to it by the ordinances of the city.
Its dominant purposes shall be to accomplish the following:



      (1)   To identify community needs and to advise the City
Council of the short-range and long-range implications of the needs for the
total development of the city;



      (2)   To recommend to the City Council achievable community
goals for planning and development programs;



      (3)   To recommend to the City Council plans, programs and
policies calculated to aid the community in achieving its defined goals; and



      (4)   To explain to and explore with concerned citizens those
plans and programs adopted by the City Council in an effort to ensure that
private activities and desires may be accomplished in harmony with public
needs and policies.



   (C)   Membership and appointment. The Commission shall be composed
of five regular members to be appointed by the City Council. The City Council
may also appoint at least three but no more than seven alternate members who
shall serve in the absence of one or more of the regular members when
requested to do so by the Chairperson of the Commission, the Vice-Chairperson
or the acting Chairperson in the event of the absence of the Chairperson and
Vice-Chairperson. All of these members, both regular and alternate, shall
serve at the pleasure of the City Council and shall, at the time of
appointment and at all times while service as members of the Commission, be
qualified electors of the city.



   (D)   Terms of office. Each member appointed to the Commission,
whether regular or alternate, shall serve a term of two years, except that
initially three regular members and not more than three alternate members
shall be appointed for a term ending two years from the date of their
appointment, and two regular members and not more than four alternate members
shall be appointed for a term ending one year from the date of their
appointment. Thereafter, the number of regular members to be appointed
annually shall equal the number of regular members whose terms are expiring
in that year, and the number of alternate members to be appointed may be
established by the City Council, provided that at no time shall the total
number of alternate members exceed seven. Members of the Commission may be
appointed to succeed themselves.



   (E)   Vacancies. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled by the
City Council. Unless sooner removed by the City Council, a person appointed
to fill a vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the time for which his or
her predecessor on the Commission was appointed. Newly appointed members
shall be installed at the first regular meeting of the Commission following
their appointment.



   (F)   Organization. The Commission shall hold an organizational
meeting each year within 15 days following the appointment of new members to
the Commission. At each such organizational meeting, the Commission shall
elect from among its members a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson before
proceeding to any other matters of business. The Mayor shall appoint a
Secretary to the Commission who shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor. The
Secretary shall keep minutes of all proceedings of the Commission, which
shall include the vote of each member upon every question. The minutes shall
be a summary of all proceedings before the Commission attested to by the
Secretary and shall be approved by a vote of a majority of the members of the
Commission voting to approve the minutes. The Secretary shall maintain all
records of the Commission and shall, in addition, prepare reports of the
Commission for signature by the Chairperson.



   (G)   Meetings. The Commission shall meet regularly at least once
each month and shall designate the date, time and place of its meetings. It
shall hold such special meetings as may be called by the Chairperson, the
Vice-Chairperson or a majority of its members. All meetings of the Commission
shall be open to the public in accordance with the provisions, limitations
and exceptions of the Texas Open Meetings Law, Tex. Government Code Ch. 551.
The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record
of its proceedings consistent with the provisions of this section and the
requirements of law.



   (H)   Quorum. A majority of the members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.



   (I)   Duties and powers. The Commission is hereby charged with the
responsibility and invested with the authority to:



      (1)   Formulate and recommend to the City Council for its
adoption such plans, programs and policies related to the future growth and
development of the city as the Commission deems appropriate and necessary;



      (2)   Exercise all of the powers and responsibilities of a
Planning Commission relating to the approval or disapproval of land
subdivision plans, plats or replats and to the vacation of the plans, plats
or replats granted by the laws of the state, including but not limited to
Tex. Loc. Government Code Chs. 212 and 242 and Tex. Local Government Code
Chapter 212, and by the ordinances of the city, including but not limited to
Chapter 152, Subdivision Regulations, of the code of ordinances of the city;



      (3)   Exercise all of the powers and responsibilities of a
Zoning Commission relating to the formulation of a zoning plan, hold public
hearings and make recommendations to the City Council relating to the
creation, amendment and implementation of zoning regulations, classifications
and districts, all as provided for in the laws of the state, including but
not limited to Tex. Loc. Government Code Ch. 211, and the ordinances of the
city, including but not limited to this chapter of the code of ordinances of
the city; and



      (4)   Perform such other duties and address such other matters
as may be conferred upon or referred to the Commission by the City Council.



   (J)   Compensation. Members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation; however, each member shall be entitled to reimbursement of
actual and necessary expenses incurred by him or her in the discharge of his
or her official duties on the Commission, subject to approval by the City
Council.



   (K)   Conflict of interest. No member of the Commission shall vote
or participate in any proceeding before the Commission which involves any
matter or property in which he or she has a personal or pecuniary interest,
in which the decision of the Commission will directly affect him or her, or
in which the decision of the Commission will affect any property within 200
feet of his or her place of residence. In the event any such possible
conflict should arise, the member affected thereby shall make disclosure of
that fact to the Commission, which disclosure shall be duly noted in the
minutes of the Commission, and disqualify himself or herself from any further
participation in the Commission's consideration of the matter.



(Prior Code, § 24-302)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.032  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Creation. There is hereby established the Board of Adjustment.



   (B)   Qualifications for membership. Members of the Board of
Adjustment shall possess the following minimum qualifications:



      (1)   Shall be at least 21 years of age;



      (2)   Shall be citizens of the United States of America and
qualified voters of the State of Texas;



      (3)   Shall have resided for at least one year next preceding
their appointment within the corporate limits of the city; and



      (4)   Shall possess such other qualifications as shall be from
time to time imposed by law for members of the City Council.



   (C)   Membership: Appointment, removal, terms and vacancies.



      (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall be composed of five
regular members to be appointed by the City Council, who shall serve without
compensation. The City Council may also appoint four alternate members who
shall serve in the absence of one or more of the regular members, when
requested to do so by the Chairperson of the Board or the Vice-Chairperson or
acting Chairperson in the event of the absence of the Chairperson and
Vice-Chairperson.



      (2)   All members of the Board shall serve a term of two
years, serving until their successors are appointed and qualified.



      (3)   No member of the Board may be removed by the City
Council except for cause; provided, however, that before the removal, the
member shall be provided written charges and given an opportunity to appear
in his or her defense at a public hearing.



   (D)   Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson.



      (1)   At the first meeting after the appointment of members of
the Board for a new term, the members of the Board shall elect one of their
number as Chairperson and one of their number as Vice-Chairperson.



      (2)   In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson
shall act as Chairperson and shall have all powers of the Chairperson.



      (3)   The members of the Board may select an additional person
to preside over meetings in the absence of the Chairperson and the
Vice-Chairperson.



      (4)   The presiding officer of any meeting of the Board may
administer oaths and shall be in charge of all proceedings before the Board
and shall take such action as shall be necessary to preserve order and the
integrity of all proceedings before the Board.



   (E)   Staff Secretary. The Mayor shall appoint a Secretary to the
Board who shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor. The Secretary shall keep
minutes of all proceedings of the Board, which shall include the vote of each
member upon every question. The minutes shall be a summary of all proceedings
before the Board attested to by the Secretary and shall be approved by a vote
of a majority of the members of the Board voting to approve the minutes. The
Secretary shall maintain all records of the Board and shall, in addition,
prepare orders of the Board for signature by the Chairperson as the official
orders of the Board.



   (F)   Planning and Zoning Official and Building Official. In order
to implement the applicable provisions of this chapter, the Planning and
Zoning Official and the Building Official shall provide necessary staff
support to the Board.



   (G)   Quorum and necessary vote. No meeting of the Board may be
called to order nor may any business be transacted by the Board without a
quorum, consisting of at least four members of the Board, being present. The
concurring vote of at least four members shall be necessary for the Board to
take action, save and except to consider and pass a motion of adjournment
which shall require the concurring vote of a simple majority of the members
of the Board then present and voting.



   (H)   Meetings, hearings and procedures.



      (1)   Regular meetings of the Board shall be held monthly as
business shall require, and special meetings at the call of the Chairperson.



      (2)   All meetings and hearings of the Board shall be open to
the public in accordance with the provisions, limitations and exceptions of
the Texas Open Meetings Law, Tex. Government Code Ch. 551.



      (3)   Notices of appeals and requests for variances or special
exceptions or for determination of nonconforming uses or elimination thereof
shall be given by mail to the persons-in-interest and by publishing a notice
of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten
days prior to the date set for the hearing.



      (4)   All records of the Board shall be public records open to
inspection at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice in accordance with
Tex. Government Code Ch. 552.



   (I)   Powers and duties. The Board shall have the following powers
and duties:



      (1)   To hear and decide where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement of Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 211, or of
this chapter;



      (2)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of
this chapter;



      (3)   To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such
variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, and so
that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice
done;



      (4)   To review and report on any matter referred to it by the
Mayor or the City Council; and



      (5)   To adopt rules of procedure which are not in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter.



   (J)   Appeals from the Board. Any person or persons, jointly or
severally, or any taxpayer, any officer, department or board of the
municipality, aggrieved by any decision of the Board, may present to the
District Court of the county, a verified petition stating that a decision is
illegal and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition shall be
filed with the Court no later than ten days after the filing of the Board's
decision with the City Secretary. If the person or persons fails to file the
petition within the ten-day period of time, then the decision of the Board
shall become final and binding.



(Prior Code, § 24-303)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.033  OFFICE OF PLANNING AND ZONING.



   (A)   Creation and appointment. There is hereby established an
Office of Planning and Zoning. The Planning and Zoning Official shall be the
head of the Office of Planning and Zoning and shall be appointed by and serve
at the pleasure of the Mayor.



   (B)   Jurisdiction, authority and duties. In addition to the
jurisdiction, authority and duties which may be conferred on the Planning and
Zoning Official by other provisions of this code, the Planning and Zoning
Official shall have the following jurisdiction, authority and duties:



      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall receive and
review, or cause to have reviewed, all applications under the provisions of
this chapter;



      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall serve as staff
planner to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of Adjustment, and
shall inform those bodies of all facts and information at his or her disposal
with respect to the development proposals or any other matters brought before
the bodies;



      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall assist in the
preparation and giving of all notices required by this chapter and may, in
addition, give recommendations on all proposals properly before the
Commission or the City Council;



      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall assist the City
Secretary in maintaining the Official Zoning District Map;



      (5)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall certify
compliance when it shall be determined that a proposed development is in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and



      (6)   Whenever requested to do so by the Mayor or the City
Council, the Planning and Zoning Official, with the assistance of other city
departments, shall conduct or cause to be conducted surveys, investigations
and studies and shall prepare or cause to be prepared such reports, maps,
photographs, charts and exhibits as may be requested.



(Prior Code, § 24-304)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.034  OFFICE OF INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Creation and appointment. There is hereby created an Office of
Inspections. The Building Official shall be the head of the Office of
Inspections and shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.



   (B)   Jurisdiction, authority and duties. In addition to the
jurisdiction, authority and duties which may be conferred on the Building
Official by other provisions of this code, the Building Official shall have
the following jurisdiction, authority and duties:



      (1)   The Building Official shall issue building permits in
accordance with the procedures of this code;



      (2)   The Building Official shall issue certificates of
occupancy in accordance with the procedures of this code;



      (3)   The Building Official shall enforce the provisions of
this chapter; and



      (4)   The Building Official shall provide the City Council,
the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Board of Adjustment with reports
and recommendations with respect to matters before those bodies as directed
by the Mayor.



(Prior Code, § 24-305)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



PLANNING DOCUMENTS AND OFFICIAL MAP



§ 153.045  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN; REVIEW; AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Authority. The Commission shall annually review the adopted
Comprehensive Plan and prepare a report thereon, recommending to the City
Council adoption of amendments to the plan if the Commission deems the same
necessary.



   (B)   Effect. All decisions made by the city implementing the terms
of this chapter shall be consistent with the policies adopted in the plan.
Any action on any application for amendment to this chapter shall be in
accordance with the adopted policies of the plan except where the policy
itself is the subject of the proposed change.



   (C)   Procedures for review and amendment.



      (1)   Review of Plan. The Commission, with the assistance of
the Planning and Zoning Official, shall annually review the Comprehensive
Plan and submit a report thereon to the City Council. The Commission shall
make reasonable efforts to obtain the views, comments on and criticisms of
the plan or proposed amendments thereto from departments, interested
organizations, groups, firms and residents of the city. The Commission may
incorporate in the report proposed amendments to the plan, if any, which may
be submitted by residents at any time and shall set forth its recommendations
on each proposal in accordance with the procedure established for reports to
the City Council. The Commission shall transmit the report to the City
Council no later than June 1 of each year, together with any materials or
statements deemed necessary to a full consideration of the report. The report
may include recommendations, majority and minority positions and proposed
amendments.



      (2)   Receipt of report. The City Council shall formally
receive the report from the Commission.



(Prior Code, § 24-401)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.046  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.



   (A)   Authority. Commencing in 1985 and annually thereafter, the
Mayor shall prepare and the City Council may adopt or amend a capital
improvement program for the city. In the event that the Mayor finds that a
capital improvement program cannot be presented in 1985, the provisions
herein set out shall become operative in 1986.



   (B)   Definition. The capital improvement program shall consist of a
program of municipal capital improvement projects with their estimated costs,
projected over a period of at least five years. The projects may include: any
major expenditure for physical municipal facilities, such as costs for
acquisition, development and improvement of lands or interests in land;
acquisition or construction of buildings, structures, streets and permanent
installations, including additions or major repairs or alterations;
acquisition and construction of utility lines; acquisition, construction or
installation of permanent public improvements; acquisition of equipment;
major landscaping installations; and similar expenditures.



   (C)   Purpose. The capital improvement program shall serve as a
means for systematically reviewing proposed capital projects to ensure
coordination of expenditures and development. The program shall tie together
the timing, location and financing of proposed capital projects, shall
encourage the development of such projects in scheduled stages, and shall
provide the public with an understanding of future needs and development
activities to be undertaken by the city.



   (D)   Procedures for adoption and amendment.



      (1)   Development of program. The Mayor shall propose the
capital improvement program and shall refer it to the Commission for review
and comment on the consistency of the program with the adopted Comprehensive
Plan.



      (2)   Adoption of program. Within 30 days of receipt of the
capital improvement program from the Mayor, the Commission shall transmit its
comments and recommendations to the City Council in the form provided for
reports and recommendations from the Planning and Zoning Commission. The City
Council may adopt the capital improvement program, as recommended by the
Mayor, with or without modifications.



      (3)   Amendment of program. The capital improvement program,
or any part thereof, may be amended at any time in the same manner as herein
provided for its original development and adoption, subject only to the
limitations imposed by law. The City Council may amend or adopt a capital
improvement program at any time in accordance with law, without action of any
individual board or commission.



(Prior Code, § 24-402)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.047  OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP.



   (A)   Map status. The Official Zoning District Map described in this
section, a reduced copy of which is attached to this chapter, is hereby
designated and established as a part of this chapter; and the originals
thereof which are on file at City Hall, City of Meadows Place and bear the
signatures of the City Secretary and the Mayor, shall be as much a part of
this chapter as if the information contained therein was set out in full in
this chapter.



   (B)   Procedures.



      (1)   Adoption and amendment to the Official Zoning District
Map shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   Two copies of the map shall be filed with the City
Secretary, one of which shall be prominently displayed and available for
public inspection. Any amendments to the map shall be considered amendments
to this chapter; and as soon as the same are properly enacted, the two maps
in the office of the City Secretary should be properly changed.



      (3)   One copy shall be filed with the Building Official and
the Planning and Zoning Official and shall be maintained up-to-date by
posting thereon all amendments, to be readily accessible for the purposes of
issuing building permits, certificates of occupancy and certificates of
compliance, and for enforcing the provisions of this chapter.



      (4)   One copy shall be maintained in the records of the
Planning and Zoning Commission for reference purposes and shall be maintained
up-to-date by posting thereon all changes and subsequent amendments.



   (C)   District boundaries. In the event that any uncertainty exists
with respect to the intended boundaries of the various districts as shown on
the Official Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply:



      (1)   The district boundaries are the center lines of the
streets, alleys, waterways and rights-of-way, unless otherwise indicated.
Where designation of a boundary line on the Zoning District Map coincides
with the location of a street, alley, waterway or right-of-way, the center
line of the street, alley, waterway or right-of-way shall be construed to be
the boundary of the district.



      (2)   Where the district boundaries do not coincide with the
location of streets, alleys, waterways and rights-of-way but do coincide with
lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries of the
district.



      (3)   Where the district boundaries do not coincide with the
location of streets, alleys, waterways and rights-of-way or lot lines, the
district boundaries shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the
Zoning District Map.



      (4)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city
limits shall be construed as following city limits.



(Prior Code, § 24-403)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Ord.
94-16, § 2, passed 5-10-1994)



Editor's note:



   The Official Zoning District Map was changed according to Ord. 94-16,
§ 2, passed May 10, 1994 to provide for C-3 Special Commercial District.



ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY



§ 153.060  DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.



   In order to carry out the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive
Plan and the purposes of this chapter, the following districts are hereby
created:



   (A)   Residential Districts:



      (1)   R-1 Residential District;



      (2)   R-2 Residential District; and



      (3)   R-3 Residential District.



   (B)   C-M Commercial-Residential Mixed Use District; and



   (C)   Commercial Districts:



      (1)   C-1 Light Commercial District;



      (2)   C-2 Commercial District; and



      (3)   C-3 Special Commercial District.



(Prior Code, § 24-501)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Ord.
94-16, § 3, passed 5-10-1994)



§ 153.061  PERMITTED USES.



   No structure or land in the city shall hereafter be constructed, built,
moved, remodeled by expanding the size thereof, reconstructed, used or
occupied except in accordance with the requirements of the zoning district in
which the structure is located. However, a structure, use or lot lawfully
existing at the date of adoption of this chapter may be occupied as a
nonconforming use under the procedures and requirements of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 24-502)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.062  SPECIFIC USES.



   (A)   Certain uses, which because of their nature and existing
location are not appropriate for categorizing into specific zoning districts,
are allowed in various zoning districts by specific use permit. The procedure
for approval of a specific use permit includes notice, public hearings and
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the same basic
procedure prescribed for amendments to this code.



   (B)   Any use not permitted by this chapter or approved as a
specific use amendment under the procedures hereinafter set out is prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 24-503)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.063  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Planned development in Residential Districts. A planned
development mechanism may be provided for selected residential districts in
order to provide greater flexibility and opportunity in the planning and
development of residential projects that serve to upgrade and enhance
existing residential neighborhoods while responding to current market trends
in housing.



   (B)   Planned development in Commercial-Residential Mixed Use
District. A planned development mechanism is provided in order to provide
greater flexibility and opportunity in the planning and development of
residential or commercial projects or a combination thereof within a mixed
land use environment.



   (C)   Planned development in Light Commercial and Commercial
Districts. A planned development mechanism is provided in order to provide
greater flexibility and opportunity in the planning and development of
commercial projects, such as shopping centers, office plazas, permitted
retail, service and commercial type uses or a combination of those uses.



(Prior Code, § 24-504)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.064  TEMPORARY USES.



   (A)   Authorization. Temporary uses may be authorized by the City
Council in any zoning district subject to the standards hereinafter
established, provided that all temporary uses shall meet the minimum
requirements of this code for any type of development within the zoning
district in which the use is located and shall, in addition, meet the minimum
requirements of this code for the building and maintenance of any structure
erected as a temporary use.



   (B)   Time limitation. All temporary uses shall be for a period of
time not exceeding 30 days from the date of commencement of construction of
the temporary use structure or the actual inhabitation or use of the
structure for temporary use purposes, whichever is shorter. The time
limitation herein imposed may be extended or shortened by action of the City
Council or the Building Official, for good cause shown, when it shall appear
that extension thereof is in the best interest of the applicant and neither
contrary to the purposes and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan nor
injurious to the health, safety and well-being of the residents, citizens and
inhabitants of the city.



   (C)   Permit required. A permit must be obtained for all temporary
uses; the permit shall be issued by the Building Official of the city. The
permit issued shall be entitled "Temporary Use Permit" and shall be for a
period of time not exceeding 30 days. The permit shall clearly specify the
use intended and any conditions and safeguards imposed by the Building
Official for the protection of the health, safety and well-being of the
residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city. The Building Official shall
be authorized to charge a fee for the issuance of a temporary use permit in
an amount as shall from time to time be established by the City Council.
Nothing herein provided shall prevent the City Council or the Building
Official from extending the expiration date of any temporary use permit
issued hereunder under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed;
however, no additional fee shall be charged for extension of the permit if
the temporary use thereunder is continuous and uninterrupted.



   (D)   Exception for construction. The Building Official or the City
Council may issue a temporary permit for construction offices (shacks) and
the open storage of building materials upon a construction site so long as
the offices (shacks) and open storage meet all other requirements of this
code.



(Prior Code, § 24-505)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.065  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements as set forth in this chapter, all
property proposed for planned development approval or any property requiring
subdividing or resubdividing for any purpose within the city, shall be laid
out in accordance with Chapter 152 of this code, Subdivision Regulations,
including but not limited to regulations contained therein for streets,
alleys, sidewalks, utilities and drainage.



(Prior Code, § 24-506)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.066  USE OF NONCONFORMING RESIDENTIAL LOTS.



   Notwithstanding the minimum requirements for residential lot size,
structures may be constructed, built, moved, remodeled by expanding the size
thereof, reconstructed, occupied or used on a nonconforming lot of record
platted prior to the enactment of this chapter, or any amendment hereto,
provided that all such structures shall meet all other applicable development
and use regulations for the zoning district in which the structure is located.



(Prior Code, § 24-507)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.067  STRUCTURE AND AREA REGULATIONS.



   No structure or part thereof shall be constructed, built, moved,
remodeled by expanding the size thereof, reconstructed, occupied or used in
such manner that the maximum height, lot coverage, floor area or floor area
ratio exceeds that specified for the zoning district in which the structure
or use is located; nor shall a structure or part thereof be constructed,
built, remodeled by expanding the size thereof, reconstructed, occupied or
used in such manner that yards are provided which are smaller than the
required yards in the zoning district in which the structure or use is
located.



(Prior Code, § 24-508)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.068  USE AND LAND REGULATIONS.



   No structure or land shall be used for any purpose except as specified
herein, except as a nonconforming use lawfully existing at the date of
enactment of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 24-509)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985) 
Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.069  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Authorization. Accessory structures and uses are permitted in
any zoning district in connection with any principal use lawfully existing
within the district, provided that all accessory structures or uses shall
meet the development regulations for the zoning district in which the
structure or use is located, in addition to the further requirements of this
section.



   (B)   Particular prohibited accessory structures and uses. 
Prohibited accessory structures and uses are:



      (1)   Commercial garages, commercial parking lots and
commercial parking areas; and



      (2)   Kitchen facilities in any residential structure other
than the principal structure.



   (C)   Accessory structures, location and regulation.



      (1)   All detached accessory structures and uses in any
residential district shall be located in the rear or side yard of the
residential unit, and the same shall be screened from view from any adjacent
rights-of-way.



      (2)   No accessory structure or use shall exceed the height of
the principal structure to which it is accessory.



      (3)   All accessory structures and uses shall be subordinate
to and supportive of the primary use and structure.



   (D)   Accessory parking use, location and regulation.



      (1)   Whenever a nonresidential structure shall be constructed
in such a manner that the same is located partially within the city and
partially within another adjacent city of jurisdiction, only the gross floor
area actually located within the city shall be used in calculating the number
of required off-street parking spaces for the structure. The minimum number
of required off-street parking spaces shall equal the number specified in the
regulations hereinafter set out for each zoning district; provided, however,
that the total number of spaces shall not exceed one and one-half times the
minimum number so specified.



(Ord. 87-018, § 1, passed 7-28-1987)



      (2)   In Zoning District C-3, Special Commercial District, the
parking requirements as herein specified for the district may be satisfied in
whole or in part within the city limits of the City of Stafford, Texas.
Nothing herein shall permit the construction of any parking lot or parking
area without the construction of building or buildings within the City of
Meadows Place requiring parking as herein provided.



(Ord. 94-16, § 3, passed 5-10-1994)



   (E)   Accessory parking use to adjacent commercial development.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, whether
contained in this chapter or any other chapter, or any contrary provision of
any ordinance whatsoever heretofore previously adopted by the City Council of
the city, it is hereby specifically provided that the tract of land lying
immediately north of Dorrance Lane and immediately west of U.S. Highway 59
shall be permitted to be used as a parking lot in order to provide additional
or overflow parking space as an accessory use to the commercial development
located on the tract of land lying immediately south of Dorrance Lane and
west of U.S. Highway 59, provided that:



      (1)   No improvements constructed in conjunction with the
accessory parking use, including but not limited to poured concrete or other
paving surface, curbing, walkways, storm water detention ponds or related
facilities, any lighting fixtures, or any similar improvements, shall be
located or constructed upon any portion of the tract of land which lies
within 350 feet to the east and the east southeast of any point on the
boundary line between the R-1 Residential District on the west and the C-2
Commercial District on the east, except such landscaping as herein required;



      (2)   The improvements constructed pursuant to this division
(E) shall be landscaped and screened in accordance with the provisions of §
153.072; and



      (3)   The improvements shall be used and operated in
accordance with the performance standard, including but not limited to the
standards provided for glare and open storage, as set forth in § 153.070.



(Ord. 88-018, § 1, passed 5-24-1988)



(Prior Code, § 24-510)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.070  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   All uses in any district of the city shall conform in operation,
location and construction to the performance standards herein specified for
noise, air pollution and particulate matter and other air contaminants,
odorous matter, fire and explosive hazard material, toxic and noxious matter,
vibration, open storage and glare.



   (A)   Noise.



      (1)   Environmental sound levels. It shall be a violation of
this chapter for any person to operate or permit to be operated any
stationary source of sound which creates a unit percentile sound level (L1)
greater than 15 dB(A) above the ambient sound pressure level (L90) as set
forth in Table 1 in any residential use zone, or creates a tenth percentile
sound level (L10) or a ninetieth percentile sound level (L90) which exceeds
the limits set forth in Table 1 for the receiving land use districts when
measured at the property boundary. For the purpose of enforcing these
provisions, a measurement period shall not be less than ten minutes or more
than 30 minutes. When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured
in more than one land use category, the limits of the most restrictive use
shall apply at the boundary and within the most restrictive land use category.



 


Table 1. Limiting Sound Levels for Land Use Districts




Use District

 

L90

 

L10




7:00 a.m.– 10:00 p.m.

 

10:00 p.m. – 7:00 a.m.

 

7:00 a.m.– 10:00 p.m.

 

10:00 p.m.– 7:00 a.m.



Residential
 

55 dB(A)

 

50 dB(A)

 

65 dB(A)

 

60 dB(A)



Commercial
 

62 dB(A)

 

57 dB(A)

 

72 dB(A)

 

67 dB(A)




 



      (2)   Public and private project review. All public and
private projects shall be subject to a review process by the Building
Official in order to determine if the projects are likely to cause noise or
vibration in violation of this division. The Building Official shall be
authorized to make or require any investigations or studies which in his or
her opinion are necessary to determine if compliance with this division can
be achieved. The Building Official shall also have the authority to require
noise attenuation measures in accordance with the findings of the
investigations or studies for the purpose of determining compliance with this
division.



      (3)   Exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be
exempt from the noise level regulations herein specified:



         (a)   Noises not directly under control of the property
user;



         (b)   Noises emanating from construction and maintenance
activities between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. (daylight hours);



         (c)   Noises of safety signals, warning devices and
emergency pressure relief valves;



         (d)   Transient noise of moving sources such as
automobiles, trucks, airplanes and trains; and



         (e)   Noises of temporary and permanent generators in
residential districts shall be governed by § 153.080.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 8-24-2010)



   (B)   Control of air pollution from visible emission and particulate
matter. No person may cause, suffer, allow or permit any outdoor burning,
incineration, visible emissions or particulate matter from any source to
exceed allowable rates specified in the Texas Air Quality Control Board
Regulation I 131.03, incorporated herein by reference and filed in the office
of the City Secretary of the city.



   (C)   Odorous matter. No person shall discharge from any source
whatsoever one or more air contaminants that produce an odor, in such
concentration and of such duration as may tend to be injurious to or to
adversely affect human health or welfare. No discharge shall be permitted
which exceeds applicable standards set by the Texas Air Quality Control Board.



   (D)   Fire and explosive hazardous material.



      (1)   No use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds
or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted in any district,
except that chlorates, nitrates, perchlorates, phosphorus and similar
substances and compounds in small quantities for use by industry, school
laboratories, druggists or wholesalers may be permitted when approved by the
Fire Marshal of the city as not presenting a fire or explosion hazard.



      (2)   The storage and use of all flammable liquids and
materials such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film, solvents and
petroleum products shall be permitted only when the storage or use conforms
to the standards and regulations of the city.



   (E)   Toxic and noxious matter. No operation or use in any district
shall emit toxic and noxious matter that is in violation of Texas Air Quality
Control Board General Rules (131.01), Regulation I and Regulation V (as
applicable to Fort Bend County), incorporated herein by reference and filed
in the office of the City Secretary of the city.



   (F)   Vibration. No operation or use in any district shall at any
time create earthborn vibration which, when measured at the bounding property
line of the source of operation, exceeds the limit of displacement set forth
in the following table in the frequency ranges specified.



 


Frequency in Cycles per Second

 

Displacement in Inches




0 to 10

 

.0010




10 to 20

 

.0008




20 to 30

 

.0005




30 to 40

 

.0004




40 and over

 

.0003




 



   (G)   Open storage. No open storage of materials or commodities
shall be permitted in any district. No wrecking, junk or salvage yard shall
be permitted as a storage use in any district.



   (H)   Glare. No use or operation in any district shall be located or
conducted so as to produce intense glare or direct illumination across the
bounding property line from a visible source of illumination or glare, nor
shall the light be of an intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from
the use and enjoyment of adjacent property.



(Prior Code, § 24-511)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985) 
Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.071  FENCE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   In all residential districts of the city, no fences
shall be constructed to a height in excess of eight feet. The fences may be
constructed anywhere inside the property lines of a lot zoned residential,
except within the front yard space as that term is defined in this chapter.



(Ord. 92-36, passed 9-22-1992)



      (2)   In the event that the property building line, as set out
on the subdivision plat, shall be closer than the outermost surface of any
building to the property line, then it shall be a defense to any action
commenced under this section that the fence was not in fact located within
the distance between the property building line and the front lot line. Any
person who shall plead this defense shall be required to prove the exact
measured distance from the property building line to the front lot line.



   (B)   In nonresidential zoning districts, fences may be located
anywhere on a lot, subject to such conditions and limitations as shall be
provided in this code.



   (C)   In the event a home or residential structure has a rear
property line which abuts and parallels the Dairy Ashford Street
right-of-way, the maximum fence size shall be a height not to exceed eight
feet, only for the part of the property line abutting and paralleling Dairy
Ashford Street.



(Prior Code, § 24-512)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Ord.
91-41, § 1, passed 12-17-1991)



§ 153.072  LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND BUFFERING.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of requirements for landscaping,
screening and buffering is to improve the aesthetic appearance and increase
the attractiveness of open spaces within the city, including off-street
parking, to enhance the compatibility of differing land uses and, in general,
to mitigate negative environmental influences of climate on land uses (e.g.
heat, noise, air pollution).



   (B)   Applicability. Standards described herein are minimum
standards applicable to all new planned developments and all new
nonresidential structures and related parking that have, as a condition of
approval, requirements for landscaping, screening or buffering and to all
nonresidential uses and related parking permitted.



   (C)   General requirements.



      (1)   Installation. All landscaping shall be installed in a
sound workmanlike manner according to accepted planting procedures, with the
quality of plant materials as hereinafter described and with a readily
available water supply. All plant material shall be insect- and
disease-resistant and shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds, noxious
pests and diseases when installed.



      (2)   Maintenance. The owner and tenant of the landscaped
premises and their agents, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible
for the maintenance of all landscaping in a good condition so as to present a
healthy, neat and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris.



   (D)   Screening and buffering between nonresidential and residential
uses.



      (1)   Screening wall or fence and buffering between
nonresidential and residential uses. Where the rear or service side of a
nonresidential building is exposed to a residence or to a residential
district boundary line, and where the building is closer than 60 feet to the
residence or to the boundary line, a screening wall or fence of at least
eight feet and not more than ten feet in height shall be erected separating
the rear or service side from the adjacent residence or residential district,
unless a planned development has been approved specifically authorizing an
alternative solution for screening and/or buffering, which is not in conflict
with the purposes of this section and which is justified based upon
architectural, aesthetic and landscaping considerations peculiar to the
specific development, in which case the requirements of the planned
development approval shall prevail.



         (a)   1.   A screening wall or fence shall be of wood
or masonry construction as provided herein.



            2.   A screening wall or fence of wooden
construction shall be a permanent wooden fence constructed of cedar or
redwood and with capped galvanized iron posts set in concrete and must not be
less than eight feet in height, not containing openings of more than 40
square inches in each one square foot of surface of the wall or fence, and
the wall or fence surface shall constitute a visual barrier.



            3.   A screening wall or fence may be constructed,
which shall be of masonry construction on a concrete beam or foundation or a
metal frame or base, which supports a permanent type wall material, the
surface of which does not contain openings of more than 40 square inches in
each one square foot of surface of the wall or fence, and which fence or wall
surface shall constitute a visual barrier.



            4.   In either permanent wooden or masonry
constructed walls or fences, no opening shall be permitted for access unless
a solid gate, equaling the height of the wall or fence, is provided. The gate
shall remain closed at all times except when in actual use.



         (b)   Where a planned development has been approved by
the City Council, final plans submitted by the applicant for approval by the
Planning and Zoning Official shall include a landscaping plan in accordance
with the provisions of this section and the provisions for landscaping,
screening and buffering in the planned development amendment.



         (c)   The provisions of this division as to screening
and buffering between nonresidential and residential uses may be waived by
the City Council upon recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission in
the following cases:



            1.   When a property line abuts a dedicated alley;
and/or



            2.   When a rear or service side abuts an existing
wall or other durable landscaping or screening barrier on an abutting
property if the existing barrier satisfies the requirements of this division.



      (2)   Landscape buffering. Where nonresidential uses abut
residential uses, a landscaped buffer zone of not less than 12 feet shall be
provided continuously along the property line.



   (E)   Screening and buffering between higher and lower residential
densities. Where a residential use requires a planned development amendment
to proceed, there shall be at least a six-foot screening wall or fence
between the property that is the subject of the planned development and any
abutting residential property that conforms to regulations for permitted uses
within the district in which it is located. A planned development may be
approved specifically authorizing an alternate solution for screening and/or
buffering, which is not in conflict with the purposes of this section and
which is justified based upon architectural, aesthetic and landscaping
considerations peculiar to the specific development, in which case the
requirements of the planned development approval shall prevail.



      (1)   A screening wall or fence shall be of wood or masonry
construction as provided herein.



         (a)   A screening wall or fence of wooden construction
shall be a permanent wooden fence constructed of cedar or redwood and with
capped galvanized iron posts set in concrete and must not be less than six
feet in height, not containing openings or more than 40 square inches in each
one square foot of surface of the wall or fence, and the wall or fence
surface shall constitute a visual barrier.



         (b)   A screening wall or fence may be constructed,
which shall be of masonry construction on a concrete beam or foundation or a
metal frame or base, which supports a permanent type wall material, the
surface of which does not contain openings of more than 40 square inches in
each one square foot of surface of the wall or fence, and which fence or wall
surface shall constitute a visual barrier.



         (c)   In either permanent wooden or masonry constructed
walls or fences, no opening shall be permitted for access unless a solid
gate, equaling the height of the wall or fence, is provided. The gate shall
remain closed at all times except when in actual use.



      (2)   Final plans for a planned development district submitted
in accordance with this chapter shall include a landscaping plan which
conforms to the general provisions of this section and to any additional
landscaping requirements imposed as a result of the planned development
amendment.



   (F)   Screening of outside storage. All outside storage areas,
including waste material storage facilities, in planned development and
nonresidential districts shall be screened from adjacent residential uses and
public street rights-of-way. Screening may be as follows:



      (1)   A screening wall or fence, which shall be of wood or
masonry construction of sufficient height to screen that which is being
stored; or



      (2)   A hedge, which shall be of sufficient height and density
to screen that which is being stored.



   (G)   Landscaping of off-street parking. Landscaping shall be
provided when any off-street parking area for five vehicles or more is not
visually screened by an intervening building or structure from an abutting
public right-of-way or adjacent residential property.



      (1)   Interior landscaping. Interior landscaping of parking
areas may be included as a condition of planned development approval for the
purpose of providing trees and massed plantings.



      (2)   Design of required landscaping. Where required,
landscaping shall be integrated into the overall design of the surface
parking area in accordance with this chapter in such a manner that it may
assist in defining parking slots, pedestrian paths, driveways and internal
collector lanes, in limiting points of ingress and egress, and in separating
parking pavement from street alignments. (For example, see the illustration
referenced in division (A) of Appendix A to this chapter.)



         (a)   Where applicable, landscaped areas and walkways
abutting parking spaces shall be protected by a wheel stop or curb that is at
least three feet from any landscaping except grass or ground cover.



         (b)   All landscaping shall be located so as not to
interfere with the act of parking or with parking area maintenance and so as
not to create a traffic hazard by obscuring driver or pedestrian vision at
the intersections of walkways, driveways, collector lanes and streets, or any
combination thereof.



   (H)   Landscaping along public rights-of-way.



      (1)   A landscaped area 20 feet wide abutting the property
line along all public rights-of-way shall be provided in all nonresidential
districts. The landscaped area shall contain a berm having a minimum height
of three feet and a maximum height of five feet, as measured from curb level.
(See the illustration referenced in division (B) of Appendix A to this
chapter.)



      (2)   In Zoning District C-3, Special Commercial District, if
the developer/owner chooses not to construct the required berm, the
developer/owner shall file with the city a landscaping plan which shall
provide for appropriate vegetative planting to be maintained to a height of
not greater than five feet and such trees that are deemed appropriate that
will not prevent reasonable observation of pedestrians and vehicular traffic.



(Ord. 94-16, § 3, passed 5-10-1994)



   (I)   Screening of parking areas and parking structures in
commercial uses.



      (1)   All parking garages or parking structures in commercial
use in the city shall be adequately screened to prevent visual observations
of any vehicles or equipment used as an instrument of transportation from any
abutting public or private property. In addition, sufficient provisions
should be made to prevent any noise or odor contamination of the environment
as a result of the use of property for parking or storage of vehicles or
equipment used as an instrument of transportation. The required screening
shall consist of a wall structure or the lattice or other intertwined
material constructed in a manner to accomplish the objectives of this code.



      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a permit for any parking
garages, or parking structures in commercial use in the city, the applicant
shall submit to the Building Official, in addition to the application for
building permits or other permits required under this code, a screening plan
which shall be in full compliance with the provisions of this division and
performance standards of § 153.070. The Building Official may approve the
plan if the same is found to be in accordance with the provisions of this
division.



(Prior Code, § 24-513)  (Ord. 97-08, § 1, passed 2-25-1997)



§ 153.073  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.



   (A)   Purpose. The requirements of this section are intended to
reduce congestion of the public streets and to promote the safety and welfare
of the public by ensuring the availability of adequate off-street parking and
loading facilities in the city.



   (B)   Required parking.



      (1)   Off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each use
in accordance with the requirements of each district.



      (2)   When calculating the number of required off-street
parking spaces, fractions of less than one-half shall be disregarded, and
fractions of one-half or more shall be counted as one space.



      (3)   Every building site within any residential district must
have a garage as defined in § 153.016.



(Ord. 2006-03, passed 2-28-2006)



   (C)   Location of required parking spaces. Required parking spaces
shall be located as follows.



      (1)   For single-family detached and single-family attached
dwelling units, required parking shall be located on the same lot.



      (2)   The City Council may determine that it is in the best
interest of the applicant and the surrounding property owners to permit the
joint use by two or more property owners of parking areas which may be
located on the same property as the structure or on contiguous or
noncontiguous property. In these cases, the City Council may determine that
the joint-use parking is appropriate and in the best interest of the
applicant, adjoining property owners and the residents, citizens and
inhabitants of the city and thereby approve the proposal in accordance with
this division. All joint-use parking shall be located within 150 feet of any
building which it serves, as measured along an established pedestrian route
from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the
use served.



      (3)   No open parking space or surfaced area in a residential
district shall be located nearer than one and one-half feet to the side lot
line.



   (D)   Design of required parking spaces.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (D)(2) or as otherwise
specified in the planned development approval, each required parking space
shall have the dimensions as hereinafter provided.



      (2)   Up to 30% of the required parking spaces may be
designated for use by compact automobiles, provided that adequate provision
should be made for safe ingress to and egress from all parking spaces and
parking areas with adequate and safe turning and backing radii. Parking
spaces shall be adequately sized for standard and compact automobiles in
accordance with plans and specifications on file in the office of the
Building Official or as approved in a planned development amendment.



      (3)   All parking areas containing three or more parking
spaces shall be constructed in accordance with such requirements as may be
promulgated by the Building and Planning and Zoning Officials in order to
provide for safe and adequate ingress to and egress from the parking area.



      (4)   All parking spaces shall have direct access to public
streets by way of aisles or driveways of the following minimum dimensions:



         (a)   One-way: 12 feet; and



         (b)   Two-way: 24 feet.



      (5)   All driveways, roadways, open surface parking spaces and
points of ingress to and egress from parking spaces shall be constructed in
accordance with the city specifications for streets and shall be graded and
drained to dispose of surface water accumulation by means of a storm water
drainage system.



      (6)   Each parking space abutting a wall, walkway, roadway or
a landscaped area shall have a wheel stop or curb at least three feet from
the wall and any landscaping, except grass or ground cover.



   (E)   Change of use. Whenever a use which is in existence on the
date of enactment of this chapter is changed or modified so that additional
parking spaces are required under this chapter, the new required parking
spaces shall comply with the requirements of this section. A nonconformity
with the terms and provisions of this section as to insufficient parking
spaces may be continued, but the nonconformity shall not be increased as
provided for in §§ 153.155 through 153.158.



   (F)   Required off-street loading spaces.



      (1)   Location of required loading spaces. Loading spaces
shall be located on the same lot as the building or structure to which they
are accessory. No loading space shall be located in a required front yard.



      (2)   Designation and use. Each required loading space shall
be designated as such and shall only be used for loading purposes.



      (3)   Design and maintenance.



         (a)   Dimensions. Each space shall be a minimum of 12
feet wide, 45 feet long, with an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less
than 14 feet.



         (b)   Screening. All loading spaces or maneuvering areas
shall be fully screened from view of any residential use by a uniformly
colored, solid visual and auditory barrier of not less than five feet nor
greater than seven feet in height, or a densely planted landscape screen
consisting of evergreen shrubs or trees which shall be at least four feet in
height when planted and which can be expected to reach at least six feet in
height within three years thereafter. The screening shall extend the full
length of any loading facility with openings as required for ingress and
egress, with not greater than 20% open space within the screen. The screen
shall not be located closer than five feet to any lot line.



         (c)   Surfacing and drainage. All loading spaces shall
be surfaced with an all-weather, durable and dust-free surface and shall be
graded and drained to dispose of surface water accumulation by means of a
storm water drainage system.



      (4)   Number required. One loading space shall be required for
the first 100,000 square feet of floor area, and one space shall be required
for each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area.



(Prior Code, § 24-514)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.074  SPECIAL OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   In all residential districts, no vehicle that is inoperative,
wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or discarded, for a continuous
period of more than seven days; no truck exceeding one ton capacity; no bus;
and no recreational vehicle, trailer, boat, motor home or mobile home shall
be parked or stored on any abutting street or within the front yard and/or
side yard, as those terms are defined in this chapter, and shall not anywhere
within those districts be used as a dwelling or for business, commercial or
storage purposes. However, temporary parking of any such vehicle shall be
permitted in accordance with the terms and provisions of Title VII of this
code of ordinances.



   (B)   In all districts, no vehicle other than a passenger car or a
vehicle not exceeding one ton capacity shall be stored in any manner upon any
property in residential use where the same is visible from any public street.



   (C)   In the event that the property building line, as set out on
the subdivision plat, shall be closer to the property line than the outermost
surface of any building to the property line, then it shall be a defense to
any action commenced under this section that the truck, bus, recreational
vehicle, trailer, boat, motor home or mobile home was not in fact located
within the distance between the property building line as set out on the
subdivision plat and the front lot line. Any person who shall plead this
defense shall be required to prove the exact measured distance from the
property building line to the front lot line.



(Ord. 92-19, § 1, passed 3-24-1992)



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to keep or maintain any
automotive or mechanical parts, accessories, pieces or equipment within an
open area visible from any other privately owned property or a public street
or right-of-way on any property within the city not zoned for commercial use.
This provision shall also be applicable to camper bodies, camper shells,
parts, accessories or other pieces of equipment used in conjunction with a
trailer, boat, motor home or mobile home which may be owned by the property
owner and lawfully within the city for a temporary period as provided for by
this section.



(Prior Code, § 24-515)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Ord.
93-29, § 1, passed 8-24-1993)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.075  PARKING ON UNSURFACED AREA PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be prohibited to park unattended vehicles on the
unsurfaced area within the distance between the edge of the curb or edge of
the paved surface of a public street abutting a front or side yard and the
outermost surface of any structures located on any property. For the purpose
of this section UNSURFACED AREA includes but is not limited to those areas
covered with grass and/or other vegetation, whether natural, planted or
landscaped.



   (B)   It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this
section that the vehicle was parked on an uncurbed street with two wheels on
the same lateral side of the vehicle resting on and parallel to the paved
portion of the street and two wheels on the same lateral side of the vehicle
resting on and parallel to the unsurfaced area defined in division (A) above;
provided, however, that the parking in no way impedes the orderly flow of
traffic on the street.



(Prior Code, § 24-516)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985) 
Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.076  HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   (A)   Authorization. A home occupation shall be permitted in any
residential dwelling unit or accessory structure provided that the home or
structure complies with the terms and provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Purpose. The regulations of this section are designed to
protect and maintain the residential character of established neighborhoods
while recognizing that particular professional and limited business
activities are traditionally and inoffensively carried on in the home. All
home occupations are subordinate to the primary use of the home as a place of
residence and shall not interfere with the enjoyment of surrounding homes as
places of residence.



   (C)   Limitation on home occupations. Any home occupation is
prohibited when:



      (1)   The home occupation causes, by reason of its existence,
a noticeable increase in the number of motor vehicles traveling to and from
the home or on the public streets surrounding or abutting the home; or when



      (2)   The home occupation in any destroys or interferes with
the primary use of the home as a place of residence.



   (D)   Use limitations. In addition to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located and those requirements herein previously set
out, all home occupations shall comply with the following restrictions.



      (1)   No stock-in-trade shall be displayed or sold on the
premises.



      (2)   The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within
the principal dwelling unit or accessory structure, or off-premises in
accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter, and in no event
shall the use be visible from any other residential structure or public way.



      (3)   There shall be no outdoor storage of equipment or
material used in the home occupation.



      (4)   No more than one vehicle shall be used in the conduct of
the home occupation.



      (5)   No mechanical, explosive, electrical or other equipment
which produces noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat,
glare or other nuisance outside the residential or accessory structure shall
be used.



      (6)   No home occupation shall be permitted which is noxious
or offensive to a person of ordinary sensitivity or hazardous by reason of
vehicular traffic, generation or emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or
other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare, refuse,
radiation or other objectionable emissions.



      (7)   There shall be no alterations in or about the structure
of the home or any of its rooms to facilitate the conduct of the home
occupation.



(Prior Code, § 24-517)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.077  EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.



   Notwithstanding the minimum requirements for side yards and rear yards
as herein set out, any existing residential structure located within the
city, lawfully existing prior to the enactment of this chapter or any
amendment hereto, may be expanded or enlarged as long as the expansion or
enlargement does not extend into the required side yard or rear yard beyond
the outermost surface of the existing building line, and as long as the
expansion does not violate the city's Fire Code or any other code, ordinance,
rule or regulation of the city.



(Prior Code, § 24-518)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.078  SPECIFIC USE PERMIT REQUIRED FOR COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES OR
DEVELOPMENT LOCATED WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES OF TWO CITIES OR LOCATED WITHIN THE
BOUNDARIES OF THE CITY OF MEADOWS PLACE AND THE EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
OF ANOTHER CITY.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no zoning
approval or building permit shall at any time be granted or issued for the
construction or development of any area, territory or commercial building
which shall be located partially within the city limits and the city limits
of another city or the extraterritorial jurisdiction of another city without
the issuance of a specific use permit as herein required.



   (B)   The City Council finds that the location of the city within
the southern part of the Houston Metro area and the close and immediate
proximity of several other cities to the city limits and the existence of
extraterritorial jurisdictions of the several cities adjacent to Meadows
Place necessitates the implementation of a specific use permit mechanism to
protect the health, safety and well-being of residents, citizens and
inhabitants and property interests located within or adjacent to the impacted
areas.



   (C)   The city is completely surrounded by municipalities and the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of other cities; therefore, a unique and
special circumstance exists necessitating specific development regulations to
ensure that any new commercial structures, development or improvements are
appropriately regulated by the several cities involved and the development
does not unnecessarily impair the integrity of the infrastructure of this
city without significant balancing benefit to the city.



   (D)   Any entity seeking to develop or construct improvements
partially within the City of Meadows Place and an adjoining city or the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of an adjoining city must first obtain a
specific use permit under the procedures otherwise set out in this chapter
for a specific use permit amendment.



   (E)   Upon appropriate application, which shall provide the
information and disclosures as herein required, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall hold a public hearing after notice under the procedures of
this chapter and shall forward an appropriate recommendation to the City
Council. Prior to final action, the City Council shall cause an appropriate
notice to be given and a hearing held in accordance with the procedures for
amendments to this chapter. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council
from holding a joint hearing with the Planning and Zoning Commission as
otherwise permitted in this chapter and permitted by the laws of the state.



   (F)   The applicant for a specific use permit for development and/or
construction as herein required shall first file with the city an application
in writing for the permit which shall provide the following information or
any modification thereof which from time to time shall be approved by the
City Council of the city:



      (1)   A general description of the development, the type
and/or nature of commercial activity contemplated. The location of
improvements with careful delineation of the part or portions of the
development, construction or improvements located in the city and in the
adjoining municipality or extraterritorial jurisdiction of a municipality;



      (2)   A statement as to whether or not the proposed
appropriate official of the development and/or construction complies with the
codes and regulations of the adjoining city. The applicant shall either
provide a letter from the adjoining city or an opinion of the applicant's
legal counsel that the development fully complies with the codes and
regulations of the adjoining city;



      (3)   A map of the proposed traffic circulation including
points of ingress and/or egress of all vehicles including delivery trucks,
automobiles and other vehicles. Specific attention shall be given to location
of possible points of congestion with specific reference to proposed traffic
control devices including signage and needed traffic signalization;



      (4)   The location and path for all pedestrian access
including those areas that are to be set aside, reserved and designated for
that access;



      (5)   The location of any parts or phases of the development
and/or construction that might be deemed hazardous or considered hazardous if
adjacent to residential development. The term hazardous shall relate to
hazardous conditions that are from time to time defined or provided for in
both state or federal law, but shall in addition include noise, light
emissions or other conditions that may be deemed offensive to persons
residing in residential structures close to or adjacent to the proposed
development or construction;



      (6)   The application shall identify any potential economic
loss or damage to the city that may or is likely to occur if the development
and/or construction is completed in accord with the proposed plans as
presented. The applicant shall prepare an economic comparison and shall
assume that a similarly sized self-contained development would be located
totally within the city and prepare comparative economic projections relating
to ad valorem taxes to be paid to the city, sales taxes to be collected by
the city, assuming the point of sale for anticipated sales is located in the
city and alternatively outside of the city. The required projections shall
also identify all benefits and/or projected costs to the city, including any
other municipal costs, expenses, income, fees or benefits both tangible and
intangible from a structure of a size similar to the number of square feet
proposed to be located in the city versus the proposed development located
partially within the city; and



      (7)   Any other factors or conditions that may be present or
may result upon the completion of the development, construction or
improvements which might tend to impact or affect the health, safety and
well-being of residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city. Information
must be provided relating to these conditions or circumstances regardless of
the point of origin, i.e., within or outside the city.



   (G)   Upon appropriate hearings and recommendation of the Planning
and Zoning Commission, the City Council may grant the applicant a specific
use permit which shall constitute an amendment to this code if the City
Council finds and determines that the proposed development, construction and
improvements, when completed, do not negatively impact the health, safety and
well-being of the residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city.



   (H)   In making this determination, the City Council and the
Planning and Zoning Commission, prior to recommendation, shall compare the
proposed development with a hypothetical development of a similar size to the
number of square feet and area of the total proposed development that is
proposed to be located within the city.



   (I)   The City Council shall consider the impact of the proposed
development on other adjacent or nearby commercial developments, construction
and/or improvements located within the city limits of the City of Meadows
Place and shall, as a part of the specific use amendment, provide such
conditions to ensure the integrity of present and/or likely future municipal
infrastructural needs and maintenance as well as commercial development,
construction and improvements that are or may be located within the municipal
limits of the city.



   (J)   The City Council shall be further authorized in granting a
specific use permit, a specific use amendment to this code, to impose such
conditions and limitations as shall be necessary to insure the health, safety
and well-being of the residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city. In
addition, the actions by the City Council shall insure the continued
integrity of the infrastructure and infrastructural needs of the city without
any unreasonable impact as a result of a development or structure that is
proposed to be located within the boundaries of the city and another city or
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of another city.



(Prior Code, § 24-520)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Ord.
99-12, passed 4-27-1999)



§ 153.079  WINDOW INSTALLED ELECTRICAL MECHANICAL DEVICES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or
operate within any window or window opening, including holes or openings cut
in walls, electrical mechanical devices of any kind that can be viewed from
the street.



   (B)   ELECTRICAL MECHANICAL DEVICES shall mean any device that
requires energy of any type for operation and contains either motors, gears,
belts, fans, moving parts or apparatus or any combination thereof, including
parts or devices that are manufactured or built with the intention of running
or producing energy, heating or cooling.



(Ord. 2005-05, passed 1-25-2005)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.080  GENERATORS.



   (A)   Temporary generators. Temporary generators may be used during
an emergency as defined in this chapter or for maintenance and repair which
such maintenance and repair shall not last longer than two hours in any given
month. Temporary generators may be used under the following conditions:



      (1)   Location. Temporary generators may be used in R-1, R-2,
and R-3 Residential Districts when such generator is used to provide power to
either a single-family attached or detached dwelling.



      (2)   Use. Temporary generators shall be used in accordance
with the manufacture's instructions. Persons with life threatening medical
conditions are exempt from the three-hour timeframe set forth in the
definition of emergency and may use a temporary generator immediately upon
any electrical interruption.



      (3)   Noise. Temporary generators shall be used and located in
a way to minimize the noise emitted from the generators and to not annoy,
disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or
welfare of others within the limits of the city.



   (B)   Permanent generators. Permanent generators may be installed
and used under the following conditions:



      (1)   Location. Permanent generators may be installed and used
in R-1, R-2, and R-3 Residential Districts when such generator is used to
provide power to either a single-family attached or detached dwelling.
Permanent generators shall not be placed in a location that is visible from
any public right-of-way, public place, or private property of another person.
Permanent generators must be installed at least two feet from any building
line and at least three feet from any property line.



      (2)   Use.  Permanent generators shall be used in accordance
with the manufacture's instructions.



      (3)   Permit and inspection. A permit shall be applied for and
granted by the city before installation and use of a permanent generator.
City staff will inspect the proposed location of the permanent generator to
determine if all the terms of this chapter and the city code are met. Permit
applicants shall pay a fee for such permit and inspection as set forth in a
resolution adopted by City Council. As part of the permit approval process,
applicants shall provide an approval letter for such installation and use of
a permanent generator from the electric company.



      (4)   Accessory structures. Permanent generators also shall
comply with the general regulations of accessory structures found in §
153.069 and any specific regulations related to either a single-family
attached or detached dwelling found in §§ 153.090 through 153.092. In case
of any conflict between §§ 153.090 through 153.092 with this section, the
most stringent regulations shall control.



      (5)   Noise. Permanent generators shall not emit noise at
greater than 75 decibels as measured from the permit applicant's property
line.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 8-24-2010)



§ 153.081  DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   Spacing.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, no smoking paraphernalia establishment shall be established,
operated, or maintained within 1,000 feet of any of the following uses:



      (1)   Property which is temporarily or permanently zoned
residential.



      (2)   Churches.



      (3)   Hospitals.



      (4)   Community centers.



      (5)   Museums.



      (6)   Parks.



      (7)   Schools.



   (B)   Measurement of spacing.  The measurement of the distance
between the place of business where the smoking paraphernalia establishment
is located and the used in division (A) of this section shall be along the
property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in
direct line across intersections.



(Ord. 2012-11, passed 5-22-2012)  Penalty, see § 153.999



ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 153.090  R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The R-1 Residential District is a low density
residential area characterized by the zoning requirements set forth in this
section.



   (B)   Unzoned property. All property not included in a zoning
district or for any reason removed from an established zoning classification,
shall be deemed included in the R-1 Residential District although not so
delineated on the Official Zoning District Map.



   (C)   Uses.



      (1)   Permitted uses.



         (a)   Single-family detached dwellings;



         (b)   Public parks;



         (c)   Utilities:



            1.   Local utility distribution lines; and



            2.   Telephone lines and related cross-connecting
points;



         (d)   Accessory uses, subject to the requirements of §
153.069;



         (e)   Home occupations, subject to the requirements of
§ 153.076; and



         (f)   Facilities owned and maintained by the city.



      (2)   Specific uses. Educational, institutional and special
uses:



         (a)   Churches;



         (b)   Schools; and



         (c)   Kindergarten, nursery and/or day care centers.



   (D)   Standard regulations.



      (1)   Residential structures.



         (a)   Size and area.



            1.   Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet.



            2.   Minimum lot width: 60 feet.



            3.   Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.



            4.   Maximum building height: Two and one-half
stories, except that roof gables, chimneys and vent stacks may extend for an
additional height, the total not to exceed 40 feet above the average level of
the base of the foundation of the building. Television and/or radio antennas
of any kind shall be placed within or upon the structure or property in
accordance with any deed restrictions which may be in force and effect for
the residential subdivision in which the residence is located.



            5.   Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 1,500
square feet.



            6.   Minimum required yards:



               a.   Front yard: 18 feet;



               b.   Side yard: Five feet, provided that on
a corner lot, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards on all
lots platted after the date of enactment of this chapter, except that where
one street exposure is designated as a side yard by a building line shown on
a plat approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, containing a side yard
of ten feet or more, the building line provisions on the plat shall be
observed.



                  i.   On lots which were official
corner lots of record prior to the date of enactment of this chapter, the
minimum side yard adjacent to the side street shall be ten feet.



                  ii.   For any detached accessory
structure, there shall be a side yard of not less than two feet from any
interior side lot line when the detached accessory structure is located in
the rear of the lot (which is to the rear of a line connecting the midpoints
of the two opposite side lot lines). When any part of a detached accessory
structure is located in front of the line connecting the two midpoints of the
two opposite side lot lines, then the same side yard as specified for the
main building is required.



               c.   Rear yard:



                  i.   For the main residential
structure, 15 feet from the rear property line; and



                  ii.   For any permanent accessory
structure, two feet from any easement or five feet where there is no easement.



            7.   Maximum lot coverage: 60% of lot area.



         (b)   Parking. Not less than two on-site spaces per
dwelling unit, subject to the requirements of § 153.073.



      (2)   Nonresidential structures.



         (a)   Churches.



            1.   Size and area.



               a.   Minimum lot area: 12,500 square feet.



               b.   Minimum lot width: 100 feet.



               c.   Minimum lot depth: 125 feet.



               d.   Maximum building height: Two and
one-half stories, except that:



                  i.   Church steeples, domes, spires
and bell towers may extend for an additional height, the total not to exceed
40 feet above the average level of the base of the foundation of the
building; and



                  ii.   Cooling towers, roof gables,
chimneys and vent stacks may extend for an additional height, the total not
to exceed 40 feet above the average level of the base of the foundation of
the building. Television and/or radio antennas of any kind shall be placed
within or upon the structure or property in accordance with any deed
restrictions which may be in force and effect for the residential subdivision
in which the church is located.



               e.   Minimum floor area: 1,500 square feet.



               f.   Minimum required yards:



                  i.   Front yard: 50 feet;



                  ii.   Side yard: Eight feet, provided
that on a corner lot, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards
on all lots platted after the date of enactment of this chapter, except that
where one street exposure is designated as a side yard by a building line
shown on a plat approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, containing a
side yard of ten feet or more, the building line provisions on the plat shall
be observed. On lots which were official corner lots of record prior to the
date of enactment of this chapter, the minimum side yard adjacent to the side
street shall be ten feet; and



                  iii.   Rear yard:



                     A.   For the main structure, ten
feet from any alley or easement, with not more than 50% lot coverage on the
back half of the lot; and



                     B.   For any accessory
structure, three feet from any alley or easement or five feet where there is
no alley or easement.



               g.   Maximum lot coverage: 70% of lot area.



            2.   Parking. One on-site space for every three
individual seats provided in the main sanctuary. Whenever pews are provided
in lieu of individual seats, 24 inches shall be the equivalent of one seat.



         (b)   Schools.



            1.   Size and area.



               a.   Minimum lot area: 12,500 square feet.



               b.   Minimum lot width: 100 feet.



               c.   Minimum lot depth: 125 feet.



               d.   Maximum building height: Two and
one-half stories, except that cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys and vent
stacks may extend for an additional height, the total not to exceed 40 feet
above the average level of the base of the foundation of the building.
Television and/or radio antennas of any kind shall be placed within or upon
the structure or property in accordance with any deed restrictions which may
be in force and effect for the residential subdivision in which the school is
located.



               e.   Minimum floor area: 1,500 square feet.



               f.   Minimum required yards:



                  i.   Front yard: 50 feet;



                  ii.   Side yard: Eight feet, provided
that on a corner lot, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards
on all lots platted after the date of enactment of this chapter, except that
where one street exposure is designated as a side yard by a building line
shown on a plat approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, containing a
side yard of ten feet or more, the building line provisions on the plat shall
be observed. On lots which were official corner lots of record prior to the
date of enactment of this chapter, the minimum side yard adjacent to the side
street shall be ten feet; and



                  iii.   Rear yard:



                     A.   For the main structure, ten
feet from any alley or easement, with not more than 50% lot coverage on the
back half of the lot; and



                     B.   For any accessory
structure, three feet from any alley or easement or five feet where there is
no alley or easement.



               g.   Maximum lot coverage: 70% of lot area.



            2.   Parking. One on-site space for each classroom
plus one on-site space for each four seats in any auditorium, gymnasium or
other place of assembly.



(Prior Code, § 24-531)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Ord.
2015-14, passed 8-25-2015)



§ 153.091  R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The R-2 Residential District is a lower medium
density residential area characterized by the zoning requirements set forth
in this section.



   (B)   Uses.



      (1)   Permitted uses.



         (a)   Single-family detached dwellings;



         (b)   Public parks;



         (c)   Utilities;



            1.   Local utility distribution lines; and



            2.   Telephone lines and related cross-connecting
points;



         (d)   Accessory uses, subject to the requirements of §
153.069;



         (e)   Home occupations, subject to the requirements of
§ 153.076; and



         (f)   Facilities owned and maintained by the city.



      (2)   Specific uses. Educational, institutional and special
uses:



         (a)   Churches;



         (b)   Schools; and



         (c)   Kindergarten, nursery and/or day care centers.



   (C)   Standard regulations.



      (1)   Residential structures.



         (a)   Size and area.



            1.   Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.



            2.   Minimum lot width: 50 feet.



            3.   Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.



            4.   Maximum building height: Two and one-half
stories, except that roof gables, chimneys and vent stacks may extend for an
additional height, the total not to exceed 40 feet above the average level of
the base of the foundation of the building. Television and/or radio antennas
of any kind shall be placed within or upon the structure or property in
accordance with any deed restrictions which may be in force and effect for
the residential subdivision in which the residence is located.



            5.   Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 1,500
square feet.



            6.   Minimum required yards:



               a.   Front yard: 15 feet;



               b.   Side yard:



                  i.   Each residential structure shall
be designed and constructed in such a manner as to incorporate a privacy wall
of masonry or wood, without windows, doors or openings, the exterior surface
of which shall be located upon a side lot line. The residential structure on
the adjoining lot shall be set back a distance of eight feet from the side
lot line upon which the privacy wall of the adjacent dwelling is located;



                  ii.   On corner lots, the residential
structure shall be set back a distance of 20 feet from the side lot line
which abuts the dedicated public right-of-way;



(Ord. 86-023, § 1, passed 6-17-1986)



                  iii.   For any detached accessory
structure, there shall be a side yard of not less than three feet from any
interior side lot line when the detached accessory structure is located in
the rear of the lot (which is to the rear of a line connecting the midpoints
of the two opposite side lot lines). When any part of a detached accessory
structure is located in front of the line connecting the two midpoints of the
two opposite side lot lines, then the same side yard as specified for the
main building is required; and



                  iv.   On corner lots where the garage
is attached to the residential structure, the minimum setback shall be a
distance of 15 feet from the side lot line which abuts the dedicated public
right-of-way.



(Ord. 94-02, § 2, passed 1-25-1994)



               c.   Rear yard:



                  i.   For the main residential
structure, eight feet from the rear property line, providing that no main
residential structure shall be located within an existing easement; and



(Ord. 86-023, § 2, passed 6-17-1986)



                  ii.   For any accessory structure,
five feet from the rear property line, provided that no accessory structure
shall be located within an existing easement.



(Ord. 87-018, § 3, passed 7-28-1987)



            7.   Maximum lot coverage: 70% of lot area.



         (b)   Parking. Two on-site spaces per dwelling unit,
subject to the requirements of § 153.073.



      (2)   Nonresidential structures.



         (a)   Churches.



            1.   Size and area.



               a.   Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.



               b.   Minimum lot width: 100 feet.



               c.   Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.



               d.   Maximum building height: Two and
one-half stories, except that:



                  i.   Church steeples, domes, spires
and bell towers may extend for an additional height, the total not to exceed
40 feet above the average level of the base of the foundation of the
building; and



                  ii.   Cooling towers, roof gables,
chimneys and vent stacks may extend for an additional height, the total not
to exceed 40 feet above the average level of the base of the foundation of
the building. Television and/or radio antennas of any kind shall be placed
within or upon the structure or property in accordance with any deed
restrictions which may be in force and effect for the residential subdivision
in which the church is located.



               e.   Minimum floor area: 1,500 square feet.



               f.   Minimum required yards:



                  i.   Front yard: 30 feet;



                  ii.   Side yard: Six feet, provided
that on a corner lot, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards
on all lots platted after the date of enactment of this chapter, except that
where one street exposure is designated as a side yard by a building line
shown on a plat approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, containing a
side yard of ten feet or more, the building line provisions on the plat shall
be observed. On lots which were official corner lots of record prior to the
date of enactment of this chapter, the minimum side yard adjacent to the side
street shall be ten feet; and



                  iii.   Rear yard:



                     A.   For the main structure, ten
feet from any alley or easement, with not more than 50% lot coverage on the
back half of the lot; and



                     B.   For any accessory
structure, three feet from any alley or easement or five feet where there is
no alley or easement.



               g.   Maximum lot coverage: 70% of lot area.



            2.   Parking. One on-site space for every three
individual seats provided in the main sanctuary. Whenever pews are provided
in lieu of individual seats, 24 inches shall be the equivalent of one seat.



         (b)   Schools.



            1.   Size and area.



               a.   Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.



               b.   Minimum lot width: 100 feet.



               c.   Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.



               d.   Maximum building height: Two and
one-half stories, except that cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys and vent
stacks may extend for an additional height, the total not to exceed 40 feet
above the average level of the base of the foundation of the building.
Television and/or radio antennas of any kind shall be placed within or upon
the structure or property in accordance with any deed restrictions which may
be in force and effect for the residential subdivision in which the school is
located.



               e.   Minimum floor area: 1,500 square feet.



               f.   Minimum required yards:



                  i.   Front yard: 30 feet;



                  ii.   Side yard: Six feet, provided
that on a corner lot, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards
on all lots platted after the date of enactment of this chapter, except that
where one street exposure is designated as a side yard by a building line
shown on a plat approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, containing a
side yard of ten feet or more, the building line provisions on the plat shall
be observed. On lots which were official corner lots of record prior to the
date of enactment of this chapter, the minimum side yard adjacent to the side
street shall be ten feet; and



                  iii.   Rear yard:



                     A.   For the main structure, ten
feet from any alley or easement, with not more than 50% lot coverage on the
back half of the lot; and



                     B.   For any accessory
structure, three feet from any alley or easement or five feet where there is
no alley or easement.



               g.   Maximum lot coverage: 70% of lot area.



            2.   Parking. One on-site space for each classroom
plus one on-site space for each four seats in any auditorium, gymnasium or
other place of assembly.



(Prior Code, § 24-532)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Ord.
2015-14, passed 8-25-2015)



§ 153.092  R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The R-3 Residential District is a medium density
residential area characterized by the zoning requirements set forth in this
section.



   (B)   Uses.



      (1)   Permitted uses.



         (a)   Single-family detached dwellings;



         (b)   Public parks;



         (c)   Utilities;



            1.   Local utility distribution lines; and



            2.   Telephone lines and related cross-connecting
points;



         (d)   Accessory uses, subject to the requirements of §
153.069;



         (e)   Home occupations, subject to the requirements of
§ 153.076; and



         (f)   Facilities owned and maintained by the city.



      (2)   Specific uses. Educational, institutional and special
uses:



         (a)   Churches;



         (b)   Schools; and



         (c)   Kindergarten, nursery and/or day care centers.



   (C)   Standard regulations.



      (1)   Residential structures.



         (a)   Size and area.



            1.   Project area: A townhouse development in an
R-3 Residential District shall have a minimum of three single-family dwelling
units on a site of at least 7,200 square feet, and the minimum site area per
dwelling unit shall be 1,200 square feet.



            2.   Maximum building height: Two and one-half
stories, except that cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys and vent stacks
may extend for an additional height, the total not to exceed 40 feet above
the average level of the base of the foundation of the building. Television
and/or radio antennas of any kind shall be placed within or upon the
structure or property in accordance with any deed restrictions which may be
in force and effect for the residential subdivision in which the residence is
located.



            3.   Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 1,400
square feet.



            4.   Building lines:



               a.   i.   The front building line facing
an existing public street shall be set back from the public street
right-of-way a minimum distance of 25 feet. The front building line shall be
set back a minimum of 15 feet from any new street right-of-way dedicated as a
part of the townhouse development.



                  ii.   In the event that the front
building line faces a court, as that term is defined herein, there shall be a
minimum separation between front building lines of 40 feet with at least ten
feet of yard space from the front of the building to the property line and 20
feet for a public utility easement, for pedestrian access as well as
utilities between the property lines.



               b.   i.   No building line of any
structure within the townhouse development shall be located any closer than
six feet from the side lot line of any residential lot adjacent to the
townhouse development nor shall any such building line be located any closer
than 15 feet from the side lot line of any commercial lot adjacent to the
townhouse development. In the event that any portion of the townhouse
development site includes a corner lot, no such building line shall be
located any closer than ten feet from the right-of-way of the adjacent side
street. 



                  ii.   Within the interior of the
townhouse development, zero lot lines are permitted for adjacent residential
units; but in the event that the main residential units are separated, a
minimum of eight feet must be maintained between units.



               c.   No building line of any structure
within the townhouse development shall be located any closer than ten feet
from the rear lot line of any adjacent residential lot.



               d.   No contiguous building lines of
structures having zero lot lines shall exceed 200 linear feet.



            5.   Maximum site coverage: 75% of site area.



         (b)   Parking. Two on-site spaces per dwelling unit,
subject to the requirements of § 153.073.



         (c)   Screening. Screening shall be required between the
townhouse development and abutting property according to the specifications
set forth in § 153.072.



      (2)   Nonresidential structures.



         (a)   Churches.



            1.   Size and area.



               a.   Minimum lot area: 7,200 square feet.



               b.   Minimum lot width: 60 feet.



               c.   Minimum lot depth: 120 feet.



               d.   Maximum building height: Two and
one-half stories, except that:



                  i.   Church steeples, domes, spires
and bell towers may extend for an additional height, the total not to exceed
40 feet above the average level of the base of the foundation of the
building; and



                  ii.   Cooling towers, roof gables,
chimneys and vent stacks may extend for an additional height, the total not
to exceed 40 feet above the average level of the base of the foundation of
the building. Television and/or radio antennas of any kind shall be placed
within or upon the structure or property in accordance with any deed
restrictions which may be in force and effect for the residential subdivision
in which the church is located.



               e.   Minimum floor area: 900 square feet.



               f.   Minimum required yards:



                  i.   Front yard: 25 feet;



                  ii.   Side yard: Five feet, provided
that on a corner lot, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards
on all lots platted after the date of enactment of this chapter, except that
where one street exposure is designated as a side yard by a building line
shown on a plat approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, containing a
side yard of ten feet or more, the building line provisions on the plat shall
be observed. On lots which were official corner lots of record prior to the
date of enactment of this chapter, the minimum side yard adjacent to the side
street shall be ten feet; and



                  iii.   Rear yard:



                     A.   For the main structure, ten
feet from any alley or easement, with not more than 50% lot coverage on the
back half of the lot; and



                     B.   For any accessory
structure, three feet from any alley or easement or five feet where there is
no alley or easement.



               g.   Maximum lot coverage: 75% of lot area.



            2.   Parking. One on-site space for every three
individual seats provided in the main sanctuary. Whenever pews are provided
in lieu of individual seats, 24 inches shall be the equivalent of one seat.



         (b)   Schools.



            1.   Size and area.



               a.   Minimum lot area: 7,200 square feet.



               b.   Minimum lot width: 60 feet.



               c.   Minimum lot depth: 120 feet.



               d.   Maximum building height: Two and
one-half stories, except that cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys and vent
stacks may extend for an additional height, the total not to exceed 40 feet
above the average level of the base of the foundation of the building.
Television and/or radio antennas of any kind shall be placed within or upon
the structure or property in accordance with any deed restrictions which may
be in force and effect for the residential subdivision in which the school is
located.



               e.   Minimum floor area: 900 square feet.



               f.   Minimum required yards:



                  i.   Front yard: 25 feet;



                  ii.   Side yard: Five feet, provided
that on a corner lot, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards
on all lots platted after the date of enactment of this chapter, except that
where one street exposure is designated as a side yard by a building line
shown on a plat approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, containing a
side yard of ten feet or more, the building line provisions on the plat shall
be observed. On lots which were official corner lots of record prior to the
date of enactment of this chapter, the minimum side yard adjacent to the side
street shall be ten feet; and



                  iii.   Rear yard:



                     A.   For the main structure, ten
feet from any alley or easement, with not more than 50% lot coverage on the
back half of the lot; and



                     B.   For any accessory
structure, three feet from any alley or easement or five feet where there is
no alley or easement.



               g.   Maximum lot coverage: 75%of lot area.



            2.   Parking. One on-site space for each classroom
plus one on-site space for each four seats in any auditorium, gymnasium or
other place of assembly.



(Prior Code, § 24-533)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Ord.
2015-14, passed 8-25-2015)



§ 153.093  C-M COMMERCIAL–RESIDENTIAL MIXED USE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The C-M Commercial–Residential Mixed Use District
is an area of transition between residential and commercial districts and is
appropriate for medium density residential use, low intensity commercial use,
or a mixture of the two, located on the southwest side of the city along West
Airport Boulevard, characterized by the zoning requirements set forth in this
section.



   (B)   Uses.



      (1)   Permitted uses.



         (a)   Public parks;



         (b)   Utilities:



            1.   Local utility distribution lines; and



            2.   Telephone lines and related cross-connecting
points.



         (c)   Accessory uses, subject to the requirements of §
153.069:



         (d)   Home occupations, subject to the requirements of
§ 153.076;



         (e)   Facilities owned and maintained by the city;



         (f)   Planned development: residential;



         (g)   Planned development: commercial; and



         (h)   Planned development: commercial-residential mixed
use.



      (2)   Specific uses.



         (a)   Recreational and entertainment uses:



            1.   Amusement, commercial indoor;



            2.   Art gallery or museum;



            3.   Athletic, swimming or tennis club and/or
facilities;



            4.   Private club; and



            5.   Theater, indoor.



         (b)   Educational, institutional and special uses:



            1.   Hospital, acute care;



            2.   Kindergarten, nursery and/or day care center;



            3.   School, business or trade;



            4.   Personal care facilities; and



            5.   Churches.



         (c)   Facilities for drive-in banking; and



         (d)   Transportation, automobile and related uses:



            1.   Auto or motorcycle sales;



            2.   Auto parts sales; and



            3.   Automobile service stations.



      (3)   Additional use requirements. It shall be unlawful for
any person to make use of any property located within the C-M
Commercial–Residential Mixed Use District except in accordance with the
uses permitted in this District, with the performance standards set forth in
§§ 153.060 through 153.078 and with the additional regulations listed below.



         (a)   Trash and laundry. No collection, storage for
refuse, debris or garbage generated by any use shall be allowed in this
district when the storage is visible from publicly owned streets. No hanging
of laundry, cleaning rags, mops or similar items shall be allowed within view
of publicly owned streets. Screening structures erected to obscure the items
from view from publicly owned streets shall meet applicable city
specifications for materials and construction as set forth in § 153.072.



         (b)   Sidewalk sales. The open display of merchandise
shall only be permitted wherein a permit shall have been previously issued by
the City Secretary, for a period not exceeding three successive days and not
exceeding four times per calendar year.



   (C)   Standard regulations – nonresidential structures.



      (1)   Churches.



         (a)   Size and area.



            1.   Minimum lot area: 12,500 square feet.



            2.   Minimum lot width: 100 feet.



            3.   Minimum lot depth: 125 feet.



            4.   Maximum building height: Two and one-half
stories, except that:



               a.   Church steeples, domes, spires and bell
towers may extend for an additional height, the total not to exceed 40 feet
above the average level of the base of the foundation of the building; and



               b.   Cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys
and vent stacks may extend for an additional height, the total not to exceed
40 feet above the average level of the base of the foundation of the
building. Television and/or radio antennas of any kind shall be placed within
or upon the structure or property in accordance with any deed restrictions
which may be in force and effect for the residential subdivision in which the
church is located.



            5.   Minimum floor area: 1,500 square feet.



            6.   Minimum required yards:



               a.   Front yard: 50 feet;



               b.   Side yard: Eight feet, provided that on
a corner lot, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards on all
lots platted after the date of enactment of this chapter, except that where
one street exposure is designated as a side yard by a building line shown on
a plat approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, containing a side yard
of ten feet or more, the building line provisions on the plat shall be
observed. On lots which were official corner lots of record prior to the date
of enactment of this chapter, the minimum side yard adjacent to the side
street shall be ten feet; and



               c.   Rear yard:



                  i.   For the main structure, ten feet
from any alley or easement, with not more than 50% lot coverage on the back
half of the lot; and



                  ii.   For any accessory structure,
three feet from any alley or easement or five feet where there is no alley or
easement.



            7.   Maximum lot coverage: 70% of lot area.



         (b)   Parking. One on-site space for every three
individual seats provided in the main sanctuary. Whenever pews are provided
in lieu of individual seats, 24 inches shall be the equivalent of one seat.



      (2)   Schools.



         (a)   Size and area.



            1.   Minimum lot area: 12,500 square feet.



            2.   Minimum lot width: 100 feet.



            3.   Minimum lot depth: 125 feet.



            4.   Maximum building height: Two and one-half
stories, except that cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys and vent stacks
may extend for an additional height, the total not to exceed 40 feet above
the average level of the base of the foundation of the building. Television
and/or radio antennas of any kind shall be placed within or upon the
structure or property in accordance with any deed restrictions which may be
in force and effect for the residential subdivision in which the school is
located.



            5.   Minimum floor area: 1,500 square feet.



            6.   Minimum required yards:



               a.   Front yard: 50 feet;



               b.   Side yard: Eight feet, provided that on
a corner lot, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards on all
lots platted after the date of enactment of this chapter, except that where
one street exposure is designated as a side yard by a building line shown on
a plat approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, containing a side yard
of ten feet or more, the building line provisions on the plat shall be
observed. On lots which were official corner lots of record prior to the date
of enactment of this chapter, the minimum side yard adjacent to the side
street shall be ten feet; and



               c.   Rear yard:



                  i.   For the main structure, ten feet
from any alley or easement, with not more than 50% lot coverage on the back
half of the lot; and



                  ii.   For any accessory structure,
three feet from any alley or easement or five feet where there is no alley or
easement.



            7.   Maximum lot coverage: 70% of lot area.



         (b)   Parking. One on-site space for each classroom plus
one on-site space for each four seats in any auditorium, gymnasium or other
place of assembly.



   (D)   Planned Development; Residential. Residential planned
developments may be proposed for lands within the C-M
Commercial–Residential Mixed Use District, provided that proposed projects
will not isolate or surround any parcel of land abutting the same, in order
to encourage development of projects of high quality which act as buffers for
adjacent residential areas. These planned developments may be approved in
this District under the amendatory procedures of this chapter, subject to the
following restrictions and limitations.



      (1)   Size and area.



         (a)   Project area: The minimum project area shall be
two acres with a gross density not to exceed ten dwelling units per acre,
which is equivalent to an average minimum lot size of 4,300 square feet.



         (b)   Maximum building height: Two and one-half stories,
except that cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys and vent stacks may extend
for an additional height, the total not to exceed 40 feet above the average
level of the base of the foundation of the building. Television and/or radio
antennas of any kind shall be placed within or upon the structure or property
in accordance with any deed restrictions which may be in force and effect for
the residential subdivision in which the residence is located.



         (c)   Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 1,250 square
feet.



         (d)   Maximum floor area to site area: 150% of site area.



         (e)   Building lines:



            1.   a.   The front building line facing an
existing public street other than West Airport Boulevard shall be set back
from the public street right-of-way a minimum distance of 25 feet. The front
building line shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any new street
right-of-way dedicated as part of the planned development district, except
that in no case shall required parking obstruct pedestrian flow on the
required sidewalk.



               b.   In the event that the front building
line faces a court, as that term is defined herein, there shall be a minimum
separation between front building lines of 40 feet with at least ten feet of
yard space from the front of the building to the property line and 20 feet
for a public utility easement, for pedestrian access as well as utilities
between the property lines.



            2.   a.   No building line of any structure
within the planned development district shall be located any closer than
eight feet from the side lot line of any residential lot adjacent to the
planned development district. In the event that any portion of the planned
development site includes a corner lot, no such building line shall be
located any closer than ten feet from the right-of-way of the adjacent side
street, designated as such on the approved plat of the planned development,
except where the adjacent side street is West Airport Boulevard. 



               b.   Within the interior of the planned
development district, zero lot lines are permitted for adjacent residential
units; but in the event that the main residential units are separated, a
minimum of six feet must be maintained between units.



            3.   No building line of any main residential
structure shall be located within a distance of 75 feet of West Airport
Boulevard. A berm and/or plantings shall be located within this strip and
shall not, at the time of occupancy of the site, be less than five feet in
width and six feet in height. The individual trees and shrubs shall be
planted and maintained by the owner or occupant so as to provide a dense
screen year-round. At least 50% of the plantings shall consist of evergreens.
A solid wall or fence, not to exceed eight feet in height, complemented by
suitable plantings, may be substituted for the landscaped screening, if
specifically authorized as a condition of the approval of the planned
development. The strip may be part of the yard or common area of residential
uses within a planned development or have required parking and/or
recreational amenities located within it.



            4.   No building line of any structure within the
planned development district shall be located any closer than ten feet from
the rear lot line of any adjacent residential lot.



            5.   No contiguous building lines of structures
having zero lot lines shall exceed 200 linear feet.



         (f)   Maximum site coverage: 75% of site area.



      (2)   Parking and driveways. Each home within the planned
development district shall have at a minimum a two-car garage; driveways
shall be of such design as to accommodate two vehicles per unit totally on
site. Within the planned development district, two garages of neighboring
dwelling units may share a common wall on a common lot line so long as the
required six-foot minimum distance is maintained between separated main
residential structures.



      (3)   Screening and landscaping. Generally, screening and
landscaping shall be required for the planned development district according
to the specifications set forth in § 153.072.



      (4)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be located,
screened or shielded so that adjacent lots or structures are not directly
illuminated.



   (E)   Planned Development: Commercial. Commercial planned
developments may be approved in this District under the amendatory procedures
of this chapter, subject to the following restrictions and limitations.



      (1)   Size and area.



         (a)   Site area.



            1.   Retail center: The minimum site area shall be
three acres; and



            2.   Other commercial: The minimum site area shall
be one acre.



         (b)   Maximum building height.



            1.   Retail center: Two and one-half stories,
except that cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys, vent stacks and similar
extensions may extend for an additional height, the total not to exceed 40
feet above the average level of the base of the foundation of the building,
provided that the height of the main structure shall not exceed that height
prescribed by Appendix B to this chapter; and



            2.   Other commercial: Three stories, except that
cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys, vent stacks and similar extensions may
extend for an additional height, the total not to exceed 54 feet above the
average level of the base of the foundation of the building, provided that
the height of the main structure shall not exceed that height prescribed by
Appendix B to this chapter.



         (c)   Maximum floor area to site area:



            1.   Retail center: 34% of site area; and



            2.   Other commercial: 60% of site area.



         (d)   Building lines: None are prescribed except as may
be established by the planned development amendment.



         (e)   Maximum site coverage:



            1.   Retail center: 85% of site area; and



            2.   Other commercial: 80% of site area.



      (2)   Parking.



         (a)   Business and professional offices (including
banks, savings and loan associations and similar institutions): One space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces), designed in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



         (b)   General retail sales and service establishments:
One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces),
designed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



         (c)   Restaurants: One space for every three restaurant
seating spaces, designed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072
and 153.073.



         (d)   Theaters, meeting rooms, places of public
assembly: One space for every three seats, designed in accordance with the
provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



      (3)   Screening. Screening shall be required between the
planned development district and all abutting property according to the
specifications set forth in § 153.072.



      (4)   Landscaping. None is prescribed except as may be
established by the planned development amendment.



      (5)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be located,
screened or shielded so that adjacent lots or structures are not directly
illuminated.



   (F)   Planned Development: Commercial–Residential Mixed Use. 
Commercial-residential mixed use planned developments may be approved in this
District under the amendatory procedures of this chapter, subject to the
following restrictions and limitations.



      (1)   Size and area.



         (a)   Site area. The minimum site area shall be three
acres.



         (b)   Maximum building height: The height of all
buildings shall be determined by their location upon the planned development
site in accordance with the limitations and requirements prescribed by
Appendix B to this chapter.



         (c)   Maximum floor area to site area: The floor areas
of all buildings shall be established by the planned development amendment.



         (d)   Building line: None are prescribed except as may
be established by the planned development amendment.



         (e)   Maximum site coverage: 80% of site area.



      (2)   Parking.



         (a)   Business and professional offices (including
banks, savings and loan associations and similar institutions): One space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces), designed in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



         (b)   General retail sales and service establishments:
One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces),
designed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



         (c)   Restaurants: One space for every three restaurant
seating spaces, designed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072
and 153.073.



         (d)   Theaters, meeting rooms, places of public
assembly: One space for every three seats, designed in accordance with the
provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



      (3)   Screening. Screening shall be required between the
planned development district and all abutting property according to the
specifications set forth in § 153.072.



      (4)   Landscaping. None is prescribed except as may be
established by the planned development amendment.



      (5)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be located,
screened or shielded so that adjacent lots or structures are not directly
illuminated.



(Prior Code, § 24-534)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Ord.
95-27, § 1, passed 8-22-1995; Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§ 153.999



§ 153.094  C-1 LIGHT COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The C-1 Light Commercial District is a predominantly
retail commercial area, located at the northwest and southwest corners and
along the southern boundary line of the city, easily accessible to city
residents, characterized by the zoning requirements set forth in this section.



   (B)   Uses.



      (1)   Permitted uses.



         (a)   Public parks;



         (b)   Utilities:



            1.   Local utility distribution lines; and



            2.   Telephone lines and related cross-connecting
points.



         (c)   Accessory uses, subject to the requirements of §
153.069;



         (d)   Facilities owned and maintained by the city;



         (e)   Planned development: commercial;



         (f)   Banks, savings and loan associations and similar
institutions;



         (g)   Business and professional offices and services;



         (h)   General retail sales and services and similar uses
providing for the sale of convenience goods and personal services which would
meet the daily needs of the community trade area;



         (i)   Restaurants (without drive-thru service); and



         (j)   Cafeterias.



      (2)   Specific uses.



         (a)   Recreational and entertainment uses:



            1.   Amusement, commercial indoor;



            2.   Art gallery or museum;



            3.   Athletic, swimming or tennis club and/or
facilities;



            4.   Private club;



            5.   Theater, indoor; and



            6.   Hotels and motels.



         (b)   Educational, institutional and special uses:



            1.   Hospital, acute care;



            2.   Kindergarten, nursery and/or day care
centers; and



            3.   Schools, business or trade.



         (c)   Facilities for drive-in banking; and



         (d)   Transportation, automobile and related uses:



            1.   Auto or motorcycle sales;



            2.   Auto parts sales; and



            3.   Automobile service stations.



         (e)   Smoking paraphernalia establishments; and



         (f)   Restaurants with drive-thru service.



      (3)   Additional use requirements. It shall be unlawful for
any person to make use of any property located within the C-1 Light
Commercial District except in accordance with the uses permitted in this
District, with the performance standards set forth in §§ 153.060 through
153.078 and with the additional regulations listed below.



         (a)   Trash and laundry. No collection, storage for
refuse, debris or garbage generated by any use shall be allowed in this
district when the storage is visible from publicly owned streets. No hanging
of laundry, cleaning rags, mops or similar items shall be allowed within view
of publicly owned streets. Screening structures erected to obscure the items
from view from publicly owned streets shall meet applicable city
specifications for materials and construction as set forth in § 153.072.



         (b)   Sidewalk sales. The open display of merchandise
shall only be permitted wherein a permit shall have been previously issued by
the City Secretary, for a period not exceeding three successive days and not
exceeding four times per calendar year.



   (C)   Standard regulations - commercial structures.



      (1)   Size and area.



         (a)   Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.



         (b)   Minimum lot width: 50 feet.



         (c)   Minimum lot depth: 50 feet.



         (d)   Maximum building height: The height of all
buildings shall be determined by their location upon the site in accordance
with the limitations and requirements prescribed by Appendix B to this
chapter.



         (e)   Maximum floor area to lot area: 50% of lot area.



         (f)   Minimum required yards:



            1.   Front yard: 20 feet;



            2.   Side yard and rear yard: No side yard or rear
yard is specified except that where the side yard or rear yard abuts a lot
which is either zoned residential or in residential use, the minimum side
yard or rear yard shall not be less than the distance prescribed by Appendix
B to this chapter or in § 153.072; and



            3.   Corner lots: On a corner lot abutting a lot
which is either zoned residential or in residential use, both street
exposures shall be treated as front yards on all lots platted after the date
of enactment of this chapter, except that where one street exposure is
designated as a side yard by a building line shown on a plat approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission containing a side yard of ten feet or more,
the building line provisions on the plat shall be observed; on lots which
were official corner lots of record prior to the date of enactment of this
chapter, the minimum side yard adjacent to the side street shall be ten feet.



         (g)   Maximum lot coverage: 75% of lot area.



      (2)   Parking.



         (a)   Business and professional offices (including
banks, savings and loan associations and similar institutions): One space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces), designed in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



         (b)   General retail sales and service establishments:
One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces),
designed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



         (c)   Restaurants: One space for every three restaurant
seating spaces, designed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072
and 153.073.



         (d)   Theaters, meeting rooms, places of public
assembly: One space for every three seats, designed in accordance with the
provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



      (3)   Screening. Screening shall be required between the
planned development district and all abutting property according to the
specifications set forth in § 153.072 .



      (4)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be located,
screened or shielded so that adjacent lots or structures are not directly
illuminated.



      (5)   Antennas. No antenna placed upon the roof of any
structure in this District shall extend more than ten feet above the roofline.



   (D)   Planned Development: Commercial. Commercial planned
developments may be approved in this District under the amendatory procedures
of this chapter, subject to the following restrictions and limitations.



      (1)   Size and area.



         (a)   Site area:



            1.   Shopping center: The minimum site area shall
be three acres; and



            2.   Office plaza: The minimum site area shall be
one acre.



         (b)   Maximum building height: The height of all
buildings shall be determined by their location upon the site in accordance
with the limitations and requirements prescribed by Appendix B to this
chapter.



         (c)   Maximum floor area to site area:



            1.   Shopping center: 34% of site area; and



            2.   Office plaza: 60% of site area.



         (d)   Building lines: None are prescribed except as may
be established by the planned development amendment.



         (e)   Maximum site coverage:



            1.   Shopping center: 85% of site area; and



            2.   Office plaza: 80% of site area.



      (2)   Parking.



         (a)   Business and professional offices (including
banks, savings and loan associations and similar institutions): One space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces), designed in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



         (b)   General retail sales and service establishments:
One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces),
designed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



         (c)   Restaurants: One space for every three restaurant
seating spaces, designed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072
and 153.073.



         (d)   Theaters, meeting rooms, places of public
assembly: One space for every three seats, designed in accordance with the
provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



      (3)   Screening. Screening shall be required between the
planned development district and all abutting property according to the
specifications set forth in § 153.072 .



      (4)   Landscaping. None is prescribed except as may be
established by the planned development amendment.



      (5)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be located,
screened or shielded so that adjacent lots or structures are not directly
illuminated.



      (6)   Accessory uses. In a commercial office building,
residential and retail accessory uses to the predominant office use may be
allowed so long as the total area occupied by the accessory uses does not
exceed 33% of the total use and so long as the number of dwelling units does
not exceed 18 per acre for the total project site.



(Prior Code, § 24-535)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Ord.
2012-11, passed 5-22-2012; Ord. 2012-30, passed 7-24-2012; Ord. 2014-10,
passed 7-22-2014; Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-25-2015; Ord. 2017-04, passed
2-28-2017; Ord. 2018-30, passed 10-23-2018) Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.095  C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The C-2 Commercial District is the center of the city
economic community and the focal point of the city's visual character,
characterized by the zoning requirements set forth in this section.



   (B)   Uses.



      (1)   Permitted uses.



         (a)   Public parks;



         (b)   Utilities:



            1.   Local utility distribution lines; and



            2.   Telephone lines and related cross-connecting
points.



         (c)   Accessory uses, subject to the requirements of §
153.069;



         (d)   Facilities owned and maintained by the city;



         (e)   Planned development: commercial;



         (f)   Banks, savings and loan associations and similar
institutions;



         (g)   Business and professional offices and services;



         (h)   General retail sales and services and similar uses
providing for the sale of convenience goods and personal services which would
meet the daily needs of the community trade area;



         (i)   Restaurants (without drive-thru service);



         (j)   Cafeterias; and



         (k)   Recreational and entertainment uses:



            1.   Amusement, commercial indoor;



            2.   Art gallery or museum;



            3.   Athletic, swimming or tennis club and/or
facilities;



            4.   Private club; and



            5.   Theater, indoor.



      (2)   Specific uses.



         (a)   Educational, institutional and special uses:



            1.   Hospital, acute care;



            2.   Kindergarten, nursery and/or day care centers;



            3.   Schools, business or trade;



            4.   Churches; and



            5.   Hotels and motels.



         (b)   Facilities for drive-in banking;



         (c)   Transportation, automobile and related uses:



            1.   Auto or motorcycle sales;



            2.   Auto parts sales;



            3.   Automobile service stations; and



            4.   Automobile services.



         (d)   Restaurants and other retail establishments with
drive-thru service;



         (e)   Electronic assemblers;



         (f)   Wholesale sales;



         (g)   Distribution; and



         (h)   Smoking paraphernalia establishments.



(Ord. 2001-19, passed 8-6-2001)



      (3)   Additional use requirements. It shall be unlawful for
any person to make use of any property located within the C-2 Commercial
District except in accordance with the uses permitted in this District, with
the performance standards set forth in §§ 153.060 through 153.078 and with
the additional regulations listed below.



         (a)   Trash and laundry. No collection, storage for
refuse, debris or garbage generated by any use shall be allowed in this
district when the storage is visible from publicly owned streets. No hanging
of laundry, cleaning rags, mops or similar items shall be allowed within view
of publicly owned streets. Screening structures erected to obscure the items
from view from publicly owned streets shall meet applicable city
specifications for materials and construction as set forth in § 153.072.



         (b)   Sidewalk sales. The open display of merchandise
shall only be permitted wherein a permit shall have been previously issued by
the City Secretary, for a period not exceeding three successive days and not
exceeding four times per calendar year.



   (C)   Standard regulations – commercial structures.



      (1)   Size and area.



         (a)   Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.



         (b)   Minimum lot width: 50 feet.



         (c)   Minimum lot depth: 50 feet.



         (d)   Maximum building height: The height of all
buildings shall be determined by their location upon the site in accordance
with the limitations and requirements prescribed by Appendix B to this
chapter.



         (e)   Maximum floor area to lot area: 100% of lot area.



         (f)   Minimum required yards:



            1.   Front yard: 20 feet;



            2.   Side yard and rear yard: No side yard or rear
yard is specified except that where the side yard or rear yard abuts a lot
which is either zoned residential or in residential use, the minimum side
yard or rear yard shall not be less than the distance prescribed by Appendix
B to this chapter or in § 153.072; and



            3.   Corner lots: On a corner lot abutting a lot
which is either zoned residential or in residential use, both street
exposures shall be treated as front yards on all lots platted after the date
of enactment of this chapter, except that where one street exposure is
designated as a side yard by a building line shown on a plat approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission containing a side yard of ten feet or more,
the building line provisions on the plat shall be observed; on lots which
were official corner lots of record prior to the date of enactment of this
chapter, the minimum side yard adjacent to the side street shall be ten feet.



         (g)   Maximum lot coverage: 85% of lot area.



      (2)   Parking.



         (a)   Business and professional offices (including
banks, savings and loan associations and similar institutions): One space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces), designed in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



         (b)   General retail sales and service establishments:
One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces),
designed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



         (c)   Restaurants: One space for every three restaurant
seating spaces, designed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072
and 153.073.



         (d)   Theaters, meeting rooms, places of public
assembly: One space for every three seats, designed in accordance with the
provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



      (3)   Screening. Screening shall be required between the
planned development district and all abutting property according to the
specifications set forth in § 153.072.



      (4)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be located,
screened or shielded so that adjacent lots or structures are not directly
illuminated.



      (5)   Antennas. No antenna placed upon the roof of any
structure in this District shall extend more than ten feet above the roofline.



   (D)   Planned Development: Commercial. Commercial planned
developments may be approved in this District under the amendatory procedures
of this chapter, subject to the following restrictions and limitations.



      (1)   Size and area.



         (a)   Site area:



            1.   Shopping center: The minimum site area shall
be three acres; and



            2.   Office plaza: The minimum site area shall be
one acre.



         (b)   Maximum building height: The height of all
buildings shall be determined by their location upon the site in accordance
with the limitations and requirements prescribed by Appendix B to this
chapter.



         (c)   Maximum floor area to site area:



            1.   Shopping center: 60% of site area; and



            2.   Office plaza: 120% of site area.



         (d)   Building lines: None are prescribed except as may
be established by the planned development amendment.



         (e)   Maximum site coverage: 85% of site area.



      (2)   Parking. For each shopping center or office plaza
commercial planned development constructed within the C-2 Commercial
District, a parking garage shall also be constructed upon the development
site to provide parking as follows:



         (a)   Business and professional offices (including
banks, savings and loan associations and similar institutions): One space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces), designed in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073;



         (b)   General retail sales and service establishments:
One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces),
designed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073;



         (c)   Restaurants: One space for every three restaurant
seating spaces, designed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072
and 153.073; and



         (d)   Theaters, meeting rooms, places of public
assembly: One space for every three seats, designed in accordance with the
provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



      (3)   Screening. None is prescribed except as may be
established by the planned development amendment.



      (4)   Landscaping. None is prescribed except as may be
established by the planned development amendment.



      (5)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be located,
screened or shielded so that adjacent residential lots or structures are not
directly illuminated.



      (6)   Accessory uses. In a commercial office building,
residential and retail accessory uses to the predominant office use may be
allowed so long as the total area occupied by the accessory uses does not
exceed 33% of the total use and so long as the number of dwelling units does
not exceed 12 per acre for the total project site.



      (7)   Development intensity bonuses. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this section, a planned development amendment may be granted
which permits floor area ratio increases over and above that permitted by
other provisions of this section not to exceed the amounts set out herein,
except that the cumulative amount of any bonus granted may not cause the
total floor area to exceed 300% of the site area.



         (a)   Public open space: One percent floor area to site
area for every 1% of the development site over and above the 15% base
requirement, that is preserved in the landscaped open space, plazas with
public art, fountains and/or pedestrian walkways.



         (b)   Parking: One percent floor area to site area for
every 3% of a parking structure located below ground level or for every 3% of
a parking structure integrated into the base structure of the main building
that it serves.



         (c)   Land assembly: The allowable maximum floor area to
site area (floor area ratio) for any site assembled that is in excess of one
acre may be increased by an amount computed as follows:



 


.05 (total site) minus 1 acre




1 acre




 



         (d)   Street orientation, siting and design: Increase in
floor area to site area of up to 33% for special street orientation, such as
conversion of single loaded shopping streets to double loaded shopping
streets, siting or design features that achieve a standard of excellence in
relation to the specific environment in which the project is located and that
exceed other requirements of this code.



(Prior Code, § 24-536)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Ord.
92-29, § 1, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 96-12, § 1, passed 2-27-1996;  Ord.
96-14, § 1, passed 3-26-1996; Ord. 2000-31, passed 11-28-2000; Ord. 2001-19,
passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 2012-11, passed 5-22-2012; Ord. 2012-30, passed 7-
24-2012; Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-25-2015; Ord. 2017-04, passed 2-28-2017)  
Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.096  C-3 SPECIAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The provisions of this section are applicable only to
a tract of property generally located on the southern boundary of the City of
Meadows Place. The characteristics of the property and the necessity for its
development as a part of a larger tract located within the city limits of the
City of Stafford require special and unique zoning regulations in order to
achieve a development which is desirable for the residents, citizens and
inhabitants of the City of Meadows Place.



   (B)   Uses.



      (1)   Permitted uses.



         (a)   Utilities:



            1.   Local utility distribution lines; and



            2.   Telephone lines and related cross-connecting
points.



         (b)   Accessory uses, subject to the requirements of §
153.069;



         (c)   Facilities owned and maintained by the city;



         (d)   Planned development: commercial;



         (e)   Banks, savings and loan associations and similar
institutions, including not more than one such institution with drive-thru
facilities, if the facilities are designed and constructed not to negatively
or adversely impact the health, safety and well-being of the residents,
citizens and inhabitants of the city. The facilities should be designed in a
way as to prevent unnecessary traffic congestion and to provide for the
orderly movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic;



         (f)   Business and professional offices and services;



         (g)   General retail sales and services and similar uses
providing for the sale of convenience goods and personal services which would
meet the daily needs of the community trade area;



         (h)   Restaurants, including not more than one
restaurant with a drive-thru facility if the facilities are designed and
constructed not to negatively or adversely impact the health, safety and
well-being of the residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city. The
facilities should be designed in a way as to prevent unnecessary traffic
congestion and to provide for the orderly movement of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic;



         (i)   Cafeterias;



         (j)   Recreational and entertainment uses:



            1.   Amusement, commercial indoor;



            2.   Art gallery or museum;



            3.   Athletic, swimming or tennis club and/or
facilities;



            4.   Private club; and



            5.   Theater, indoor, without limitations as to
whether located either on the first or second level of any building or
structure.



         (k)   Medical offices if the facilities are designed and
constructed not to negatively or adversely impact the health, safety and
well-being of the residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city. The
facilities should be designed in a way as to prevent unnecessary traffic
congestion and to provide for the orderly movement of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic; and



         (l)   An automobile service station (not more than one
such facility), if the facility is designed and constructed not to negatively
or adversely impact the health, safety and well-being of the residents,
citizens and inhabitants of the city. The facility should be designed in a
way as to prevent unnecessary traffic congestion and to provide for the
orderly movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.



      (2)   Specific uses.



         (a)   Educational, institutional and special uses:



            1.   Hospital, acute care; and



            2.   Schools, business or trade.



         (b)   Transportation, automobile and related uses:



            1.   Auto or motorcycle sales; and



            2.   Auto parts sales.



         (c)   Restaurant in conjunction with automobile service
station uses;



         (d)   Retail establishments with drive-thru service
(excluding restaurants: and



         (e)   Smoking paraphernalia establishments.



      (3)   Additional use requirements. It shall be unlawful for
any person to make use of any property located within the C-3 Special
Commercial District except in accordance with the uses permitted in this
District, with the performance standards set forth in §§ 153.060 through
153.078 and with the additional regulations listed below.



         (a)   Trash and laundry. No collection, storage for
refuse, debris or garbage generated by any use shall be allowed in this
District when the storage is visible from publicly owned streets. No hanging
of laundry, cleaning rags, mops or similar items shall be allowed within view
of publicly owned streets. Screening structures erected to obscure the items
from view from publicly owned streets shall meet applicable city
specifications for materials and construction as set forth in § 153.072.



         (b)   Sidewalk sales. The open display of merchandise
shall only be permitted wherein a permit shall have been previously issued by
the City Secretary, for a period not exceeding three successive days and not
exceeding four times per calendar year.



   (C)   Standard regulations – commercial structures.



      (1)   Size and area.



         (a)   Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.



         (b)   Minimum lot width: 50 feet.



         (c)   Minimum lot depth: 50 feet.



         (d)   Maximum building height: The height of all
buildings shall be determined by their location upon the site in accordance
with the limitations and requirements prescribed by Appendix B to this
chapter.



         (e)   Maximum floor area to lot area: 100% of lot area.



         (f)   Minimum required yards:



            1.   Front yard: 20 feet;



            2.   Side yard and rear yard: No side yard or rear
yard is specified, except that where the side yard or rear yard abuts a lot
which is either zoned residential or in residential use, the minimum side
yard or rear yard shall not be less than the distance prescribed by Appendix
B to this chapter or in § 153.072; and



            3.   Corner lots: On a corner lot abutting a lot
which is either zoned residential or in residential use, both street
exposures shall be treated as front yards on all lots platted after the date
of enactment of this chapter, except that where one street exposure is
designated as a side yard by a building line shown on a plat approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission containing a side yard of ten feet or more,
the building line provisions on the plat shall be observed; on lots which
were official corner lots of record prior to the date of enactment of this
chapter, the minimum side yard adjacent to the side street shall be ten feet.



         (g)   Maximum lot coverage: 85% of lot area.



      (2)   Parking. The parking regulations as herein provided
contemplate the inclusion of property within the development but located
within the city limits of the City of Stafford. As such, all requirements as
herein provided may be satisfied by inclusion in the appropriate computation
of parking spaces within the development but located outside the city limits
of the City of Meadows Place.



         (a)   Business and professional offices (including
banks, savings and loan associations and similar institutions): One space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces), designed in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073. No additional
parking requirements shall be imposed in the event that a business and
professional office shall be accessory to another principal use existing
within the proposed development, and the business and office use represents
less than 5% of the total floor area.



         (b)   General retail sales and service establishments:
One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces),
designed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



         (c)   Restaurants: One space for every 80 square feet of
gross seating floor area designed in accordance with provisions of §§
153.072 and 153.073.



         (d)   Theaters, meeting rooms, places of public
assembly: One space for every three and one-half seats, designed in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073. No additional
parking requirements shall be made for this use if the theaters, meeting
rooms or places of public assembly uses herein provided represent less than
5% of the total floor area of the proposed project and when the theaters,
meeting rooms and places of public assembly are available primarily for
meetings of community civic groups or nonprofit organizations. For theaters
sharing parking with other retail and office uses up to 50% of the primarily
daytime use requirements can be used to satisfy the parking requirements of
the theaters.



      (3)   Screening. Screening shall be required between the
planned development district and all abutting property in accordance with the
specifications set forth in § 153.072.



      (4)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be located,
screened or shielded so that adjacent lots or structures are not directly
illuminated.



      (5)   Antennas. No antenna placed upon the roof of any
structure in this District shall extend more than ten feet above the roofline.



      (6)   Landscaping along public rights-of-way. A landscaped
area not less than 15 feet wide abutting the property line along the public
rights-of-way shall be provided.



      (7)   Location of buildings. A property owner may at any time
locate any building at any point or points within the property zoned C-3
Special Commercial District. The property owner may from time to time provide
information relating to the proposed location of buildings and/or make such
public presentations as are deemed necessary and desirable for the
information of the community; however, failure of the developer to make such
presentations and/or otherwise to report on planning decisions shall not
preclude nor prevent the property owner from proceeding to obtain all
required building permits.



      (8)   Subsequent approvals. No additional approval shall be
necessary as to any question or issue relating to the zoning of property or
the inclusion of property in a zoning district subsequent to the adoption of
this amendment. The property owner shall be entitled to all necessary
building permits and other permits as provided for under Chapter 150 of the
code of ordinances of the city upon meeting such requirements and conditions
as therein specified.



   (D)   Planned Development; Commercial. Commercial planned
developments may be approved in this District under the amendatory procedures
of this chapter, subject to the following restrictions and limitations.



      (1)   Size and area.



         (a)   Site area:



            1.   Shopping center: The minimum site area shall
be three acres; and



            2.   Office plaza: The minimum site area shall be
one acre.



         (b)   Maximum building height: The height of all
buildings shall be determined by their location upon the site in accordance
with the limitations and requirements prescribed by Appendix B to this
chapter.



         (c)   Maximum floor area to site area:



            1.   Shopping center: 60% of site area; and



            2.   Office plaza: 120% of site area.



         (d)   Building lines: None are prescribed except as may
be established by the planned development amendment.



         (e)   Maximum site coverage: 85% of site area.



      (2)   Parking. For each shopping center or office plaza
commercial planned development constructed within the C-3 Special Commercial
District, a parking garage shall also constructed upon the development site
to provide parking as follows.



         (a)   Business and professional offices (including
banks, savings and loan associations and similar institutions): One space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces), designed in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



         (b)   General retail sales and service establishments:
One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area (minimum five spaces),
designed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



         (c)   Restaurants: One space for every three restaurant
seating spaces, designed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 153.072
and 153.073.



         (d)   Theaters, meeting rooms, places of public
assembly: One space for every three seats, designed in accordance with the
provisions of §§ 153.072 and 153.073.



      (3)   Screening. None is prescribed except as may be
established by the planned development amendment.



      (4)   Landscaping. None is prescribed except as may be
established by the planned development amendment.



      (5)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be located,
screened or shielded so that adjacent residential lots or structures are not
directly illuminated.



      (6)   Accessory uses. In a commercial office building,
residential and retail accessory uses to the predominant office use may be
allowed so long as the total area occupied by the accessory uses does not
exceed 33% of the total use and so long as the number of dwelling units does
not exceed 12 per acre for the total project site.



      (7)   Development intensity bonuses. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this section, a planned development amendment may be granted
which permits floor area ratio increases over and above that permitted by
other provisions of this section not to exceed the amounts set out herein,
except that the cumulative amount of any bonus granted may not cause the
total floor area to exceed 300% of the site area.



         (a)   Public open space: One percent floor area to site
area for every 1% of the development site over and above the 15% base
requirement, that is preserved in the landscaped open space, plazas with
public art, fountains and/or pedestrian walkways.



         (b)   Parking: One percent floor area to site area for
every 3% of a parking structure located below ground level or for every 3% of
a parking structure integrated into the base structure of the main building
that it serves.



         (c)   Land assembly: The allowable maximum floor area to
site area (floor area ratio) for any site assembled that is in excess of one
acre may be increased by an amount computed as follows:



 


.05 (total site) minus 1 acre




1 acre




 



         (d)   Street orientation, siting and design: Increase in
floor area to site area of up to 33% for special street orientation, such as
conversion of single loaded shopping streets to double located shopping
streets, siting or design features that achieve a standard of excellence in
relation to the specific environment in which the project is located and that
exceed other requirements of this code.



(Prior Code, § 24-537)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Ord.
94-16, § 4, passed 5-10-1994; Ord. 95-07, § 1, passed 2-21-1995; Ord.
2012-11, passed 5-22-2012; Ord. 2012-30, passed 7-24-2012; Ord. 2015-14,
passed 8-25-2015; Ord. 2017-04, passed 2-28-2017) Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.097  ARCHITECTURAL COMMERCIAL AESTHETICS.



   Aesthetic requirements for existing commercial structures, any new
commercial structures built in existing neighborhoods or for any new planned
development shall be as follows.



   (A)   In existing subdivisions and/or new development, all buildings
and structures shall be architecturally and aesthetically pleasing to the
general population. All buildings and structures shall be constructed and
exterior-finished so as to blend with and complement the surrounding
buildings and landscape. No exterior finishing or color shall be of colors
normally considered loud, obnoxious or excessively bright.  The purpose of
this criterion is twofold: to ensure that the character and quality of
retail, commercial and industrial development contributes to desired
community character objectives; and to preclude the design and construction
of buildings for which the tenants and/or uses are readily recognizable
solely by the buildings' architectural elevations, colors, materials, other
architectural elements and/or the arrangement thereof.



      (1)   Any new development shall be required to obtain initial
approval of any exterior colors to be used on new buildings and structures
from the City Planning and Zoning Commission.



      (2)   The approval for any exterior color for any exterior
additions to or change or alteration to existing buildings and structures
shall be required from the City Planning and Zoning Commission.



      (3)   An appeal may be taken within ten business days from the
City Planning and Zoning Commission decision to deny a color selection
directly to the City Council. The decision of the City Council shall be final.



      (4)   Any decision by the City Council that shall be deemed
arbitrary may be appealed to the District Court of the county, if notice of
appeal has been filed with the City Secretary within 30 days from the date of
the decision by the City Council. This notice, if given, shall be in addition
to the aggrieved party timely filing the petition and/or pleadings as may be
applicable and required for suits in District Court. The appeals shall be
under the substantial evidence rule.



   (B)   New commercial development and all buildings and structures
thereto shall be architecturally and aesthetically pleasing to the general
population. All buildings and structures shall be constructed and
exterior-finished so as to blend with and complement the surrounding
buildings and landscape. No exterior finishing or color shall be of colors
normally considered loud, obnoxious or excessively bright. The purpose of
this criterion is twofold: to ensure that the character and quality of
retail, commercial and industrial development contributes to desired
community character objectives; and to preclude the design and construction
of buildings for which the tenants and/or uses are readily recognizable
solely by the buildings' architectural elevations, colors, materials, other
architectural elements and/or the arrangement thereof.  Any new commercial
development shall be required to obtain initial approval of any exterior
colors to be used on new buildings and structures from the City Planning and
Zoning Commission. Appeals may be taken following the procedures set out in
divisions (A)(3) and (A)(4) above.



(Ord. 2008-04, passed 2-26-2008)



§ 153.098  ARCHITECTURAL RESIDENTIAL AESTHETICS.



   Aesthetic requirements for existing residential structures and any new
residential structures shall be as follows. Divisions (A) and (B) below,
subject to § 150.02(C), the following allowable residential roofing
materials may be installed in new or replacement roof construction:



   (A)   Before changing 50% or more of the exterior paint color of an
existing residential structure, the residential owner or an authorized
representative shall consult the Behr Exteriors Custom Color Collection Chart
No. 50003913 that is kept on file with the code enforcement official of the
city to choose an approved color. Residential structures are not required to
be painted with the name brand paint found in the Behr Exterior Collection
Chart No. 50003913, but the residential owner or authorized representative
shall present to the code enforcement official for approval an exterior paint
color of a different brand than that found in the Behr Exterior Collection
Chart No. 50003913. The Code enforcement official will approve reasonable
color matches to that found in the Behr Exterior Collection Chart No.
50003913. Any change to the exterior paint color of an existing residential
structure shall be painted a uniform color, with the exception of any trim
which may be painted a different color. Doors also may be colored in standard
manufacturer colors.



   (B)   Before painting the exterior paint color of a new residential
structure, the residential owner or an authorized representative shall
consult the Behr Exterior Collection Chart No. 50001540 that is kept on file
with the code enforcement official of the city to choose an approved color.
Residential structures are not required to be painted with the name brand
paint found in the Behr Exterior Collection Chart No. 50003913 but the
residential owner or authorized representative shall present to the code
enforcement official for approval an exterior paint color of a different
brand than that found in the Behr Exterior Collection Chart No. 50003913. The
code enforcement official will approve reasonable color matches to that found
in the Behr Exterior Collection Chart No. 50003913. The exterior paint color
of a new residential structure shall be painted a uniform color, with the
exception of any trim which may be painted a different color. Doors also may
be colored in standard manufacturer colors.



   (C)   If the code enforcement official denies a paint color
selection, the residential owner or authorized representative may appeal such
denial to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any appeal must be filed with
the City Secretary within ten business days of denial. In determining whether
to approve an alternate exterior paint color selection, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall consider surrounding buildings, structures, and
landscapes to ensure that an alternative exterior paint color selection is
aesthetically and architecturally consistent with such surrounding buildings,
structures, and landscapes and that no alternative exterior paint color
selection is of a color normally considered loud, obnoxious, or excessively
bright.



(Ord. 2008-12, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2011-10, passed 2-22-2011; Ord.
2017-24, passed 8-22-2017)



ZONING DISTRICT PROHIBITIONS



§ 153.110  PROHIBITED USES.



   It shall be strictly prohibited to own or operate a tattoo studio or
body piercing studio as defined in § 153.016 within the boundaries of the
city.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 4-27-2010)



AMENDATORY PROCEDURE



§ 153.125  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide appropriate and uniform
procedures for the conduct of public hearings and adoption of amendments by
the City Council as well as for the conduct of public hearings and making of
recommendations by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



(Prior Code, § 24-601)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.126  TYPES OF AMENDMENT.



   (A)   This subchapter provides a procedure for amendment to the
written text of this chapter or the Official Zoning District Map, the
creation and approval of planned development districts and the approval of
specific use permits as amendments to this chapter.



   (B)   Amendments are not intended to relieve particular hardships or
to confer special privileges or rights on any person but to amend this
chapter in light of changed circumstances and conditions. In determining
whether to grant a requested amendment, the City Council and the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall consider the consistency of the proposed amendment
with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan set forth in § 153.004 of this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 24-602)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.127  APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENT TO WRITTEN TEXT OR OFFICIAL ZONING
DISTRICT MAP.



   (A)   Any person desiring to petition for an amendment to the
written text of this chapter or to the Official Zoning District Map shall be
required to file an application in writing with the Planning and Zoning
Official, accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee, in an amount
established by the City Council, to defray the actual cost of processing the
application.



   (B)   The application shall include the following information:



      (1)   The applicant's name and address;



      (2)   The precise wording of any proposed amendment to the
written text of this chapter and a statement of the present provisions and
section or sections of this chapter sought to be amended, or in the event the
proposal concerns a change in the Official Zoning District Map, then a clear
delineation of the area set out on the map sought to be rezoned;



      (3)   A statement of the need and justification for the
proposed amendment;



      (4)   A statement as to the conformity of the proposed
amendment to the Comprehensive Plan set forth in § 153.004 or the reason for
any deviation from the Plan and the precise wording of any proposed change in
the Plan to bring the Plan into conformity with the proposed amendment; and



      (5)   In the event that the proposed amendment would change
the Official Zoning District Map and the zoning classification of any
property:



         (a)   The street address and legal description of the
property proposed to be reclassified;



         (b)   The applicant's interest in the subject property;



         (c)   The owner's name and address, if different than
the applicant's, and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the
application or the signatures of 75% of the owners of the parcels to be
affected;



         (d)   The names and addresses of all owners of property
required to be notified under this subchapter;



         (e)   The present zoning classification and existing
uses of the property proposed to be reclassified; and



         (f)   The area of the property proposed to be
reclassified, stated in square feet or acres, or fraction thereof.



      (6)   Any other information or documentation that the Planning
and Zoning Official, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council
may from time to time designate or which may be deemed necessary and
appropriate to a full and proper consideration and disposition of the
particular application.



(Prior Code, § 24-603)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.128  APPLICATION FOR PLANNED DEVELOPMENT AMENDMENT.



   (A)   Any person desiring to petition for a planned development
amendment to this chapter shall be required to file an application in writing
with the Planning and Zoning Official, accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee, in an amount established by the City Council, to defray the
actual cost of processing the application.



   (B)   The application shall include the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant; and in the event
that the applicant is a partnership, the full name and address of the general
partner, and in the event that the applicant is a corporation, the full names
and addresses of all officers, a statement as to the state of incorporation,
the name and address of the registered agent and the address of the
registered office of the corporation;



      (2)   The section or sections of this chapter authorizing a
planned development amendment;



      (3)   A legal description and street address of the property
which is the subject of the application;



      (4)   A statement of ownership accompanied by a certificate
from a title insurance company certifying ownership;



      (5)   A written description of the proposed development and a
site plan which graphically sets forth the following:



         (a)    The size of the subject property;



         (b)   The general location of the public streets and/or
points of ingress to and egress from the development, with a description of
the parameters desired for variation from the proposed location of the public
streets and/or points of ingress or egress;



         (c)   The proposed number and height of any and all
buildings to be constructed upon the site, with a description of the
parameters desired for variation from the proposed number and height of any
and all buildings;



         (d)   The proposed lot coverage and floor area ratio of
all buildings to be developed, with a description of the parameters desired
for variation from the proposed lot coverage and floor area ratio of all
buildings to be developed; and



         (e)   The proposed location of any and all green space,
public parks or other areas reserved for public use in the proposed
development, with a description of the parameters desired for variation from
the proposed location of any and all green space, public parks or other areas
reserved for public used in the proposed development.



      (6)   An environmental assessment form, in a form as
prescribed by the Planning and Zoning Official, which shall include but not
be limited to a traffic impact analysis, an analysis of demand on utilities
and their capacity, a description of development phases or stages, if
applicable, and other data as may be deemed necessary; and



      (7)   Such other information or documentation as the Planning
and Zoning Official, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council
may from time to time designate or which may be deemed necessary and
appropriate to a full and proper consideration and disposition of the
particular application.



(Prior Code, § 24-604)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.129  APPLICATION FOR SPECIFIC USE AMENDMENT.



   (A)   Any person desiring to petition for a specific use amendment
to this chapter shall be required to file an application in writing with the
Planning and Zoning Official, accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee,
in an amount established by the City Council, to defray the actual cost of
processing the application.



   (B)   The application shall include the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant; and in the event
that the applicant is a partnership, the full name and address of the general
partner; and in the event that the applicant is a corporation, the full names
and addresses of all officers, a statement as to the state of incorporation,
the name and address of the registered agent and the address of the
registered office of the corporation;



      (2)   The section or sections of this chapter authorizing a
specific use amendment;



      (3)   A legal description and street address of the property
which is the subject of the application;



      (4)   A statement of ownership accompanied by a certificate
from a title insurance company certifying ownership;



      (5)   A written description of the proposed specific use as
provided for in this code;



      (6)   A written environmental assessment statement describing
in general terms the impact of the development for which approval is sought
and providing any specific information that the Planning and Zoning Official
shall deem necessary; and



      (7)   Such other information or documentation as the Planning
and Zoning Official, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council
may from time to time designate or which may be deemed necessary and
appropriate to a full and proper consideration and disposition of the
particular application.



(Prior Code, § 24-605)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.130  AMENDMENTS INITIATED BY THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION AND
CITY COUNCIL.



   Nothing herein shall prevent the Planning and Zoning Commission from
calling and conducting public hearings on proposals by the Commission for
amendments to the text of this chapter or the Official Zoning District Map
and making recommendations thereon, nor shall anything herein prevent the
City Council from initiating consideration of amendments to the text of this
chapter or the Official Zoning District Map.



(Prior Code, § 24-606)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.131  CALL OF PUBLIC HEARINGS.



   (A)   When any amendment is proposed under the provisions of this
chapter, the City Council may, at its discretion and by ordinance, call a
joint public hearing to be held before the City Council and the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The City Council shall receive the Commission's final
report and recommendation before considering any amendment.



   (B)   In the event the City Council shall not elect to call a joint
public hearing on any such proposed amendment, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall, by formal action, call and hold a public hearing thereon
prior to making its report and recommendation to the City Council. Upon
receipt of the report and recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, and upon request by any applicant, the City Council shall then,
by ordinance, call and hold its public hearing prior to finally considering
the amendment.



(Prior Code, § 24-607)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.132  NOTICE REQUIRED.



   Upon formal action by the Planning and Zoning Commission or ordinance
duly enacted by the City Council, notice of all public hearings concerning
proposed amendments shall be given in accordance with this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 24-608)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.133  CONTENT OF NOTICE.



   Every required notice shall include the date, time and place of the
hearing, statement of the proposal under consideration or the text of the
proposal to be considered and identification of the body conducting the
hearing.



(Prior Code, § 24-609)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.134  PUBLICATION.



   (A)   For public hearings before the Commission, notice of the
public hearings shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the city, and the hearings shall not occur earlier than ten days from the
date of the publication. When the matter under consideration by the
Commission involves an amendment or change in the classification or boundary
of a zoning district, written notice of public hearing before the Commission
on the proposed amendment or change shall be sent to all owners of real
property lying within 200 feet of the property upon which the change is
requested, excluding public lands, easements or rights-of-way, and the owners
of such additional property as may be designated by the Commission. The
notice shall be given not less than ten days before the date set for the
hearing by depositing the notice in the mail, properly addressed and postage
prepaid, to each taxpayer as the ownership appears on the last approved tax
roll.



   (B)   For public hearings before the City Council, notice of the
public hearings shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the city, and the hearings shall not occur earlier than 15 days from the date
of the publication. When the matter under consideration by the Commission
involves an amendment or change in the classification or boundary of a zoning
district, written notice of public hearing before the City Council on the
proposed amendment or change shall be sent to all owners of real property
lying within 200 feet of the property upon which the change is requested,
excluding public lands, easements or rights-of-way, and the owners of such
additional property as may be designated by the City Council. The notice
shall be given not less than 15 days before the date set for the hearing by
depositing the notice in the mail, properly addressed and postage prepaid, to
each taxpayer as the ownership appears on the last approved tax roll.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of
this section, in the case of a joint public hearing, in addition to the
required publication, the City Council may, by a two-thirds vote of the
members of the Council, prescribe some manner and method of notice other than
mailing of written notice as herein contemplated, as the same may, from time
to time, be authorized by the laws of the state.



(Prior Code, § 24-610)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.135  REQUIRED SIGNS.



   In the case of a hearing in regard to an amendment to the Official
Zoning District Map or a planned development amendment, at least 15 days
prior to any public hearing under this chapter, a sign at least four square
feet in front surface area which describes the nature of the amendment and
the date, time and location of the hearing shall be posted on the property
which is subject of the hearing. It shall be the duty and responsibility of
the applicant to procure the sign and to cause the same to be properly
lettered so that the same might be easily visible from all public streets and
public ways abutting the property. The applicant shall file with the Planning
and Zoning Official an affidavit of posting, which affidavit shall be made
under oath and shall specify that a sign, meeting the requirements of this
section, has been posted at or before the time required. The filing of the
affidavit with the record shall be sufficient proof of compliance with this
section; and no one may complain of the validity of any amendment because the
sign has been prematurely removed or is alleged not to have been posted. The
filing of an affidavit of posting in a form as found in Appendix C of this
chapter, in conjunction with the certificate of the Planning and Zoning
Official, shall be prima facie evidence and conclusive for all purposes of
compliance with this section.



(Prior Code, § 24-611)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.136  CONDUCT OF PUBLIC HEARINGS.



   (A)   Rights of all persons. Any person may appear at a public
hearing and submit evidence either individually or as a representative of any
organization. Each person who appears at a public hearing shall identify
himself or herself, his or her address and state the name and mailing address
of any organization he or she represents. The body conducting the hearing may
exclude evidence that it finds to be irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious.



   (B)   Due order of proceedings. Any person shall have the right to
appear and present evidence or testimony which is relevant and material to
the matter under consideration. Any person may, in addition, ask relevant
questions of other persons appearing as witnesses, but shall do so only
through the presiding officer; and the presiding officer may, as he or she
shall deem fit, address the questions to the witnesses.



   (C)   Opinions. Any person, in addition to giving evidence in the
form of oral testimony or documentation, shall have the right at a public
hearing to express opinions and give other information, so long as the same
is relevant, material and not unduly repetitious.



   (D)   Continuance of hearing. The body conducting the hearing may,
on its own motion or the request of any person, continue the hearing to a
fixed date, time and place. An applicant shall have the right to request and
be granted one continuance without statement of grounds or reasons therefor.
However, all subsequent continuances shall be granted at the discretion of
the body conducting the hearing, upon good cause shown. Any person requesting
and being granted a continuance shall be required to pay all costs and
expenses as required by law. All adjourned and recessed public hearings shall
only commence upon the giving of all notices which would have been required
were it the initial call of the public hearing.



   (E)   Other rules to govern. Other matters pertaining to the public
hearing shall be governed by other provisions of this chapter applicable to
the body conducting the hearing and its adopted rules of procedure, so long
as the same are not in conflict with this code.



   (F)   Record.



      (1)   The body conducting the hearing shall record the
proceedings by any suitable and available process, which shall be duplicated
by any appropriate means at the request of any person upon application to the
City Secretary and payment of a fee to cover the cost of transcription, or
the audio record (tape) may be duplicated.



      (2)   The transcript of oral proceedings, including testimony
and statements of personal opinions, the minutes of the Secretary, all
applications, exhibits and papers submitted in any proceeding before the
decision-making body, the report of the Planning and Zoning Official or other
member of the city staff and the decision and report or reports of the
decision-making body, shall constitute the record.



      (3)   All records of the decision-making bodies shall be
public records, open to inspection at reasonable times and upon reasonable
notice in accordance with Tex. Government Code Ch. 55, the Texas Open Records
Act.



   (G)   Joint hearing procedure. A joint public hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with procedures for public hearings as set out
herein. The Mayor shall act as presiding officer at any joint public hearing,
or in the event of the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Temp or member of
City Council designated by a majority of the members of the City Council
present shall preside.



(Prior Code, § 24-612)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.137  EXPEDITIOUS ACTION.



   All decision-making bodies shall act expeditiously and promptly to
conclude their deliberations and take final action on the matter before them.
These actions should be taken as promptly as possible in consideration of the
interest of the citizens of the city.



(Prior Code, § 24-613)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.138  REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING
COMMISSION.



   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall render written reports and
recommendations to the City Council, which shall include at least the
following elements:



   (A)   A clear statement of specific findings;



   (B)   A summary of the information presented before the Commission
by interested citizens appearing before the Commission and making
presentations. The report should state the approximate total number of
citizens appearing and shall provide a brief summary of the differing
opinions presented by the persons;



   (C)   Copies of all documentary evidence provided to the Commission
or which the Commission considered in making its report; and



   (D)   Identification of the members of the Commission voting for the
majority position and identification of the members of the Commission voting
against the majority position, with a brief statement explaining the reasons
for the determinations made.



(Prior Code, § 24-614)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.139  STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT AMENDMENTS AND
SPECIFIC USE AMENDMENTS.



   A planned development amendment or a specific use amendment may be
granted and may be allowed to continue if it meets the following criteria and
standards and is otherwise in accord with this code:



   (A)   The planned development amendment or specific use amendment is
consistent with the purposes, goals, objectives and standards of the
Comprehensive Plan of the city as set out in § 153.004;



   (B)   The design of the proposed development, considered as a part
of the planned development amendment or specific use amendment, minimizes
adverse effects, including visual impacts of the proposed use on adjacent
properties;



   (C)   The proposed development will not have an adverse effect on
the value of the adjacent property;



   (D)   The proposed development will not unduly burden essential
public facilities and services, including streets, police and fire
protection, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, solid waste disposal and schools;
and



   (E)   The applicant for the development has adequate financial and
technical capacity to complete the development as proposed and has met all
requirements of this code, including such conditions as have been imposed as
a part of a planned development amendment or specific use amendment.



(Prior Code, § 24-615)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.140  AMENDMENTS TO THIS CHAPTER.



   The City Council may enact such amendments to this chapter under the
conditions as herein provided and subject to the procedure as provided herein
upon finding of the changed circumstances or conditions necessitating the
amendment. No amendment to this chapter, other than procedural amendments,
shall be adopted unless specific findings of fact shall be made reasonably
concluding that a change in circumstance or condition exists. In all such
amendments, a find shall be made that the proposed amendment is in compliance
with the Comprehensive Plan of the city as set out in this chapter, or if not
in compliance, what new facts or circumstances necessitate a change in the
Comprehensive Plan.



(Prior Code, § 24-616)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.141  FINAL ACTION BY THE CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   The City Council shall, subject to the requirements and
conditions herein set out, upon receipt and acceptance of the report and
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and appropriate public
hearing(s), enact ordinances amending this chapter or the Official Zoning
District Map as its decision-making determination in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. In the case of a planned development amendment or
a specific use amendment, the City Council may approve the site plan within
parameters subject to those conditions, safeguards and restrictions as the
City Council may deem appropriate and necessary.



   (B)   In the event of a written protest against this change, signed
by the owners of 20% or more either of the area of the lots or land included
in the proposed change or of the lots or land immediately adjoining the same
and extending 200 feet therefrom, the amendment shall not become effective
except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all of the members of the
City Council.



   (C)   The City Council may, if it deems necessary, refer the
proposal to such other official, board or commission for further study and
review, or take no action.



(Prior Code, § 24-617)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.142  NOTIFICATION OF DECISION.



   (A)   Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning
Official shall mail to any interested applicants by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a letter setting out the decision of the Planning and
Zoning Commission.



   (B)   City Council. In the case of the final adoption of an
ordinance, the City Clerk shall mail to any interested applicants a certified
copy of the ordinance duly enacted; and if no ordinance is enacted, the City
Secretary shall mail to the interested applicants by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a letter setting out the decision of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 24-618)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.143  FINAL PLAN FOR PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The applicant shall file with the Building Official a final
site plan in conjunction with its request for a building permit. The final
site plan shall show compliance with the parameters and conditions
established by the City Council and the planned development amendment
ordinance. In the event the planned development amendment contemplates a
development consisting of more than one building, the applicant shall only be
required to file a final site plan for the site upon which the building
sought to be constructed is located.



   (B)   The Building Official shall issue a building permit if the
final site plan is in accord with the provisions of this chapter and the
planned development amendment and if all other conditions of this code and
administrative orders of the Building Official have been complied with.



(Prior Code, § 24-619)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.144  SUCCESSIVE APPLICATIONS.



   Whenever any application for an amendment or change in the Official
Zoning District Map is denied after public hearing, a second application for
amendment or change in the Official Zoning District Map, being substantially
the same as the first application, from the same applicant and involving the
same property, shall not be considered within two years from the date of
denial. The body charged with conducting the public hearing immediately prior
to the denial shall resolve any question concerning the similarity of a
second application.



(Prior Code, § 24-620)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



VARIANCES, SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS, APPEALS AND NONCONFORMITIES



§ 153.155  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Authority.  The Board of Adjustment shall have authority to
grant variances from the requirements of this chapter in accordance with the
procedures of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 24-701)



   (B)   Purpose.  The purpose of variances is to provide a mechanism
for relief where, owing to special conditions, the literal enforcement of the
regulations of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, provided
that the granting of variances will not be contrary to the public interest,
and provided further that the spirit of this chapter will be preserved by
variances granted under the terms and provisions hereof.



(Prior Code, § 24-702)



   (C)   Initiation.  An owner or person, either owning or having a
contractual interest in the property to be affected by the variance, may seek
a variance under the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 24-703)



   (D)   Standards.  The Board shall not grant a variance unless it
shall, in each case, make specific written findings based directly upon the
particular evidence presented to it which support written conclusions that:



      (1)   Such modifications of the height, yard, area, lot width,
lot depth, off-street loading, screening wall, coverage, parking and sign
regulations are necessary to secure appropriate development of a parcel of
land which differs from other parcels in the district by being of the
restricted area, shape or slope that it cannot be appropriately developed
without modification;



      (2)   The granting of the variance will not be materially
detrimental or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the subject property is located, nor impair an adequate
supply of light or air to adjacent property, substantially increase the
congestion in the public streets, increase the danger of fire, endanger the
public health, safety and well-being, or substantially diminish or impair
property values within the neighborhood; and



      (3)   The variance desired will not be opposed to the general
spirit and intent of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 24-704)



   (E)   Application.  An application for a variance shall be filed
with the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment according to rules of procedure
adopted from time to time by the Board and shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee as prescribed in the rules of procedure, to defray
administrative costs.



(Prior Code, § 24-705)



   (F)   Limitations on variances.  Variances from the terms of this
chapter shall not be contrary to the public interest but may be granted
where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship.



(Prior Code, § 24-706)



   (G)   Action of Board.  The Board shall hold a hearing on a
requested variance, pursuant to the procedures set out in this code, as soon
as practical after a complete application for a variance is filed.



(Prior Code, § 24-707)



   (H)   Conditions on variances.  The Board may set forth conditions
in the written order granting a variance. These conditions may relate to
screening, landscaping, location and other conditions necessary to preserve
the character of the area and protect property in the vicinity of the
variance.



(Prior Code, § 24-708)



(Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.156  SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Authority.  The Board of Adjustment shall have the authority
to grant special exceptions, in accordance with the provisions of this code
and the procedures and standards hereinafter set forth, to permit:



      (1)   The reconstruction of a nonconforming structure when the
structure has been damaged or destroyed to the extent of more than 50% of the
fair market value of the structure, or the restoration, repair or renovation
of a nonconforming structure when the structure has been damaged by less than
50% of its fair market value where no building permit has been previously
automatically issued for the restoration, repair or renovation within six
months from the date of damage as permitted under this code; or



      (2)   Any nonconformity which is nonconforming solely because
of failure to comply with regulations governing parking, screening,
landscaping or lighting, to continue as a special exception, subject to the
procedures in this subchapter and subject to conditions which may be imposed
by the Board.



(Prior Code, § 24-716)



   (B)   Initiation.  The owner or other person having a contractual
interest in the property which is the site of the proposed special exception
may initiate a request for a special exception.



(Prior Code, § 24-717)



   (C)   Standards for special exceptions.  Special exceptions may not
be granted unless the Board makes written findings based directly upon the
particular evidence presented to it which support written conclusions that
the granting of the special exception will not be materially detrimental or
injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the
subject property is located, nor impair an adequate supply of light or air to
adjacent property, substantially increase the congestion in the public
streets, increase the danger of fire, endanger the public health, safety and
well-being, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood.



(Prior Code, § 24-718)



   (D)   Application.  An application for a special exception shall be
filed with the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment according to rules of
procedure adopted from time to time by the Board and shall be accompanied by
a nonrefundable fee as prescribed in the rules of procedure, to defray
administrative costs.



(Prior Code, § 24-719)



   (E)   Action of Board.  The Board shall hold a hearing on a special
exception as soon as practical after a complete application for a special
exception is filed, pursuant to the procedures of the Board.



(Prior Code, § 24-720)



   (F)   Conditions attached to special exceptions.  The Board may
attach conditions to the grant of a special exception, including landscaping,
lighting, hours of operation, parking or other reasonable conditions which
will minimize the impact of the exception on the surrounding neighborhood.
That Board shall provide for the duration of the special exception.



(Prior Code, § 24-721) 



(Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.157  NONCONFORMITIES.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to regulate and
limit the continued existence of uses, lots and structures in nonresidential
districts established prior to the enactment of this chapter which do not
conform to the provisions of this chapter. Many nonconformities may continue,
but the provisions of this division are designed to curtail substantial
investment in nonconformities and to bring about their eventual elimination,
where appropriate, in order to preserve the integrity of the zoning
districts. Nonconforming uses, lots and structures in residential districts
may continue and are not subject to termination under any provision of this
division; however, nonconformities in residential districts may not be
enlarged, changed or modified unless the same are done in accordance with
other provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 24-731)



   (B)   Nonconforming uses and structures.



      (1)   Authority to continue. Nonconforming uses of land and
nonconforming uses of structures may continue in accordance with the
provisions of this section.



      (2)   Ordinary repair and maintenance. Normal maintenance and
repair of nonconforming uses may be performed.



      (3)   Extensions. Nonconforming uses shall not be extended.
This prohibition shall be construed so as to prevent the:



         (a)   Enlargement of nonconforming uses by additions to
the structure in which the nonconforming uses are located; and



         (b)   Occupancy of additional land.



      (4)   Relocation. A structure housing a nonconforming use may
not be moved unless the use shall thereafter conform to the limitations of
the zoning district into which it is moved.



      (5)   Change in use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed
to any other use unless the use conforms to the provisions of this chapter.



      (6)   Termination.



         (a)   Abandonment or discontinuance.



            1.   Where a nonconforming use of land is
discontinued or abandoned for six months, then the use may not be
reestablished or resumed, and any subsequent use must conform to the
provisions of this chapter.



            2.   Where a nonconforming use of s structure is
discontinued or abandoned for 12 months, then the use may not be
reestablished or resumed and any subsequent use must conform to the
provisions of this chapter.



         (b)   Damage or destruction. If a structure housing a
nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by 50% or more of the fair market
value of the structure, then the structure may be restored by special
exception granted by the Board. No permit other than a building permit shall
be required for the restoration, repair or renovation of a nonconforming
structure which has been damaged by less than 50% of the fair market value of
the structure. However, no building permit shall be automatically issued for
the restoration, repair or renovation after the expiration of six months from
the date of the damage unless a special exception shall be granted by the
Board of Adjustment.



         (c)   Discontinuance required. The Board may require the
discontinuance of nonconforming uses of land or structures in a
nonresidential district or a nonresidential use in a residential district,
under any plan whereby the full value of the structure and facilities can be
amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the
general character of the neighborhood and the necessity of all property to
conform to the regulations of this chapter. All actions to discontinue a
nonconforming use of land and structure shall be taken with due regard for
the property rights of the persons affected when considered in light of the
public welfare and character of the area surrounding the designated
nonconforming use and the conservation and preservation of property. The
Board shall, from time to time, on its own motion or upon cause presented by
interested property owners, inquire into the existence, continuation or
maintenance of any nonconforming use within the city.



(Prior Code, § 24-732)



   (C)   Nonconforming accessory uses and structures.  No
nonconforming accessory use or structure shall continue after the principal
structure or use shall have ceased or terminated, unless the structure or use
shall thereafter conform to the provisions of the zoning district in which it
is located.



(Prior Code, § 24-733) 



(Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.158  APPEALS.



   (A)   Authority.  The Board of Adjustment shall have the authority
to hear and decide appeals from any decision, determination or interpretation
by any administrative official with respect to the procedures hereinafter set
forth.



(Prior Code, § 24-741)



   (B)   Initiation and application.  An application for an appeal may
be initiated by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department or board
of the municipality affected, by any orders, decision, determination or
interpretation of any administrative official with respect to the provisions
of this chapter. The application for appeal shall be filed with the Secretary
of the Board of Adjustment according to rules of procedure adopted from time
to time by the Board and shall be accompanied by a fee as prescribed in the
rules of procedure to defray administrative costs.



(Prior Code, § 24-742)



   (C)   Procedures.  A notice of appeal in prescribed form must be
filed with the Secretary of the Board and with the office or department
rendering the decision, determination or interpretation which is the subject
of the appeal, within 15 days of the decision, determination or
interpretation. The filing of this notice of appeal will require the Building
Official or other city department to forward to the Board any and all records
concerning the subject matter of the appeal. Failure to file the appeal shall
constitute a waiver of any rights under this chapter to appeal any
interpretation or determination made by the administrative official.



(Prior Code, § 24-743)



   (D)   Effect of filing an appeal.  The filing of a notice of appeal
shall stay any proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless
the Building Official or other administrative official rendering the
decision, determination or interpretation certifies in writing to the Board
and the applicant that a stay poses an imminent peril to life or property, in
which case the appeal will not stay further proceedings. The Board may review
the certification and grant or deny a stay of the proceedings.



(Prior Code, § 24-744)



   (E)   Action of the Board.  The Board of Adjustment shall hold a
hearing on an appeal as soon as practical after a notice of appeal is filed.
The failure of the Board to act within a reasonable time shall not deprive it
of jurisdiction of the matter. The Board may reverse, affirm or modify the
decision, determination or interpretation appealed from and in so modifying
the decision, determination or interpretation, the Board shall be deemed to
have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken, including
the power to impose reasonable conditions to be complied with by the
applicant.



(Prior Code, § 24-745) 



(Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



PLANNED DEVELOPMENT AMENDMENTS



§ 153.170  AMENDMENTS ADOPTED.



   Planned development amendments approved after the final adoption of
this chapter can be found in the City Clerk’s office.



(Prior Code, Ch. 24, Art. VIII)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



SPECIFIC USE AMENDMENTS



§ 153.180  AMENDMENTS AND PERMITS ADOPTED.



   Specific use amendments approved after the final adoption of this
chapter can be found in the City Clerk’s office.



(Prior Code, Ch. 24, Art. IX)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



SIGNS



§ 153.190  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide uniform sign
standards which promote a positive city image reflecting order, harmony and
pride, thereby strengthening the economic stability of the city's business,
cultural and residential areas.



   (B)   Objectives to be pursued in applying specific standards are as
follows:



      (1)   To identify individual business, residential and public
uses without creating confusion, unsightliness or visual obscurity of
adjacent uses;



      (2)   To assure that the size, scale, height and location of
all signs are directly related to the size and character of the sites upon
which the signs are located and to further assure compatibility of all the
signs, including the design features herein specified, with existing land
uses on adjacent properties; and



      (3)   To assure that all signs, sign supports and sign bases
shall be so constructed and designed to provide for safety and for design
compatibility with the development site; where possible, the materials used,
the form, color, lighting and design should be similar to the materials used
in the development.



(Prior Code, § 24-1001)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.191  DEFINITIONS.



   The terms and provisions of this subchapter shall be interpreted in
accordance with the definitions set out in §§ 153.015 and 153.016 of this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 24-1002)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.192  ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITY.



   The Mayor of the city shall designate a member of the city's staff who
shall have the responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this
subchapter. References herein made to the performance of certain functions by
the city shall be deemed references to performance by the Mayor's designee.
The duties of the designee shall include not only the issuance of permits as
required by this subchapter but also the responsibility of ensuring that all
signs conform with this subchapter and with any other applicable laws,
requirements and regulations of this code of ordinances or of the city and
that all signs for which permits are required do in fact have permits. The
Mayor or his or her designee shall have the authority to adopt regulations
and procedures not inconsistent with the terms of this chapter, necessary to
implement the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 24-1003)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.193  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish,
equip, use or maintain any sign or structure in the city, or cause or permit
the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of
this subchapter. The regulations of this subchapter are not intended to
permit any violation of the provisions of any other lawful ordinance or
regulation of the city.



(Prior Code, § 24-1004)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985) 
Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.194  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   All signs, other than address identification signs, shall
pertain to the identification of the primary uses, by name of the occupant or
business, and/or primary services provided or primary products sold on the
premises, except for auxiliary and public information signs as hereinafter
provided.



   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, a permit shall be obtained
from the city for a proposed sign. No permit shall be issued except to the
owner, occupant or a bonded sign contractor.



   (C)   Where applicable, a sign shall, at the time the sign is
permitted, meet all requirements of Chapter 150 of the code of ordinances of
the city and any other applicable requirements of that code.



   (D)   All signs, including those painted on the walls of buildings,
shall be permanently maintained in a safe, presentable condition. All signs
shall be kept in good repair and, unless of galvanized or non-corroding metal
or treated with appropriate wood preservative, shall be thoroughly painted as
often as is necessary, consistent with good maintenance. All braces, bolts,
clips, supporting frames and fastenings shall be free from deterioration,
termite infestation, rot or loosening. All signs shall further be maintained
in compliance with any additional requirements for signs as are specified in
Chapter 150 of the code of ordinances of the city and any other applicable
requirements of the code.



   (E)   No sign shall project over any property line.



   (F)   Every business location shall be adequately identified by a
street address, i.e. street numbers and/or name, which is clearly visible
from the street adjacent to the front entrance of the business. However, the
area of a sign which is erected for a sole purpose of providing the street
address identification shall not be subtracted from or count against the
total allowable sign area requirements for the several districts as
hereinafter specified in this subchapter. Further, the street address
identification may be incorporated into any sign permitted under the terms
and provisions of this subchapter so long as the street address
identification does not increase the maximum allowable sign area of any sign
by more than 10% or does not constitute more than 10% of the actual sign
area. The incorporation of the street address identification shall not change
the height or setback requirements from the maximums or minimums allowable
for the sign prior to incorporation thereof.



   (G)   No more than 25% of the sign area of a multi-party sign may be
devoted to secondary uses or products sold on the premises.



(Prior Code, § 24-1005)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.195  SIGNS EXEMPTED FROM PERMITS.



   No permit shall be required for the following non-illuminated signs,
which signs meet the number, size and design specifications as hereinafter
set out in this subchapter:



   (A)   Signs indicating only the name and/or address of the occupants
of residential units, or the address of any commercial structure or business;



   (B)   Realty signs located on private property in residential use;



   (C)   Political signs located on private property in residential use
or on property in commercial/office use, for the purpose of advocating
certain political candidates or propositions for a specific identifiable date
certain election;



   (D)   Auxiliary or informational signs placed in windows or flat
against the walls of buildings in commercial/office use;



   (E)   Temporary business promotional signs placed in or on windows
of structures in commercial/office use; or



   (F)   Community service signs placed in or on windows of structures
in commercial/office use, or in the yards of structures or directly on
structures in residential use or in residential districts.



(Prior Code, § 24-1006)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.196  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   The following signs shall be prohibited in all zoning districts:



   (A)   All signs, other than address identification signs, which do
not identify the primary uses, by name of the occupant or business, or the
primary services provided or products sold on premises, except for auxiliary
and public information signs as hereinafter provided;



   (B)   Appendages which have flashing, blinking or traveling lights
to primary signs;



   (C)   Moving message signs;



   (D)   Signs or posters of miscellaneous character, not otherwise
regulated, which are tacked, painted, pasted or otherwise affixed and visible
from any public right-of-way or pedestrian passageway or plaza, located on
the walls of buildings or sheds, on trees, poles, posts, fences or other
structures;



   (E)   (1)   Banners, pennants, searchlights, twirling signs,
sandwich or "A" frame signs, or any other advertising sign of a similar
nature, located anywhere upon the development site or upon the sidewalk, curb
or right-of-way adjacent to the development site.



      (2)   Exceptions:



         (a)   Banners, pennants and searchlights shall be
permitted for a period not to exceed 30 days for grand openings, for which a
written permit shall be obtained from the city; and



         (b)   Banners and pennants, for which a written permit
shall be obtained from the city, shall be permitted for special promotions
and/or sales, provided that the same shall not be permitted for more than two
separate promotional and/or sales events in a calendar year or for a
cumulative number of days in excess of 30 during the calendar year.



   (F)   (1)   Flags, other than flags of any nation, state or
political subdivision.



      (2)   Exception: One flag of a standard customary size which
shows an emblem or logo of a firm or corporation shall be permitted, provided
all other regulations of this subchapter are met.



   (G)   Any signs which resemble official traffic-control signs,
signals or devices, which bear the words "Stop," "Go Slow," "Caution,"
"Danger," "Warning" or similar words;



   (H)   Signs which, by reason of their size, location, movement,
content, coloring or manner of illumination, may be confused with or
construed as traffic-control signs, signals or devices, or the lights of an
emergency or road equipment vehicle, or which hide from view any
traffic-control or street signs, signals or devices;



   (I)   (1)   Any sign or advertising device attached to or located
on any vehicle or trailer parked on a public right-of-way, on public property
or on private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way, the
basic purpose of which sign or advertising device is to provide advertisement
of products or to direct people to a business or activity located on the same
property or other property or premises.



      (2)   Exception: This division (I) shall not be construed so
as to prohibit typical vehicular signage such as is lettered on a commercial
vehicle.



   (J)   Portable or wheeled signs;



   (K)   Any sign which emits audible sound, odor or visible matter;



   (L)   Billboards;



   (M)   Signs pertaining to construction on residential property upon
which the signs are located;



   (N)   Roof signs;



   (O)   Revolving signs;



   (P)   Free-standing signs, other than free-standing monument signs,
except as hereinafter specifically permitted in business districts for
property fronting U.S. Highway 59; and



   (Q)   Electronic signs, except as hereinafter specifically permitted
in business districts for property fronting U.S. Highway 59.



(Prior Code, § 24-1007)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Ord.
2015-01, passed 1-27-2015)



§ 153.197  SIGNS; RESIDENTIAL.



   The following regulations shall apply for signs located on property in
residential use or institutional use:



   (A)   Signs indicating only the name and/or address of the occupant
shall be permitted for each residential unit;



   (B)   One unlighted sign, not exceeding eight square feet in area,
including any and all appendages, pertaining to the prospective sale or
rental of the property upon which the sign is located, shall be permitted on
each development site; two such signs shall be permitted on corner lots;



   (C)   One unlighted institutional sign, not exceeding 40 square feet
in area, shall be permitted per street frontage;



   (D)   Unlighted political signs advocating certain political
candidates or propositions for a specific identifiable date certain election,
each not exceeding five square feet in area, shall be permitted, provided
that the signs shall be removed within five days following the date of the
election which is the subject of the signs.



      (1)   Political signs may be posted at any time so long as it
is within 30 days of the date of the election to which the signs pertain; and



      (2)   Political signs affixed to billboards shall be removed
within 20 days after the date of the election or the event for which the sign
is placed.  Other political signs shall be removed within ten days following
the date of the election, which date is the subject of the sign.



(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007)



   (E)   One sign, not exceeding 32 square feet in area and ten feet in
height, pertaining to the construction and identity of a new residential
subdivision, shall be permitted upon private property within the subdivision,
provided that the sign shall be removed promptly upon sale by the
builder/developer, or his, her or its agent, of the last remaining
residential unit in the subdivision; however, no such sign shall be permitted
for any sale or resale whatsoever by the builder/developer, or his, her or
its agent, in the subdivision, other than the first sale of the residential
unit(s), which is finally and lawfully consummated and closed;



   (F)   Signs, having a maximum sign size of five square feet, shall
be permitted for garage sales on the property where the sale is being held,
announcing the sale; and



   (G)   Unlighted community service signs, having a maximum sign size
of 15 square feet shall be permitted.



   (H)   One flagpole not exceeding 25 feet in height containing one
flag with an effective area not exceeding 24 square feet.



(Prior Code, § 24-1008)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985; Am. Ord.
2011-18, passed 6-28-2011)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.198  SIGNS; COMMERCIAL/OFFICE.



   The following regulations shall apply for signs located on property in
institutional use or commercial/office use.



   (A)   Area. The total area of all signs shall not exceed one and
one-half square feet for each linear foot of lot frontage on the principal or
fronting street or streets.



   (B)   Wall signs. Signs which are placed flat against and parallel
to the building wall and project no more than two feet perpendicular from the
wall of a building shall be permitted, provided that the signs shall not
project vertically above the wall of a building; no more than 10% of any wall
shall be devoted to signs.



   (C)   Canopy signs. Canopy signs shall be permitted as follows:



      (1)   Signs which are attached to the front or roof of a
canopy and parallel to the front wall of the building shall be counted as a
part of, and limited to, the 10% permitted for wall signs; no canopy sign
shall project beyond the overall width of the canopy or above the roof line
of the canopy; and



      (2)   Signs placed on the sides of a projecting canopy shall
not project beyond the front line of the canopy and shall not project above
the roof line of the canopy; the vertical dimension of the signs shall not
exceed three feet.



   (D)   Sloping or mansard roof signs. Sloping or mansard roof signs
shall be permitted and shall be counted as part of, and limited to, the 10%
permitted for wall signs; a sign may be placed on the sloping roof of a
structure, provided the sign does not project horizontally beyond the roof
line or vertically above the roof line.



   (E)   Free-standing signs. Free-standing signs shall be permitted
for property fronting U.S. Highway 59, which are in institutional use or
commercial/office use, as follows:



      (1)   Number.



         (a)   One free-standing sign shall be permitted for each
free-standing building.



         (b)   Exception: Whenever the free-standing building
shall be located on a corner lot, having frontage on both U.S. Highway 59 and
any other public street or streets within the city, free-standing signs shall
be permitted in a number equal to the number of streets upon which the corner
lot has frontage, provided that the signs shall be placed only along and
adjacent to U.S. Highway 59, and further provided that the lot has sufficient
frontage, in linear feet, along U.S. Highway 59 to place the signs in
compliance with the spacing requirements hereinafter set out.



      (2)   Design. All the signs, sign supports and sign bases
shall be designed and constructed so as to reflect designed compatibility
with the development or structure as provided in this subchapter;



      (3)   Area. The area of a free-standing sign shall not exceed
an amount equal to 0.50 square feet per front foot of lot, and in no case
shall the area exceed 800 square feet; to compute the allowable square
footage of sign area, only one side, one face of a sign, shall be measured;



      (4)   Height. For lots with frontage of nine to 99 feet, sign
height shall not exceed five feet; for lots with frontage of 100 feet or
more, sign height shall not exceed five feet plus one foot of height for each
ten feet of lot frontage; in no case shall sign height exceed 65 feet;



      (5)   Setback.



         1.   Setbacks shall be a minimum of ten feet and a
maximum of 50 feet; and



         2.   On corner lots, no sign shall be placed within the
visibility triangle, as that term is defined in this chapter.



      (6)   Spacing. Subject to the setback requirements herein
specified, free-standing signs may be placed at any point along the
property's U.S. Highway 59 frontage, provided that no free-standing sign
shall be closer than 40 feet to any other freestanding sign which is located
either on the same lot or on any adjacent lot.



   (F)   Free-standing signs (monument). Free-standing signs (monument)
shall be permitted as follows:



      (1)   Number. One free-standing sign (monument) shall be
permitted for the first 150 linear feet of street frontage, and one
additional free-standing sign (monument) shall be permitted for each
additional 100 linear feet or part thereof, provided that the maximum number
of signs per development site shall be five, and further provided that all
the signs, sign supports and sign bases are designed and constructed so as to
reflect design compatibility with the development or structure as provided in
this subchapter;



      (2)   Area. The free-standing (monument) sign shall not have a
display surface area in excess of 100 square feet;



      (3)   Height. The free-standing (monument) sign shall have a
maximum height of ten feet;



      (4)   Setback. Setbacks shall be a minimum of seven feet from
the front lot line and a minimum of 25 feet from side lot lines; and



      (5)   Spacing. Signs shall be a minimum of 100 linear feet
apart on any one lot.



   (G)   Auxiliary or informational signs. Additional signs, not
exceeding ten square feet in total area per business entity, indicating
pricing, trading stamps, credit cards accepted, official notices of services
required by law or trade affiliations, or general information may be placed
in a window or flat against the wall of a building, which additional signs
shall not be counted against total permitted sign area.



   (H)   Temporary construction site, for sale and rental signs. In
addition to such other signs as may be permitted upon a development site
under the terms and provisions of this subchapter, temporary construction
site, for sale or rental signs, not exceeding 32 square feet in area and ten
feet in height, may be placed upon a development site, provided that no more
than one sign shall be constructed along the site frontage, except that where
a lot is located at the intersection of two or three major thoroughfares,
such a sign shall be permitted on each major thoroughfare or, in the
alternative, one sign, of the same size height, may be placed on the corner,
provided it is not within the visibility triangle.



   (I)   Political signs. Unlighted political signs advocating certain
political candidates or propositions for a specific identifiable date certain
election, each not exceeding five square feet in area, shall be permitted,
provided that the signs shall be removed within five days following the date
of the election which is the subject of the signs.



      (1)   Political signs may be posted at any time so long as it
is within 30 days of the date of the election to which the signs pertain; and



      (2)   Political signs affixed to billboards shall be removed
within 20 days after the date of the election or the event for which the sign
is placed.  Other political signs shall be removed within ten days following
the date of the election, which date is the subject of the sign.



(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007)



   (J)   Governmental signs (public works, public services). Signs, not
exceeding 32 square feet in area and not exceeding ten feet in height,
indicating public works projects, public services or programs conducted by
local, state or federal agencies, shall be permitted.



   (K)   Temporary business promotional signs. Temporary business
promotional signs shall only be placed in or on windows and shall have a
combined area not exceeding 10% of the area of all the windows on the same
wall; the sign area shall not be counted against total permitted sign area.



   (L)   Community service signs. Community service signs for seasonal
celebrations shall have no size limitation if placed in or on windows;
community service signs not of a seasonal celebration nature shall be placed
in or on windows and shall have a combined area not exceeding 10% of the area
of all the windows on the same wall. The sign area shall not be counted
against the total permitted sign area.



   (M)   Traffic-control signs.



      (1)   Privately erected traffic-control signs, located upon
private property and not upon dedicated public rights-of-way, except as
otherwise provided in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted
by the city, shall not exceed five feet in height or five square feet in area.



      (2)   Exception: This limitation shall not be deemed to apply
to clearance bars located over entrances to private parking areas.



(Prior Code, § 24-1009)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



   (N)   Electronic signs. Electronic signs shall be permitted for
property fronting U.S. Highway 59, which are in institutional use or
commercial/office use, as follows:



      (1)   Number.



         (a)   One electronic sign shall be permitted for each
free-standing building.



         (b)   Exception. Whenever the free-standing building
shall be located on a corner lot, having frontage on both U.S. Highway 59 and
any other public street or streets within the city, electronic signs shall be
permitted in a number equal to the number of streets upon which the corner
lot has frontage, provided that the signs shall be placed only along and
adjacent to U.S. Highway 59, and further provided that the lot has sufficient
frontage, in linear feet, along U.S. Highway 59 to place the signs in
compliance with the spacing requirements hereinafter set out.



         (c)   Each electronic message sign shall count as a
free-standing sign for purposes of determining the number of free-standing
signs permitted under this section.



      (2)   Design.



         (a)   All electronic signs, sign supports and sign bases
shall be designed and constructed so as to reflect designed compatibility
with the development or structure as provided in this subchapter, and are
subject to review and approval by the city.



         (b)   All electronic signs shall have a sign appendage
identifying the institutional use or commercial/office use as being located
in the City of Meadows Place, which sign appendage is subject to review and
approval of by the city.



      (3)   Area. The area of an electronic sign shall not exceed an
amount equal to 125 square feet per front foot of lot, and in no case shall
the area exceed 425 square feet; to compute the allowable square footage of
sign area, only one side, one face of a sign, shall be measured;



      (4)   Height. For lots with frontage of nine to 99 feet, sign
height shall not exceed five feet; for lots with frontage of 100 feet or
more, sign height shall not exceed five feet plus one foot of height for each
ten feet of lot frontage; in no case shall sign height exceed 65 feet;



      (5)   Location. The location of the electronic sign on the
property, including but not limited to setback and spacing, shall be subject
to review and approval by the city.



      (6)   Brightness. Electronic message signs shall not exceed a
maximum brightness of 6.20 lux between sunrise and sunset, and a maximum
brightness of 1.81 lux between sunset and sunrise, as measured from the
nearest public street. For purposes of this section, the term “lux” shall
mean the SI unit of illuminance, equal to one lumen per square meter, as
measured by a device designed and calibrated to measure in such units.



      (7)   Advertising.



         (a)   All advertising messages displayed on an
electronic sign shall be a static, and may change periodically provided that
transitions between messages are instantaneous and occur no more frequently
than the Texas Department of Transportation Standards.



         (b)   Upon request by the city, the city shall be
allowed to display one advertising message on the electronic sign per hour at
no cost.



   (O)   On flagpole not exceeding 70 feet in height containing one
flag with an effective area not exceeding 96 square feet.



(Ord. 2005-06, passed 1-25-2005; Am. Ord. 2011-18, passed 6-28-2011; Am. Ord.
2015-01, passed 1-27-2015)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.199  STOP ORDERS; REVOCATION OF PERMIT; REPAIR OR REMOVAL REQUIRED.



   The city shall have the power to issue stop orders, to require the
repair or removal of certain signs and/or to revoke sign permits, as provided
in this section. In so doing, the city shall comply with all procedural
requirements specified in Chapter 150 of this code of ordinances for the
giving of notice, the issuance of orders, the removal of signs and storage
and/or sale thereof by the city, and the conduct of hearings on permit
revocations.



   (A)   Stop orders.



      (1)   If the city shall determine that work on any sign is
being performed in a dangerous or unsafe manner, upon written notice and
issuance of a stop order by the city, the work shall be immediately stopped.
The notice shall be given to the owner of the property or to his or her
agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under
which work may be resumed. However, where an emergency exists, written notice
shall not be required.



      (2)   Following the issuance of a stop order, the city shall
initiate proceedings to revoke any permit issued for the work covered by the
stop order unless the cause of the stop order is resolved to the city's
satisfaction.



   (B)   Revocation of permit. The city shall have, and is hereby
granted, the power and authority to revoke any and all licenses or permits
authorized by this code for violation of the terms and provisions of this
code, subject to the procedural requirements of the code for notice and
hearing.



   (C)   Repair or removal required. The city is authorized to require
the repair or removal of signs within the city under the following
conditions. Should the responsible party or parties fail or refuse, after due
notice, to bring a sign into conformity with this code or to remove the same,
the city is authorized to remove the sign and to store and dispose of the
same in accordance with the procedural requirements of this code of
ordinances.



      (1)   Signs erected without permit. In the event any sign
shall be erected within the city without a permit, when the sign shall
require a permit, the city is authorized to remove the sign and to store and
dispose of the same in accordance with the procedural requirements of this
code of ordinances.



      (2)   Abandoned or damaged signs. All signs or supports
relating to an abandoned or discontinued business shall be removed within 90
days from the date of discontinuance. Damaged signs shall be repaired or
removed within 90 days of receipt of notification from the city; provided
further, that an abandoned sign maintained in a state of good repair may be
permitted by the city to remain for a period not to exceed an additional 90
days.



      (3)   Signs not properly maintained. If the city shall
determine that any sign is not being maintained as required by the terms and
provisions of this code, the city shall give written notice to the owner or
lessee thereof to so maintain the sign or to remove the sign.



      (4)   Unsafe signs. Should any sign, in the opinion of the
city, become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe, the city
shall give written notice of the condition of the sign to the person owning,
leasing or responsible for the sign; and the person so notified shall correct
the unsafe condition in a manner approved by the city and in conformity with
the provisions of this code. However, where an emergency exists, written
notice shall not be required.



      (5)   Unlawful signs. Should any sign be installed, erected,
constructed or maintained in violation of any of the terms of this code, the
city shall give written notice to the owner, lessee or person responsible for
the sign, ordering that the sign be altered so as to comply with this code or
to remove the sign.



(Prior Code, § 24-1010)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.200  VARIANCES AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.



   Applications for variances and special exceptions from the terms and
provisions of this subchapter shall be heard by the Board of Adjustment
pursuant to the provisions of §§ 153.155 through 153.158. In addition to
the provisions of § 153.156, providing requirements and procedures for the
granting of special exceptions, the Board of Adjustment may further grant a
special exception from the terms and provisions of this subchapter if strict
adherence to those terms and provisions would result in a sign that is hidden
or obscured from a person's field of vision when in a motor vehicle
approaching and/or passing the street frontage of the property upon which the
sign is located.



(Prior Code, § 24-1011)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



§ 153.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who violates or causes, allows or permits another
to violate § 153.080 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not more than $500.  Each
occurrence of any violation of § 153.080 shall constitute a separate
offense.  Each day on which any violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 8-24-2010)



   (C)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of § 153.110
shall be punished by a fine of up to $2,000 pursuant to Chapter 54 of the
Tex. Local Government Code, § 54.001(b). Each day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.



   (D)   Any person who violates or causes, allows, or permits another
to violated any provision of §§ 153.081, 153.094 through 153.096, 153.197
or 153.198 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,000.  Each
occurrence of any such violation of §§ 153.081, 153.094 through 153.096,
153.197 or 153.198 shall constitute a separate offense.  Each day on which
any such violation of §§ 153.081, 153.094 through 153.096, 153.197 or
153.198 occurs shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 4-27-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-11, passed 5-22-2012)



APPENDIX A: ILLUSTRATIONS



   (A)   Landscaping of surface parking areas. See map with printed
copy of the code of ordinances of the city in the office of the City
Secretary.



(Prior Code, § 24-A-1)



   (B)   Landscaped berms along public rights-of-way. See map with
printed copy of the code of ordinances of the city in the office of the City
Secretary.



(Prior Code, § 24-A-2) 



(Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



APPENDIX B: ANGLES OF ELEVATION



   (A)   No building located upon any lot or parcel of land having
frontage on U.S. Highway 59 shall be located within 60 feet of an abutting or
adjacent residential lot line, whether the lot be zoned residential or in
residential use. Buildings located within 200 feet of any such residential
lot line may be constructed to a height of 30 feet. The height of any
buildings located beyond 200 feet from any such residential lot line shall be
determined by the projection of a ten-degree angle of elevation extending
from the residential lot line upward to the east, as depicted on the
illustration hereinafter set out.



   (B)   No building located upon any lot or parcel of land having
frontage on either West Airport Boulevard or Kirkwood Road shall be located
within 60 feet of an abutting or adjacent residential lot line, whether the
lot be zoned residential or in residential use. Buildings located within 200
feet of any the residential lot line may be constructed to a height of 30
feet. Buildings located 200 feet from any the residential lot line may be
constructed to a height of 60 feet, and the height of any buildings located
beyond 200 feet from any such residential lot line shall be determined by the
projection of a 17-degree angle of elevation extending from the residential
lot line upward to the south, as depicted on the illustration hereinafter set
out.



   (C)   See drawing with printed copy of the code of ordinances of the
city in the office of the City Secretary.







 



   Height Limitations



(Prior Code, § 24-B-1)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



APPENDIX C:  AFFIDAVIT OF POSTING; CERTIFICATE OF ZONING OFFICIAL.




AFFIDAVIT OF POSTING




STATE OF TEXAS



COUNTY OF FORT BEND



   BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared
the undersigned Affiant who, after being by me first duly sworn, on his or
her oath stated that he or she is the applicant before the
____________________________________ of the City of Meadows Place or is a
duly authorized Affiant for a corporate or joint applicant, and that he or
she has actually physically posted, in a manner in which the same is plainly
and clearly visible to any persons traveling by or observing from a public
street or public way, the property located at
______________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________,
being the same property which is the subject of an application before the
above named body.



   Affiant further stated that he or she will do everything in his or her
power to cause this sign to remain posted upon said property for a period of
at least 15 days prior to the commencement of the public hearing.



                     _________________________



                     Affiant



   SWORN TO AND SUBSCRIBED TO before me this, the _____________ day of
_____, A.D. 20____.



                     ______________________________



                     Notary Public in and for



                     Fort Bend County, Texas



                     My Commission Expires:__________




CERTIFICATE OF ZONING OFFICIAL




   I, the undersigned, being the Zoning Official of the City of Meadows
Place or designee as appointed by the Mayor of the City of Meadows Place in
the absence of the Zoning Official, do certify that I have examined the sign
required under the provisions of § 153.135 of the Code of Ordinances of the
City of                         , and on the ________ day
of_____________, 20_____, have observed the same as having been duly posted
at ___________________________in compliance with § 153.135 of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Meadows Place.



                     _________________________



                     Zoning Official/Designee



(Prior Code, § 24-C-1)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)



APPENDIX D: OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP



   See map with printed copy of the code of ordinances of the city in the
office of the City Secretary.



(Prior Code, § 24-D-1)  (Ord. 85-036, §§ 1-2, passed 12-5-1985)


CHAPTER 154:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   154.01   Purpose
   154.02   Definitions
   154.03   Classifications of sexually oriented businesses
   154.04   License required
   154.05   Issuance of license
   154.06   Fees
   154.07   Inspection of premises
   154.08   Expiration of license
   154.09   Suspension of license
   154.10   Revocation of license
   154.11   Appeal
   154.12   Transfer of license
   154.13   Location of sexually oriented businesses
   154.14   Exemptions from location restrictions
   154.15   Additional regulations for adult motels
   154.16   Conduct in adult arcades or adult mini-theaters
 
   154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01  PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Meadows Place, and to establish reasonable and uniform rules and regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City of Meadows Place. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any premises that is subject to regulation under Chapter 243 of the Tex. Local Government Code, as amended, to which members of the public or members of any club, group or association are admitted and permitted to use one or more arcade devices on the premises.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment that as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, CDs, DVDs, Blue-rays, or any other medium, or other visual representations that depict or describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or
      (2)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with “specified sexual activities".
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, including topless dancers, nude dancers or strippers, male or female; or
      (2)   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities”; or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, CDs, DVDs, Blue-rays, or any other medium, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas".
   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, CDs, DVDs, Blue-rays, or any other medium, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, CDs, DVDs, Blue-rays, or any other medium, or similar photographic reproductions are shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas".
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities".
   ARCADE DEVICE. Any coin or slug-operated or electronically or mechanically controlled machine or device that dispenses or effectuates the dispensing of entertainment, that is intended for the viewing of five or fewer persons in exchange for any payment of any consideration. Arcade device shall also mean an anthropomorphic device or object that is utilized for entertainment with one or more persons.
   CHILD CARE FACILITY. A building used as a day nursery, children’s boarding home, child placement agency, religious or charitable encampment for children or any other place for the care or custody of children under 16 years of age.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The City of Meadows Place’s Code Enforcement Officer.
   ENTERTAINMENT shall mean:
      (1)   Any live exhibition, display or performance;
      (2)   Any still picture(s) or movie picture(s), whether mechanically, electrically or electronically displayed;
      (3)   Any combination of the foregoing, in which the specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities are depicted; or
      (4)   Use of an arcade device for any specified sexual activities.
   ESCORT. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date "for another person", or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
   ESCORT AGENCY. A person who, or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
   NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY:
      (1)   The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or
      (2)   A state of dress that fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast.
   OPERATES or CAUSES TO BE OPERATED. To cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operating a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
   PLACES OF WORSHIP. A building in which persons regularly assemble for worship, intended primarily for purposes connected with faith, or for propagating a particular form of belief.
   RESIDENTIAL AREA. A single family, duplex, townhouse, multiple family or mobile home or area so designated by such uses.
   RESIDENTIAL USE. Property used or intended for use as a dwelling.
   SCHOOL. Any public or private learning center, elementary school, secondary school, junior college, community college, college, university or other center for post-secondary education.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolas of the female breasts, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Human genitals.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (3), above; or
      (5)   Any of the foregoing with an arcade device.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT. Of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 20%, as the floor area existed on the date of the enactment of this chapter.
   TRANSFER or OWNERSHIP or CONTROL. Of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.03  CLASSIFICATIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult arcades;
   (B)   Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
   (C)   Adult cabarets;
   (D)   Adult motels;
   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters;
   (F)   Adult theaters;
   (G)   Escort agencies;
   (H)   Nude model studios;
   (I)   Sexual encounter centers; and
   (J)   Any combination thereof.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.04  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he or she operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license issued by the City of Meadows Place for the particular type of business.
   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the Code Enforcement Officer.
   (C)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law.
   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he or she must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20% or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant.
   (E)   Notice of the application for a license to own or operate a sexually oriented business under this chapter shall be mailed by the City of Meadows Place to all known mailing addresses within the corporate limits of the city and the extraterritorial limits that lie within a 1,000 foot radius of the location for the proposed sexually oriented business. The notice shall include a copy of the application for license.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.05  ISSUANCE OF A LICENSE.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall approve the issuance of a license within 30 days after receipt of an application unless the Code Enforcement Officer finds one or more of the following to be true:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant;
      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or failed to respond to a request for information by the city;
      (4)   An applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter within two years immediately preceding the application;
      (5)   Any fee required by this chapter has not been paid;
      (6)   An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers;
      (7)   An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any provisions of this chapter;
      (8)   An applicant has been convicted of a crime involving any of the following offenses as described in the Texas Penal Code:
         (a)   Prostitution;
         (b)   Promotion of prostitution;
         (c)   Aggravated promotion of prostitution;
         (d)   Compelling prostitution;
         (e)   Obscenity;
         (f)   Sale, distribution, display of harmful material to a minor;
         (g)   Sexual performance by a child;
         (h)   Possession of child pornography;
         (i)   Public lewdness;
         (j)   Indecent exposure; or
         (k)   Indecency with a child.
      (9)   Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault;
      (10)   Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child;
      (11)   Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; for which:
         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction of the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of misdemeanor offense;
         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
         (c)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.
      (12)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant;
      (13)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.06  FEES.
   (A)   The annual fee for a sexually oriented business is $2,000.
   (B)   An applicant for an initial sexually oriented business shall, at the time of making application, pay a nonrefundable fee of $1,000 for the city to conduct a survey to ensure that the proposed sexually oriented business is in compliance with the location restrictions set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.07  INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   (A)   Applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the City of Meadows Place to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
   (B)   A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the City of Meadows Place at any time it is occupied or open for business.
   (C)   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel that are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.08  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in § 154.04. Application for renewal must be made at least 30 days before the expiration date.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.09  SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or agent or employee of a licensee has:
   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with any part of this chapter;
   (B)   Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises;
   (C)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter;
   (D)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or
   (E)   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.10  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in § 154.09 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke a license if he determines that:
      (1)   A license gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer during the application process.
      (2)   A licensee, an agent or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      (3)   A licensee, an agent or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
      (4)   A licensee, an agent or an employee has knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
      (5)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in this chapter for which the required time period has not elapsed;
      (6)   On two or more occasions in a 12-month period, a person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the licensed premises, or a crime listed in § 154.05, for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were agents or employees of the sexually oriented business and the time the offenses were committed;
      (7)   A licensee or agent or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact with or without an individual or an arcade device to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term “sexual contact” shall have the same meaning as it is defined in § 21.01 of the Tex. Penal Code; or
      (8)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the City of Meadows Place for any ad valorem taxes, sales or other taxes related to the sexually oriented business.
   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
   (D)   When the Code Enforcement Officer revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the application may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under § 154.05 have elapsed.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.11  APPEAL.
   If the Code Enforcement Officer denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, the Code Enforcement Officer shall send to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. Upon receipt of written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the licensee shows application for a license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal to the state district court. An appeal to the state district court must be filed within 30 days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer. The licensee shall bear the burden of proof in court.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.12  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a license operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.13  LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of:
      (1)   A place of worship;
      (2)   A public or private elementary or secondary school;
      (3)   A child care facility;
      (4)   A boundary of a residential area;
      (5)   A public park;
      (6)   The property line of a lot devoted to residential use;
      (7)   Any building or structure in which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale;
      (8)   A hospital;
      (9)   A public library;
      (10)   A recreational center;
      (11)   A public swimming pool; or
      (12)   Another sexually oriented business.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if he or she causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or increases the floor area of any sexually oriented business.
   (C)   For the purpose of division (A), measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of the premises listed in (A)(1) through (A)(12).
   (D)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this chapter that is in violation of divisions (A), (B) or (C) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed 12 months, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business is nonconforming.
   (E)   A sexually oriented business shall be prohibited from placing advertisement on any sign or billboard within the corporate city limits or the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction, using risqué language or words that describe or symbolize, metaphorically or otherwise, female breasts, genitalia, or buttocks, or that has sexual suggestions or connotations, or that is sexually provocative or obscene.
   (F)   A sexually oriented business shall be prohibited from placing any screening device that would prevent any entrance from being visible from a public street or from erecting any opaque fencing around the perimeter of the property where the sexually oriented business is located.
   (G)   A sexually oriented business shall be required to maintain adequate lighting at its parking lot and at each entrance and exit door to the building housing the sexually oriented business.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.14  EXEMPTIONS FROM LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   If the Code Enforcement Officer denies the issuance of a license to an application because the location of the sexually oriented business establishment is in violation of any section of this chapter, then the applicant may, not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the Mayor of the City of Meadows Place a written request for an exemption from the location restrictions of this chapter.
   (B)   If the written request is filed with the Mayor within the ten-day limit, the City Council shall consider the request. The Mayor shall set a date for a public hearing within 60 days from the date the written request is received.
   (C)   A hearing by the City of Meadows Place City Council may proceed if a quorum of the City Council is present. The City Council shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply.
   (D)   The City Council may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the location restrictions of this chapter if it makes the following findings:
      (1)   That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare;
      (2)   That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this chapter;
      (3)   That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban or rural blight;
      (4)   That the location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any person of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts or urban renewal of restoration; and
      (5)   That all other applicable provisions of this chapter will be observed.
   (E)   The City Council shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the City Council is final.
   (F)   If the City Council grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the City Council’s action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the location restrictions of this chapter until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption.
   (G)   If the City Council denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the City Council’s action.
   (H)   The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provision of this chapter other than the location restriction.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.15  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS.
   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a reputable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again.
   (C)   For purposes of division (B) of this section, the terms “rent” or sub-rent” mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.16  CONDUCT IN ADULT ARCADES OR ADULT MINI-THEATERS.
   It shall be unlawful for the owners or operator and it shall also be unlawful for any agent or employee present in an adult arcade or adult mini-theater to knowingly allow or permit any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, indecent exposure, lewd conduct or masturbation with or without an individual or an arcade device to occur in the adult arcade or adult mini-theater or to knowingly allow or permit the adult arcade or adult mini-theater to be used as a place in which solicitation for sexual intercourse, sodomy or oral copulation to occur.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 154.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates or causes, allows, or permits another to violate any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,000. Each occurrence of any such violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Each day on which any such violation of this chapter occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under § 154.04(A) and § 154.13 of this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity or semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
      (1)   By a proprietary school licensed by the state of Texas; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
      (3)   In a structure:
         (a)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing;
         (b)   Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and
         (c)   Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at one time.
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecute under § 154.04(A) and § 154.13 of this chapter that each item of descriptive, printed film, or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary artistic political or scientific value.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)

PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Texas Codes





References to Prior Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO TEXAS CODES




ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CODE




 

Statutory Reference
 
Code Section


1.04
 
114.01, 130.51


11.38
 
114.04


61.36
 
114.04


 
 
 



 




CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




 

Statutory Reference
 
Code Section




Chapter 17
 
34.09


Chapter 45
 
34.09


Art. 62.301
 
130.69


Art. 62.351
 
130.69


Art. 102.017
 
34.09


Art. 102.0172
 
34.09


Art. 103.0031
 
34.10


Art. 203
 
34.09


 
 
 




 




FAMILY CODE




 

Statutory Reference
 
Code Section


Ch. 31
 
130.53


51.08
 
130.53


 



 




FINANCE CODE




 

Statutory Reference
 
Code Section


Ch. 393, Subch. G
 
116.02, 116.04, 116.06


393.001
 
116.02


393.601
 
116.02


393.627
 
116.10


 



 




GOVERNMENT CODE




 

Statutory Reference
 
Code Section


Ch. 418
 
33.16


Ch. 552
 
36.01


2001.174
 
150.38


 



 




HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE




 

Statutory Reference
 
Code Section




42.002
 
150.02


247.002
 
150.02


365.012
 
130.03


437.001
 
115.02


Ch. 481
 
130.24, 130.99


481.002
 
130.51


Art. 481.134
 
130.67, 130.68


 
 
 




 




LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE




 

Statutory Reference
 
Code Section




21.001
 
32.04


54.001
 
10.99


54.044
 
150.41


Ch. 211
 
153.002, 153.031, 153.032


Ch. 212
 
152.01, 153.002, 153.016, 153.031


Ch. 212, Subch. B
 
152.06


214.0012
 
150.38


214.101
 
150.11


Ch. 216
 
153.002


Ch. 242
 
153.031


Ch. 284
 
50.02, 50.30, 50.35, 95.02


341.012
 
31.19


341.906
 
130.69


Ch. 551
 
153.031, 153.032


Ch. 552
 
153.032


 
 
 




 




OCCUPANCY CODE




 

Statutory Reference
 
Code Section


Ch. 4153
 
113.45


 



 




PENAL CODE




 

Statutory Reference
 
Code Section




Ch. 9
 
130.52


Art. 20.04
 
130.67


Art. 20A.02
 
130.67


Art. 21.02
 
130.67


Art. 21.08
 
130.67


Art. 21.11
 
130.67


Art. 22.011
 
130.67


Art. 22.021
 
130.67


Art. 25.02
 
130.67


Art. 30.02
 
130.67


38.10
 
34.09


Art. 43.05
 
130.67


Art. 43.25
 
130.67


Art. 43.26
 
130.67


 
 
 




 




REVISED STATUTES




 

Statutory Reference
 
Code Section


9102
 
71.03


 



 




TAX CODE




 

Statutory Reference
 
Code Section


11.233(a)(2)
 
35.02


33.07
 
35.03


33.08
 
35.03


 



 




TRANSPORTATION CODE




 

Statutory Reference
 
Code Section




541.201
 
73.01


543.009
 
34.09


Ch. 544
 
70.02


581.009
 
71.03


681.011
 
71.03


Ch. 683
 
91.067, 91.068, 91.083


 




 




WATER CODE




 

Statutory Reference
 
Code Section


16.315
 
151.01


 



 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code Section
 
2011 Code Section




1-2
 
10.05, 10.11


1-3
 
10.06


1-4
 
10.20


1-7
 
10.06


1-8
 
10.21


1-11
 
10.22


1-12
 
10.23


2-1
 
30.01


2-2
 
30.02


2-3
 
30.15


2-4
 
30.03


2-5
 
30.04


2-6
 
30.30


2-7
 
30.31


2-8
 
30.32


2-9
 
30.33


2-10
 
30.05


2-11
 
30.06


2-12
 
30.07


2-13
 
30.08


2-30
 
30.16


2-31
 
35.01


2-50
 
10.17


2-52
 
10.17


2-53
 
10.17


2-54
 
10.16


2-55
 
10.17


2-80
 
32.01


2-81
 
32.02


2-82
 
32.03


2-83
 
32.04


2-84
 
32.05


2-85
 
32.06


2-100
 
36.01


5-1
 
113.01


5-2
 
113.02


5-11
 
113.15


5-12
 
113.16


5-13
 
113.17


5-14
 
113.18


5-15
 
113.19


5-16
 
113.20


5-17
 
113.21


5-18
 
113.22


5-19
 
113.23


5-20
 
113.24


5-21
 
113.25


5-41
 
113.35


5-42
 
113.36


5-51
 
113.45


5-52
 
113.46


5-53
 
113.47


5-54
 
113.48


5-55
 
113.49


5-56
 
113.50


5-57
 
113.51


5-58
 
113.52


5-59
 
113.53


5-60
 
113.54


5-61
 
113.55


5-62
 
113.56


6-1
 
90.01


6-4
 
90.04


6-5
 
90.05


9-1
 
150.01


9-2
 
150.02


9-4
 
150.04


9-5
 
150.05, 150.99


9-6
 
150.06


9-7
 
150.08


9-9
 
150.10


9-10
 
150.11


9-11
 
150.12


9-50
 
150.25


9-104
 
150.99


9-300
 
150.55


9-301
 
150.56


9-302
 
150.57


9-303
 
150.58


9-304
 
150.59


9-305
 
150.60


9-306
 
150.61


9-307
 
150.62


9-308
 
150.63


9-309
 
150.64


9-310
 
150.65


9-311
 
150.66


9-312
 
150.67


9.5-1
 
92.01


9.5-2
 
92.02


9.5-3
 
92.03


9.5-4
 
92.04


9.5-5
 
92.05


9.5-6
 
92.06


9.5-7
 
92.07


9.5-8
 
92.08


9.5-9
 
92.09


9.5-10
 
92.10


9.5-11
 
92.11


9.5-12
 
92.12


9.5-13
 
92.13


9.5-14
 
92.14


9.5-15
 
92.15


9.5-16
 
92.16


9.5-17
 
92.17


9.5-18
 
92.18


9.5-19
 
92.19


13-2
 
93.01


13-75
 
93.15


13-76
 
93.16


13-77
 
93.17


13-78
 
93.18


13-79
 
93.19


13-80
 
93.20


15-1
 
112.01


15-3
 
112.02


15-4
 
112.03


16-1
 
91.001


16-2
 
91.002


16-11
 
91.015


16-12
 
91.016


16-13
 
91.017


16-14
 
91.018


16-15
 
91.019


16-16
 
91.020


16-17
 
91.021


16-18
 
91.022


16-19
 
91.023


16-20
 
91.024


16-21
 
91.025


16-41
 
91.035


16-42
 
91.036


16-43
 
91.037


16-44
 
91.038


16-45
 
91.039


16-46
 
91.040


18-16
 
91.065


18-17
 
91.066


18-18
 
91.067


18-19
 
91.068


18-20
 
91.069


18-31
 
91.080


18-32
 
91.081


18-33
 
91.082


18-34
 
91.083


18-35
 
91.084


18-36
 
91.085


18-37
 
91.086


18-38
 
91.087


18-39
 
91.088


18-40
 
91.089


18-55
 
91.100


18-56
 
91.999


18-57
 
91.101


20-1
 
130.01, 130.99


20-2
 
130.02


20-3
 
130.20


20-4
 
130.21, 130.99


20-5
 
130.03


20-6
 
130.35


20-7
 
130.36


20-8
 
130.04


20-9
 
130.22, 130.99


20-10
 
130.37


20-11
 
130.38


20-12
 
130.05


20-13
 
130.06, 130.99


20-14
 
130.07


20-15
 
130.08


20-17
 
130.50


20-18
 
130.25


20-19
 
130.23


20-20
 
130.24, 130.99


20-21
 
130.09


20-22
 
130.39


20-23
 
130.51


20-24
 
130.52


21-1
 
34.01


21-2
 
34.02


21-3
 
34.03


21-4
 
34.04


21-5
 
34.05


21-6
 
34.06


21-7
 
34.07


21-8
 
34.08


21-9
 
34.09


21.5-1
 
94.01


21.5-6
 
94.02


23-1
 
152.01


23-2
 
152.02


23-3
 
152.03


23-4
 
152.04


24-101
 
153.001


24-102
 
153.002


24-103
 
153.003


24-104
 
153.004


24-105
 
153.005


24-106
 
153.006


24-201
 
153.015


24-202
 
153.016


24-301
 
153.030


24-302
 
153.031


24-303
 
153.032


24-304
 
153.033


24-305
 
153.034


24-401
 
153.045


24-402
 
153.046


24-403
 
153.047


24-501
 
153.060


24-502
 
153.061


24-503
 
153.062


24-504
 
153.063


24-505
 
153.064


24-506
 
153.065


24-507
 
153.066


24-508
 
153.067


24-509
 
153.068


24-510
 
153.069


24-511
 
153.070


24-512
 
153.071


24-513
 
153.072


24-514
 
153.073


24-515
 
153.074


24-516
 
153.075


24-517
 
153.076


24-518
 
153.077


24-520
 
153.078


24-531
 
153.090


24-532
 
153.091


24-533
 
153.092


24-534
 
153.093


24-535
 
153.094


24-536
 
153.095


24-537
 
153.096


24-601
 
153.125


24-602
 
153.126


24-603
 
153.127


24-604
 
153.128


24-605
 
153.129


24-606
 
153.130


24-607
 
153.131


24-608
 
153.132


24-609
 
153.133


24-610
 
153.134


24-611
 
153.135


24-612
 
153.136


24-613
 
153.137


24-614
 
153.138


24-615
 
153.139


24-616
 
153.140


24-617
 
153.141


24-618
 
153.142


24-619
 
153.143


24-620
 
153.144


24-701
 
153.155


24-702
 
153.155


24-703
 
153.155


24-704
 
153.155


24-705
 
153.155


24-706
 
153.155


24-707
 
153.155


24-708
 
153.155


24-716
 
153.156


24-717
 
153.156


24-718
 
153.156


24-719
 
153.156


24-720
 
153.156


24-721
 
153.156


24-731
 
153.157


24-732
 
153.157


24-733
 
153.157


24-741
 
153.158


24-742
 
153.158


24-743
 
153.158


24-744
 
153.158


24-745
 
153.158


24-1001
 
153.190


24-1002
 
153.191


24-1003
 
153.192


24-1004
 
153.193


24-1005
 
153.194


24-1006
 
153.195


24-1007
 
153.196


24-1008
 
153.197


24-1009
 
153.198


24-1010
 
153.199


24-1011
 
153.200


Ch. 24, Art. VIII
 
153.170


Ch. 24, Art. IX
 
153.180


24-A-1
 
Ch. 153, Appx. A


24-A-2
 
Ch. 153, Appx. A


24-B-1
 
Ch. 153, Appx. B


24-C-1
 
Ch. 153, Appx. C


24-D-1
 
Ch. 153, Appx. D


25-1
 
31.15


25-2
 
31.16


25-3
 
31.17


25-4
 
31.18


25-5
 
31.19


27-1
 
95.01


27-2
 
95.02


27-3
 
95.03


27-4
 
95.04


27-5
 
95.05


27-6
 
95.06


27-7
 
95.07


27-8
 
95.08


27-9
 
95.09


27-10
 
95.10


27-11
 
95.11


27-12
 
95.12


27-13
 
95.13


27-14
 
95.14


27-15
 
95.15


27-16
 
95.16


27-17
 
95.17


27-18
 
95.18


27-19
 
95.19


27-20
 
95.20


27-21
 
95.21


29-1
 
50.01


29-2
 
50.02


29-4
 
50.03


29-5
 
50.04


29-6
 
50.05


29-7
 
50.06


29-8
 
50.07


29-9
 
50.08


29-31
 
50.30


29-32
 
50.31


29-32a
 
50.32


29-33
 
50.33


29-34
 
50.34


29-35
 
50.35


29-36
 
50.36


30-1
 
70.01


30-2
 
70.02


30-20
 
71.01


30-21
 
71.02


30-22
 
71.03


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




84-03, § 1
 
1-31-1984
 
32.04


84-06, § 2
 
1-31-1984
 
70.02


84-07, § 1
 
1-31-1984
 
31.18


84-07, § 2
 
1-31-1984
 
31.18


84-13, § 1
 
2-6-1984
 
30.04


84-13, § 2
 
2-6-1984
 
30.04


84-17, § 1
 
2-6-1984
 
150.01


84-17, § 5
 
2-6-1984
 
150.04


84-21, § 1
 
2-23-1984
 
31.15


84-21, § 2
 
2-23-1984
 
31.16


84-21, § 3
 
2-23-1984
 
31.17


84-21, § 4
 
2-23-1984
 
31.18


84-23, § 1-8
 
2-23-1984
 
31.19


84-024, § 1
 
2-28-1984
 
70.01, 70.02


84-025, § 1
 
2-28-1984
 
30.30


84-026, § 1
 
2-28-1984
 
150.04


84-029, § 1
 
3-27-1984
 
130.01–130.09, 130.20–130.25, 130.35–130.39, 130.50–130.52, 130.99


84-033, § 1
 
4-9-1984
 
30.31


84-039, § 2
 
4-24-1984
 
150.06, 150.99


84-039, § 3
 
4-24-1984
 
150.08


84-040, § 1
 
5-14-1984
 
130.08


84-041, § 1
 
5-22-1984
 
70.01, 70.02


84-041, § 2
 
5-22-1984
 
71.03


84-043, § 1
 
6-4-1984
 
130.50


84-047, § 1
 
6-12-1984
 
112.01–112.03


84-049, § 1
 
6-12-1984
 
90.01–90.05


84-066, § 1
 
9-25-1984
 
93.01


84-072, § 1
 
10-23-1984
 
113.01, 113.02, 113.15–113.25, 113.35, 113.36, 113.45–113.56


84-073, § 1
 
11-8-1984
 
113.48


84-074, § 1
 
11-8-1984
 
91.001, 91.002, 91.015–91.025, 91.035–91.040


84-075, §§ 1, 2
 
11-8-1984
 
130.01–130.09, 130.20–130.25, 130.35–130.39, 130.50–130.52, 130.99


84-078, § 1
 
12-11-1984
 
91.065–91.069, 91.080–91.089


84-079, § 1
 
12-11-1984
 
130.25


85-08, § 1
 
2-26-1985
 
30.32


85-012, § 1
 
4-23-1985
 
30.33


85-015, § 1
 
5-28-1985
 
30.33


85-030, §§ 1, 2
 
10-22-1985
 
94.01, 94.02


85-036, §§ 1-2
 
12-5-1985
 
153.001–153.006, 153.015, 153.016, 153.030–153.034, 153.045–153.047,
153.060–153.071, 153.073–153.078, 153.090–153.096, 153.125–153.144,
153.155–153.158, 153.170, 153.180, 153.190–153.200, 153.999


85-038, § 1
 
12-05-1985
 
30.05


85-039, § 1
 
12-5-1985
 
30.06


86-001, § 1
 
1-28-1986
 
34.09


86-04, § 1
 
1-28-1986
 
93.01


86-11, § 1
 
4-7-1986
 
113.48


86-14, § 1
 
4-22-1986
 
113.51


86-023, § 1
 
6-17-1986
 
153.091


86-023, § 2
 
6-17-1986
 
153.091


86-030, § 1
 
7-30-1986
 
93.15–93.20


87-007, § 1
 
3-3-1987
 
130.23


87-018, § 1
 
7-28-1987
 
153.069


87-018, § 3
 
7-28-1987
 
153.091


87-019, § 1
 
7-28-1987
 
34.09


87-023, § 1
 
8-25-1987
 
150.06


87-040, § 1
 
12-15-1987
 
30.07


88-017, § 1
 
5-24-1988
 
150.25


88-018, § 1
 
5-24-1988
 
153.069


88-023, § 1
 
6-28-1988
 
150.05


88-032, § 1
 
8-23-1988
 
150.10


88-033, § 1
 
8-23-1988
 
71.03


89-021, § 1
 
8-22-1989
 
130.07


89-028, § 1
 
9-26-1989
 
130.24, 130.99


89-033, § 1
 
12-21-1989
 
35.01


90-05, § 1
 
3-27-1990
 
130.09


90-07, § 1
 
5-8-1990
 
36.01


90-14, § 1
 
7-24-1990
 
130.39


91-21, § 1
 
7-23-1991
 
91.069


91-22, § 1
 
7-23-1991
 
91.066


91-22, § 2
 
7-23-1991
 
91.068


91-22, § 3
 
7-23-1991
 
91.100


91-22, § 4
 
7-23-1991
 
91.999


91-22, § 5
 
7-23-1991
 
91.101


91-22, § 6
 
7-23-1991
 
91.065–91.069, 91.080–91.089


91-23, § 1
 
7-23-1991
 
150.05


91-41, § 1
 
12-17-1991
 
153.071


91-42, § 1
 
12-17-1991
 
130.39


92-01, § 1
 
1-14-1992
 
94.02


92-07, § 1
 
1-28-1992
 
92.01–92.19


92-08, § 1
 
1-28-1992
 
130.51


92-15, § 1
 
2-25-1992
 
92.16


92-19, § 1
 
3-24-1992
 
153.074


92-29, § 1
 
6-23-1992
 
153.095


92-31, § 2
 
7-28-1992
 
30.15


92-31, § 3
 
7-28-1992
 
30.04


92-31, § 4
 
7-28-1992
 
30.07


92-31, § 5
 
7-28-1992
 
32.03


92-31, § 6
 
7-28-1992
 
32.04


92-31, § 8
 
7-28-1992
 
91.068


92-36
 
9-22-1992
 
153.071


92-37
 
10-27-1992
 
130.52


93-11
 
3-23-1993
 
30.03


93-29, § 1
 
8-24-1993
 
153.074


94-02, § 2
 
1-25-1994
 
153.091


94-06, § 1
 
2-22-1994
 
34.05


94-08, § 1
 
3-22-1994
 
30.31


94-09, § 1
 
3-22-1994
 
30.08


94-10, § 1
 
3-22-1994
 
130.03


94-11, § 1
 
3-22-1994
 
150.11


94-13, § 1
 
4-14-1994
 
30.03


94-14, § 1
 
4-26-1994
 
150.12


94-16, § 2
 
5-10-1994
 
153.047


94-16, § 3
 
5-10-1994
 
153.060, 153.069, 153.072


94-16, § 4
 
5-10-1994
 
153.096


95-03, § 2
 
1-24-1995
 
150.55–150.67


95-07, § 1
 
2-21-1995
 
153.096


95-20, § 1
 
5-23-1995
 
150.10


95-27, § 1
 
8-22-1995
 
153.093


96-12, § 1
 
2-27-1996
 
153.016, 153.095


96-14, § 1
 
3-26-1996
 
153.095


96-25, §§ 1,  2
 
7-23-1996
 
50.01–50.08, 50.30–50.36


97-08, § 1
 
2-25-1997
 
153.072


97-13, § 1
 
5-27-1997
 
30.03


97-16, § 1
 
5-27-1997
 
50.01–50.08,  50.30–50.36


97-20
 
6-24-1997
 
91.065


97-33, § 1
 
10-28-1997
 
95.01–95.21


98-10, § 1
 
2-24-1998
 
30.03


99-06
 
3-23-1999
 
50.30


99-12
 
4-27-1999
 
153.078


1999-30
 
9-28-1999
 
34.09


2000-08
 
2-22-2000
 
110.01


2000-13
 
4-11-2000
 
151.01–151.04, 151.15, 151.25–151.31, 151.45–151.48, 151.60–151.61,
151.99


2000-22
 
8-22-2000
 
151.26


2000-31
 
11-28-2000
 
153.095


2001-18
 
7-24-2001
 
34.09


2001-19
 
8-6-2001
 
153.095


2002-25
 
10-22-2002
 
31.01


2003-03
 
1-28-2003
 
150.13


2003-12
 
5-27-2003
 
35.03


2003-13
 
5-27-2003
 
112.02


2003-19
 
6-9-2003
 
90.06


2003-35
 
10-28-2003
 
36.15


2003-36
 
10-28-2003
 
36.15


2004-16
 
6-8-2004
 
71.01, 71.02


2004-31
 
10-25-2004
 
70.15, 70.16


2004-41
 
11-22-2004
 
150.07, 150.99


2004-42
 
11-22-2004
 
91.039


2005-05
 
1-25-2005
 
153.079


2005-06
 
1-25-2005
 
153.198


2005-15
 
2-22-2005
 
33.15–33.23, 33.99


2005-22
 
5-24-2005
 
91.050


2005-30
 
8-23-2005
 
33.01


2005-43
 
11-29-2005
 
36.15


2006-03
 
2-28-2006
 
153.073


2006-06
 
3-28-2006
 
130.53, 130.99


2006-15
 
5-23-2006
 
51.02–51.16, 51.99


2006-21
 
7-25-2006
 
130.65–130.68, 130.99


2006-40
 
12-19-2006
 
112.02


2007-01
 
1-23-2007
 
153.197, 153.198


2007-09
 
4-24-2007
 
51.02


2008-04
 
2-26-2008
 
153.097


2008-12
 
4-22-2008
 
153.098


2008-22
 
8-26-2008
 
130.07


2008-23
 
8-26-2008
 
150.14


2009-02
 
2-24-2009
 
130.53, 130.99


2009-10
 
5-26-2009
 
71.04, 71.99, Ch. 72 Sched. I


2009-11
 
5-26-2009
 
71.04, 71.99, Ch. 72 Sched. I


2009-16
 
7-28-2009
 
130.10


2009-17
 
7-28-2009
 
150.02, 150.99


2009-36(a)
 
12-21-2009
 
36.15


2010-06
 
3-23-2010
 
112.02


2010-08
 
4-27-2010
 
153.016, 153.110, 153.999


2010-17
 
8-24-2010
 
153.016, 153.070, 153.080, 153.999


2011-01
 
1-25-2011
 
70.16, 70.99


2011-09
 
2-22-2011
 
30.03


2011-10
 
2-22-2011
 
153.098


2011-15
 
5-24-2011
 
Adopting Ordinance


2011-18
 
6-28-2011
 
153.197, 153.198, 153.999


2011-27
 
11-22-2011
 
36.15


2011-29
 
12-20-2011
 
35.02


2012-01
 
1-24-2012
 
91.066, 91.999


2012-02
 
1-24-2012
 
150.99


2012-06
 
3-27-2012
 
130.53


2012-10
 
5-22-2012
 
130.53


2012-11
 
5-22-2012
 
153.016, 153.081, 153.094–153.096, 153.999


2012-16
 
6-26-2012
 
51.01, 51.99


2012-17
 
6-26-2012
 
90.05, 90.99


2012-18
 
6-26-2012
 
92.03, 92.16, 92.18, 92.99


2012-20
 
6-26-2012
 
113.47, 113.50, 113.99


2012-21
 
6-26-2012
 
130.35, 130.99


2012-23
 
6-26-2012
 
150.99


2012-24
 
6-26-2012
 
150.07, 150.99


2012-25
 
6-26-2012
 
150.13, 150.99


2012-27
 
6-26-2012
 
150.62, 150.99


2012-28
 
6-26-2012
 
37.01


2012-30
 
7-24-2012
 
153.094–153.096


2012-37
 
11-27-2012
 
36.15


2013-03
 
2-26-2013
 
73.01, 73.02, 73.99


2013-05
 
4-23-2013
 
150.25, 150.99


2013-18
 
9-24-2013
 
34.03–34.09


2013-19
 
9-24-2013
 
150.02, 150.99


2013-20
 
9-24-2013
 
150.02, 150.99


2013-21
 
9-24-2013
 
150.02, 150.99


2013-25
 
10-22-2013
 
150.35 –150.42


2013-30
 
12-17-2013
 
150.02


2013-31
 
12-17-2013
 
91.015


2013-32
 
12-17-2013
 
116.01 –116.13


2014-01
 
1-28-2014
 
150.25


2014-02
 
1-28-2014
 
150.02


2014-03
 
1-28-2014
 
150.09


2014-06
 
3-25-2014
 
151.01 –151.04 , 151.15 , 151.25 –151.31 , 151.45 –151.48 , 151.60 ,
151.61 , 151.99


2014-07
 
4-27-2014
 
150.02


2014-08
 
5-27-2014
 
94.16 –94.18 , 94.99


2014-09(A)
 
5-27-2014
 
37.01


2014-09(B)
 
6-24-2014
 
111.01 –111.06 , 111.17 –111.28 , 111.99


2014-10
 
7-22-2014
 
153.094


2014-16
 
11-25-2014
 
115.01–115.03, 115.15, 115.20–115.24, 115.30–115.33, 115.40, 115.99


2014-17
 
11-25-2014
 
37.01


2014-19
 
11-25-2014
 
36.30


2014-20
 
12-16-2014
 
152.05


2015-01
 
1-27-2015
 
153.016, 153.196, 153.198


2015-05
 
2-24-2015
 
150.02


2015-06
 
2-24-2015
 
34.10


2015-11
 
4-29-2015
 
37.01, 150.09


2015-12
 
4-28-2015
 
114.01–114.06, 114.99


2015-14
 
8-25-2015
 
153.090–153.096


2015-18
 
- -2015
 
37.01


2015-19
 
11-24-2015
 
36.15


2015-23
 
12-8-2015
 
30.03


2016-08
 
2-23-2016
 
Ch. 72 Sched. I


2016-10
 
7-26-2016
 
94.01–94.03, 94.15–94.21, 94.99


2016-11
 
7-26-2016
 
51.02, 51.99


2016-12
 
7-26-2016
 
37.01


2016-13
 
7-26-2016
 
150.02


2016-14
 
8-23-2016
 
30.03


2016-18
 
9-6-2016
 
70.99


2016-22
 
9-27-2016
 
51.02


2016-23
 
9-27-2016
 
51.06, 51.99


2016-24
 
9-27-2016
 
51.08


2016-25
 
9-27-2016
 
51.11


2016-26
 
9-27-2016
 
37.01


2016-28
 
10-25-2016
 
90.03


2016-29
 
10-25-2016
 
36.15


2016-30
 
11-22-2016
 
150.25, 150.99


2016-31
 
12-20-2016
 
37.01


2017-02
 
1-24-2017
 
95.02


2017-04
 
2-28-2017
 
153.094–153.096


2017-05
 
2-28-2017
 
150.02


2017-14
 
4-25-2017
 
94.17


2017-15
 
4-25-2017
 
37.01


2017-22
 
4-25-2017
 
37.01


2017-23
 
8-22-2017
 
130.65–130.68, 130.99


2017-24
 
8-22-2017
 
153.098


2017-30
 
10-24-2017
 
130.69, 130.99


2018-05
 
2-27-2018
 
152.06


2018-06
 
3-27-2018
 
50.02, 50.30, 50.35, 95.02


2018-07
 
3-27-2018
 
30.15


2018-16
 
7-24-2018
 
51.99


2018-18
 
8-28-2018
 
37.01


2018-24
 
9-25-2018
 
150.02


2018-25
 
9-25-2018
 
150.02


2018-26
 
9-25-2018
 
150.02


2018-27
 
9-25-2018
 
150.02


2018-28
 
9-25-2018
 
150.02


2018-29
 
9-25-2018
 
115.01, 150.02


2018-30
 
10-23-2018
 
153.094


 
 
 
 
 




 


