
Mt. Pleasant, Texas Code of Ordinances


CITY OF MOUNT PLEASANT, TEXAS
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-12 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2019-01, passed 2-5-19





















Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




CITY OFFICIALS



CITY COUNCIL



 

MAYOR
 
Tracy Craig


MAYOR PRO-TEM
 
Tim Dale


PLACE 1
 
Jerry Walker


PLACE 2
 
Sherri Spruill


PLACE 3
 
Michael McGahee


PLACE 5
 
Brian Heavner



 



CITY OFFICIALS



 

CITY MANAGER
 
Mike Ahrens


CITY ATTORNEY
 
Kerry Wooten


CITY SECRETARY
 
Darleen Durant



 




Website: www.mpcity.net




CHARTER PROVISIONS




Art. I.   Name and Boundaries, §§ 1, 2





Art. II.   General Powers, §§ 1-10





Art. III.   Taxation, §§ 1-3





Art.IV.   Municipal Bonds, §§ 1-6





Art. V.   The Budget, §§ 1-19





Art. VI.   Officers, §§ 1-19





Art. VII.   Legislative Procedure, §§ 1-6





Art. VIII.   Franchise and Public Utilities, §§ 1-10





Art. IX.   Municipal Court, §§ 1-3





Art. X.   General Provisions, §§ 1-9





Art. XI.   City Manager, §§ 1-8





Art. XII.   Municipal Cemetery




Editor’s note:



   The city amended its Charter by vote on May 11, 2002 at an election
held on that date.  The amended Charter is included herein for the benefit
of the user of this Code of Ordinances.



Article I.  Name and Boundaries



Section 1.  Corporate name.



   The inhabitants of the City of Mount Pleasant, Texas, within the
corporate limits as now established or as hereinafter established in the
manner provided by this Charter shall continue to be a municipal body politic
and corporate in perpetuity, under the name of the “City of Mount
Pleasant.”



Section 2.  Boundaries.



   The boundaries of the city are those that have previously been legally
established.  These boundaries may be changed through annexation or
deannexation, as described in Article II of this charter.



Article II.  General Powers



Section 1.  Powers of the city.



   The city shall have all the powers granted to municipal corporations
and to cities by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas together
with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers
granted.  The city may acquire property within or without its corporation
limits for any city purpose in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate,
by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation, and may sell, lease,
mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interest may require;
and, except as prohibited by the constitution of this state or restricted by
this charter, the city shall and may exercise all municipal functions,
rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever.  The
enumeration of particular powers by this charter shall not be deemed to be
exclusive, and in addition to the powers enumerated therein or implied
thereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that
the City of Mount Pleasant shall have, and may exercise, all powers of local
self-government, and all powers enumerated in Chapter 13, Title 28, Article
1175 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas, of 1925 and
amendments thereof and hereafter enacted, or any other powers which, under
the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for
this charter specifically to enumerate.



Section 2.  Special provision for damage suits.



   Before the city shall be liable to damage claim or suit for injury of
one's person or property, the person who is injured or whose property is
damaged or someone in his behalf shall give the mayor or city secretary
notice in writing within thirty days after the occurring of the alleged
injury or damage, stating specifically in such notice when and how the injury
or damage was sustained, and setting forth the extent of the injury or damage
as accurately as possible.  No action at law for damages shall be brought
against the city for injury to one's person or property prior to the
expiration of sixty days notice hereinabove described has been fled with the
mayor or city secretary.  After the expiration of the sixty days
aforementioned, the complainant may then have two years in which to bring an
action at law.



Section 3.  Eminent domain.



   The city shall have the full right, power and authority to exercise the
power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the
powers conferred upon it by this charter, or by the constitution or laws of
the State of Texas.  The city may exercise the powers of eminent domain in
any manner authorized or permitted by the constitution and laws of this
state, or in the manner and form that may be provided by ordinance of the
governing body of the city.  The power of eminent domain hereby conferred
shall include the right to condemn public property for such purposes.  The
city shall have and possess this power of condemnations for any municipal or
public purpose, even though not specifically enumerated in this charter.



Section 4.  Street powers.



   The City of Mount Pleasant shall have the power to lay out, establish,
open, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, abandon, discontinue, abolish,
close, care for, pave, supervise, maintain and improve streets, alleys,
sidewalks, squares, parks, public places and bridges and regulate the use
thereof and require the removal from streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other
public property or places all obstructions and all fruit stands, show cases
and encroachments of every nature or character upon any of said streets and
sidewalks, and to vacate or close private ways.



Cross-reference:



   Streets and sidewalks generally, see Ch. 98



Section 5.  Street improvement.



   The City of Mount Pleasant shall have exclusive dominion, control and
jurisdiction in, upon and over the public streets, avenues, alleys and
highways of the city, and may provide for the improvement thereof by paving,
repaving, raising, grading, draining, or otherwise. The provisions of Chapter
106, 40th Legislature, First Called Session, Acts of 1927, together with
existing amendments and all such amendments as hereinafter may be made, are
expressly adopted and made a part of this charter.



Cross reference:



   Streets and sidewalks, see Ch. 98



Section 6.  Annexation.



   The city council shall have the power by an ordinance duly adopted by
said council to fix or define the boundary limits of the City of Mount
Pleasant; and to provide for the alteration and extension of the boundary
limits of Mount Pleasant, and the annexation of additional territory lying
adjacent to the City of Mount Pleasant, with or without the consent of the
territory and the inhabitants annexed. During the annexation process, the
council shall provide an opportunity for all interested persons to be heard
at public hearing(s), in conformance with state law.  Upon the final passage
of any such ordinance, the boundary limits of the City of Mount Pleasant
shall thereafter be fixed as provided in such ordinance and when any
additional territory has been so annexed, same shall be a part of the City of
Mount Pleasant and the property situated therein shall bear its pro rata part
of the taxes levied by the city, and the inhabitants thereof shall be
entitled to all the rights and privileges of all the citizens and shall be
bound and governed by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of
the city.



Section 7.  Sanitary sewer system.



   The city shall have the power to provide for a sanitary sewer system
and to require property owners to connect their premises with such sewer
system; to provide for fixing penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer
connections; to provide rules and regulations for the collection of charges
for the use of the sanitary sewer system.



Cross-reference:



   Utilities generally, see Ch. 50



Section 8.  Garbage disposal.



   The city council shall have the right by ordinance to adopt and
prescribe rules and regulations for the handling and disposition of all
garbage, refuse, trash, and rubbish with in the City of Mount Pleasant; and
shall further have the right to fix charges and compensation to be charged by
the city for the removal of trash and rubbish, providing rules and
regulations for the collection thereof.



Cross-reference:



   Garbage and refuse, see Ch. 53



Section 9.  Sanitary enforcement.



   The city council shall have the right to provide for the inspection and
regulation of the sanitary condition of all premises and vacant lots within
the city limits, for the removal of garbage, refuse, and unsanitary
vegetation; it shall have the right to fix charges for such removal,
providing regulations for the collection of such charges, and providing for
establishing a lien against any property for any expense incurred by the city
in enforcing this provision; and further to provide for the making and
enforcing of all proper and reasonable regulations for the health and
sanitation of the city and its inhabitants.



Cross-reference:



   Health and sanitation generally, see Ch. 95



Section 10.  Regulation of railroads.



   The city council shall have the power by ordinance to direct and
control, within the city limits, the speed of engines, locomotives and motor
cars operating on railroad tracks, the length of trains, the construction of
railroad tracks, turnouts and switches, the regulation of the grade thereof,
and the use of the streets for switching or stopping cars.



   If improvements be ordered constructed in any part of any area used or
occupied by the tracks or facilities of any railroad, then the city council
shall have the power to assess the whole cost of improvements in such area
and the added costs of improvements in the area adjacent thereto made
necessary by such use or occupancy against such railway or utility, and shall
have power, by ordinance, to provide for the enforcement of such assessment.



(Ord. No. 1980-2, § 2, 4-7-80)



Article III.  Taxation



Section 1.  Powers of taxation.



   The council shall have the power to levy, for general purposes, all
types of taxes as provided and permitted by state law, including but not
limited to motel/hotel occupancy taxes, occupational taxes, sales and use
taxes and ad valorem taxes on real, personal and mixed property within the
city, not exempt from taxation by state law.



Section 2.  Limitation on ad valorem tax rate.



   The ad valorem tax rate shall not exceed one dollar and fifty-eight
cents ($1.58) on one hundred dollars ($100) of assessed valuation.



Section 3.  Tax lien and liability.



   A special lien is hereby created on all real, personal mixed property
located in the city, in favor of the city, for all unpaid taxes.  The
priority of said lien shall be determined in accordance with state law.



Article IV.  Municipal Bonds



Section 1.  Powers to issue and Interest and Sinking, Fund.



   In keeping with the Constitution of the State of Texas and not contrary
thereto, the city shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the
city for any public purpose or for any permanent improvement not now or
hereafter prohibited by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and
shall have the right to issue all tax bonds, revenue bonds, funding and
refunding bonds, time warrants and other evidence of indebtedness as now
authorized or as may hereafter be authorized to be issued by cities and towns
by the laws of the State of Texas.



   All monies arising from the collection of taxes levied for the
repayment of general obligation bonded indebtedness, shall be maintained in a
separate fund to be designated as the “Interest and Sinking Fund” and a
separate account kept of the funds applicable to each bond issuance.



   Bonds and warrants of the city shall be issued in the manner provided
by the general laws of the State of Texas.



Section 2.  Shall specify purpose.



   All bonds shall specify for what purpose they were issued and shall be
invalid, if sold for less than their par value and accrued interest; and when
any bonds are issued by the city, a fund shall be provided to pay the
interest and create a sinking fund to redeem said bonds, which fund shall not
be diverted or drawn upon for any other purpose; and the person acting as
city treasurer shall honor no drafts upon said fund, except to pay interest
upon or to redeem the bonds, for which it was provided.



Section 3.  Maximum period of years.



   Said bonds shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed forty
(40) years, shall be signed by the mayor, countersigned by the person acting
in the capacity of city secretary, and shall be payable at such places and
times as may be fixed by the ordinance of the governing authority. All bonds
shall be submitted to the attorney general of the state, for his approval,
and the comptroller, for registration, as provided by the state law; provided
that any such bonds, after approval, may be issued by the city, serially or
otherwise, as may be deemed advisable by the governing authority.



Section 4.  Submitted to vote.



   Before the issuance of any bonds, the same shall be submitted to a vote
of the qualified voters of the city, and should a majority of the votes cast
at such election be in favor of issuing the bonds, the same shall be issued
as provided herein, but should said election fail to carry, bonds shall not
be issued.  The election provided for above shall be conducted as other
elections, under the state law.



Section 5.  Time warrants.



   The city council of the City of Mount Pleasant shall have the power to
issue Time Warrants in accordance with and as regulated by Article 2368-A,
Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, known as the “Bond and Warrant Law of
1931,” and all amendments thereto.



Section 6.  Revenue bonds.



   The city council shall have the power to build and purchase, to
mortgage and encumber their light systems, water systems, sewer systems or
sanitary disposal equipment and appliances, or natural gas systems, parks
and/or swimming pools, either or all, and the franchise and income thereof
and everything pertaining thereto acquired or to be acquired, and to evidence
the obligation therefor by the issuance of revenue bonds as contemplated and
provided in state law.



Article V.  The Budget



Section 1.  Fiscal year.



   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October and
shall end on the last day of September of the next succeeding calendar
year.  Such fiscal year shall constitute the budget and accounting year. 
As used in this charter, the term “budget year” shall mean the fiscal
year for which any particular budget is adopted and which it is administered.



(Amended April 7, 1953)



Section 2.  Preparation and submission of budget.



   The city manager at least sixty (60) days prior to the beginning of
each budget year shall submit to the council a proposed budget and an
explanatory budget message in the form and with the contents provided herein
by sections 12 and 13.  For such purposes at such date as he shall
determine, he, or an officer designated by him, shall obtain from the head of
each office, department or agency, estimates of revenue and expenditures of
that office, department or agency, detailed by organization units and
character and objects of expenditure, and such other supporting data as he
may request.  In preparing the budget, the city manager shall review the
estimates, and may revise the estimates as he may deem advisable.



Section 3.  Public record.



   The budget and budget message and all supporting schedules shall be a
public record in the office of the city secretary open to public
inspection.  The council shall cause sufficient copies of the budget and
budget message to be prepared for distribution to interested persons.



Section 4.  Notice of public hearing.



   At the meeting of the council at which the budget and budget message
are submitted, the council shall determine the place and time of the public
hearing on the budget and shall cause to be published a notice of the place
and time not less than ten (10) days after date of publication, at which the
date the council will hold a public hearing.



Section 5.  Public hearing.



   At the time and place so advertised or at any time and place at which
such public hearings shall from time to time be adjourned, the council shall
hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted, at which all interested
persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, for or against the
estimates or any items thereof.



Section 6.  Adoption.



   The budget shall be adopted by the favorable votes of at least a
majority of all members of the council.



Section 7.  Failure to adopt.



   The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the twenty-seventh
(27th) day of the last month of the fiscal year.  Should the council take no
final action on or prior to such day, the budget as submitted shall be deemed
to have been finally adopted by the council.



Section 8.  Effective date of budget.



   Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget
year.  A copy of the budget as finally adopted, shall be filed with the city
secretary and the county clerk of Titus County.  The final budget shall be
printed and sufficient copies shall be made available for the use of all
offices, departments and agencies, and for the use of interested persons and
civic organizations.



Section 9.  Budget establishes appropriations.



   From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated
therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the
several objects and purposes therein named.



Section 10.  Budget establishes amount to be raised by property tax.



   From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the
amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the
amount of the levy for the purposes of the city in the corresponding tax year.



Section 11.  Budget message.



   The budget message submitted to the council shall be explanatory of the
budget, shall contain an outline of the proposed financial policies of the
city for the budget year and shall describe in connection therewith the
important features of the budget plan.  It shall set forth the reasons for
salient changes from previous years in expenditure and revenue items and
shall explain any major changes in financial policy.



Section 12.  Supporting schedules to budget message.



   Attached to the budget message will be such supporting schedules,
exhibits, and other explanatory materials in respect to both current
operations and capital outlays as shall be useful to the council.



Section 13.  Budget.



   (a)   The budget message shall contain a complete financial plan for
the fiscal year.



   (b)   The total estimated expenditures of the various funds shall
not exceed the total estimated resources of each fund (prospective income
plus cash on hand).



Section 14.  Accounting procedure.



   An accounting procedure shall be devised and maintained for the city
adequate to record in detail all transactions affecting the acquisition,
custodianship, and disposition of anything of value, including cash receipts,
credit transactions and disbursements; and the recorded facts shall be
presented periodically to officials and to the public in such summaries and
analytical schedules in detailed support thereof as shall be necessary to
show the full effects of such transactions for each fiscal year upon the
finances of the city and in relation to each office, department or agency of
the city government including distinct summaries and schedules for each
public utility owned and operated.



Section 15.  Audit.



   The city council shall cause a continuous audit of the books of account
and of all records and transactions of the administration of affairs of the
city, such audit to be made annually embracing each fiscal year and shall be
made by a public accountant licensed by the State of Texas.  The duty of the
accountant shall include the certification of all statements required by
section 14 herein; such statements shall include a general balance sheet
showing summaries of income and expenditures and also comparisons, in proper
classifications, with the last previous audit.



Section 16.  Depository.



   The city council shall designate a bank in the City of Mount Pleasant
as the city depository which shall be selected for a period not to exceed
five (5) years and which shall be acceptable to the city council.  The city
council shall have the right to reject any or all bids offered as city
depository.  The bank selected as such depository shall give adequate bond.



Section 17.  Borrowing in anticipation of property taxes.



   In any budget year in anticipation of the collection of the property
tax for such year, whether levied or to be levied in such year, the council
may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money by the issuance of
negotiable notes of the city, each of which shall be designated “Tax
anticipation notes for the year             ,” (stating the budget
year).  Such notes shall mature and be payable not later than the end of the
fiscal year in which the original notes shall have been issued.



Section 18.  Borrowing in anticipation of other revenue.



   In any budget year in anticipation of the collection or receipt of
other revenues of that budget year the council may by resolution authorize
the borrowing of money by the issuance of negotiable notes of the city, each
of which shall be designated “Special revenue note for the year        
    ,” (stating the budget year).  Such notes may be renewed from time
to time, but all such notes, together with the renewals, shall mature and be
payable not later than the end of the fiscal year in which the original note
shall have been issued.



Section 19.  Sale of notes.



   The notes issued pursuant to the two preceding sections may be sold at
not less than par and accrued interest in private sale without previous
advertisement, but such sale shall be authorized by the council.



Article VI.  Officers



Section 1.  Municipal government.



   The municipal government of the City of Mount Pleasant shall consist of
the city council, which shall be composed of five (5) council members and a
mayor of the city.



Section 2.  Terms of office.



   The mayor and each council member shall serve a term of two (2) years
and until his or her successor is elected and qualified.



Section 3.  Vacancies.



   Vacancies in the council shall be filled by a special election for the
remainder of the unexpired term as provided by this charter or by ordinance.



Section 4.  Qualifications.



   The mayor and each council member shall be residents of the City of
Mount Pleasant and have the qualifications of electors therein.  The mayor,
council members, and officers and employees shall not hold any other public
office of emolument; and shall not be interested in the benefits of
emoluments of any contract, job, work or service for the city, or interested
in the sale to the city of any supplies, equipment, material or articles
purchased.  Any officer or employee of the city, who shall cease to possess
any of the qualifications herein required, shall forfeit his office or
position.



Section 5.  Elections.



   The regular election for the choice of mayor and members of the council
shall be held on the first Saturday in May of each year.



Section 6.  Regulation of elections.



   The council shall make all regulations which it considers needful or
desirable, not inconsistent with this charter or the laws of the State of
Texas, for the conduct of municipal elections, for the prevention of fraud in
such elections and for the recount of ballots in case of doubt or fraud. 
Municipal elections shall be conducted by the regular election authorities,
who shall also have power to make such regulations not inconsistent with this
charter, with any regulations made by the council or the laws of the State of
Texas.



Cross-reference:



   Administration generally, see Title III



Section 7.  How to get name on ballot.



   Any qualified elector of the city, desiring to have his name placed
upon the official ballot for any election, may do so by presenting a written
request for that purpose, signed by himself and filing the same with the city
secretary at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of said election.



Section 8.  Council ballots.



   The full names of all candidates for mayor or the council as
hereinbefore provided, except such as may be withdrawn, died or become
ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots without party
designations.  If two candidates with the same surnames or with names so
similar as to be likely to cause confusion, the address of their places of
residence shall be placed with their names on the ballot.  The order of the
names on the ballot shall be determined by lot.



Section 9.  Election of mayor and councilmen.



   The mayor shall be elected to office from the city at large.  The
other members of the council shall be elected to office at large, but by
specific place which shall be designated as Place One (1), Two (2), Three
(3), Four (4)  and Five (5).  The mayor and council places one (1) and two
(2) shall be elected in odd-numbered years and council places three (3), four
(4) and five (5) shall be elected in even-numbered years.



   In elections of the mayor and council members, the candidate receiving
a majority of all votes cast for the office shall be elected.  If no
candidate in such an election receives a majority, the mayor shall, on the
first day following the official count, call for a second election to be held
as provided by law.  The two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of
votes shall have their names placed on the ballot to be prepared by the city
secretary, in the order of their standing in the computation of votes.  In
the event of a tie between two candidates, they shall cast lots to determine
their places on the ballot.  In the event of a tie in a runoff election, the
runoff candidates shall cast lots to determine the winner.



Section 10.  Laws governing city elections.



   All city elections shall be governed, except as otherwise provided by
the charter, by the laws of the State of Texas governing general and
municipal elections, so far as same may be applicable thereto; and in the
event there should be any failure of the general laws or this charter to
provide for some feature of the city election, then the city council shall
have power to provide for such deficiency, and no informalities in conducting
a city election shall invalidate the same, it if be conducted fairly and in
substantial compliance with the general laws, where applicable, and the
charter and ordinances of the city.



Section 11.  Canvassing election.



   Returns of the elections, general and special, shall be made by the
election officers to the city council in accordance with state law and the
council shall canvass and declare the results of such election.



Section 12.  Salary of elective officers.



   The monthly salary of the mayor shall not exceed  fifty dollars
($50.00) and the monthly salary of each council member shall not exceed
twenty-five dollars ($25.00).



Section 13.  Appointive officers.



   The following officers shall be appointed by the city council to serve
until removed by a majority vote of the city council: the city attorney and
the municipal court judge.  Deputies or assistants to these officers may be
appointed by the city council as may be deemed necessary.



Section 14.  Compensation of appointive officers.



   Appointive officers shall receive such compensation as may be provided
for them by the city council.



Section 15.  Duties of mayor.



   The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council, but shall not vote
except to break a tie, and shall be recognized as head of the city government
for all purposes.  At its first regular meeting after the city election each
year, the council shall elect a mayor pro-tem who shall act as mayor in the
absence or disability of the mayor.  While acting in such capacity, the
mayor pro-tem shall not vote except to break a tie.  In the event of a
vacancy in the office of mayor, the mayor pro-tem shall become mayor until
the next mayoral election, whether a regular election or a special election,
at which election a mayor shall be elected to fill the unexpired term, if any.



Section 16.  Duties and powers of the council.



   All powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy
shall be vested in the city council.  Without limitation of the foregoing
and among the other powers that may be exercised by the council, the
following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty:



   (1)   Appoint and remove all officers, except as otherwise provided
in this charter.



   (2)   Establish all administrative departments, whether specifically
provided for herein or not as deemed necessary.



   (3)   Adopt the budget of the city.



   (4)   Authorize the issuance of bonds by ordinance.



   (5)   Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency
of the city and make investigations



as to municipal affairs.



   (6)   Appoint the members of a planning and zoning commission.



   (7)   Adopt plats.



   (8)   Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning and
zoning commission for the clearance of slum districts and rehabilitation of
blighted areas.



   (9)   Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning and
zoning commission for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of
neighborhoods and for the replanning, reconstruction or redevelopment of any
area or district which may have been destroyed in whole or in part by
disaster.



   (10)   Regulate, license and fix the charges or fares made by any
person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any vehicle of
any character used for carrying of passengers for hire on the public streets
and alleys of the city.



   (11)   Provide for the establishment and designations of fire
limits; and prescribe the kind and character of buildings or structures or
improvements to be erected therein, and provide for the erection of fireproof
buildings within certain limits; provide for the condemnation of dangerous
buildings calculated to increase the fire hazard, and the manner of their
removal or destruction.



Section 17.  Appointment and duties of the city attorney.



   The city attorney shall be appointed by the city council. The city
attorney shall be the chief legal advisor of the council and the officers of
the city in matters relating to their official powers and duties. He shall
represent the city in all legal proceedings, unless otherwise directed by the
council. It shall be his duty to perform all services incident to his
position as may be required by law, this charter or ordinance. He shall serve
for such term as may be provided by the council.



Section 18.  Duties of other appointive officers.



   The duties of all other appointive officers shall include all services
incident to their positions as may be required by law, this charter,
ordinance, resolution, or order of the city council.



Section 19.  Fees and costs.



   All fees and costs received by any officer of employee shall belong to
the city government and shall be paid into the city treasury.



Article VII.  Legislative Procedure



Section 1.  Meeting of the council.



   After the election of the mayor and/or council members in each general
election, the city council shall meet, at which time all elected officers
shall qualify and assume the duties of their office; thereafter the council
shall meet at such times as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution, but
it shall meet at least once each month.



Section 2.  Procedure.



   The mayor or any three (3) council members may call special meetings of
the city council at any time deemed advisable, after due notice to all
members, including the mayor.  The council shall determine its own rules and
order of business and shall keep minutes of its proceedings in a permanent
bound book, and any citizen shall have access to the minutes and records
thereof at all reasonable times.  The mayor or mayor pro-tem and any three
(3) members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business, and the affirmative vote of three members of the council shall be
sufficient and necessary to adopt or repeal any ordinance or resolution. 
The vote upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by
ayes and nays, and the vote of each council member present shall be entered
into the minutes of the meeting.  Every ordinance or resolution passed by
the city council shall be signed by the mayor or in his or her absence by the
mayor pro-tem, and such ordinance or resolution shall be attested by the
person acting as city secretary, and the seal of the city impressed thereon
within ten (10) days after its passage, but such ordinance or resolution
shall not be invalidated merely because the signature of either of such
officers shall be lacking or the failure to impress the city seal on the same.



Section 3.  Publication of ordinances.



   (a)   Every ordinance required by this charter to be published, or
imposing any penalty, fine, imprisonment or forfeiture, shall, after the
passage thereof, be published once in some newspaper published in the City of
Mount Pleasant, and no ordinance shall become effective until after the date
of such publication.



   (b)   In lieu of the publication required in sub-paragraph (a) of
this section, the council may, in its discretion, provide for the publication
of a descriptive caption or title, stating in summary the purpose of the
ordinances and the penalty for violation thereof.



   (c)   In lieu of the publication required in sub-paragraphs (a) and
(b) of this section, the council may publish its ordinances in pamphlet or
book form and need not republish such ordinances as have been previously
published.  All such ordinances, where printed and published by authority of
the city council shall be admitted and received in all courts without further
proof.



Section 4.  Recording and codification of ordinances.



   (a)   Every ordinance or resolution, upon its becoming effective,
shall be recorded in a permanent bound book kept for such purpose and shall
be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and the person exercising the
duties of the city secretary.



   (b)   The council may cause a new Code of Civil and Criminal
Ordinances to be prepared as early as practicable, and enacted to give effect
to this charter; and to repeal or revise such ordinances as may be obsolete
or in conflict with this charter.



Section 5.  Ordinances and enacting clause.



   In addition to such acts of the council as are required by statute or
by this charter to be passed by ordinance, every act of the council
establishing a fine or other penalties or for the contracting of indebtedness
shall be by ordinance.  The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be “BE
IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MOUNT PLEASANT.”



Section 6.  Investigation by the council.



   The council shall have the power to inquire into the conduct of any
office, department, agency, or officer of the city and to make investigation
as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose subpoena witnesses, administer
oaths and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence. 
Failure to obey such subpoena or to produce, papers or other evidence as
ordered under the provisions of this section shall be a violation and shall
be punishable consistent with a Class C misdemeanor.



Article VIII.  Franchise and Public Utilities



Section 1.  Powers of the city.



   In addition to the city's power to buy, own, construct, maintain, and
operate utilities and to manufacture and distribute electricity, gas, or
anything else that may be needed or used by the public, the city shall have
further powers as may now or hereafter be granted under the constitution and
the laws of the State of Texas.



   The city shall have the right and power to levy and collect annually a
franchise tax against any public corporation using and occupying the public
streets and grounds of the city, separately from the tangible property of
such corporations, and to levy annually upon the property and shares of
corporations, companies, and corporate institutions as the same are now, or
may be, assessed hereafter by the state laws, and shall have full power to
enforce the collection of such taxes.



   The city shall have the power to regulate, control, and prohibit the
use of streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public grounds of the city by said
public service corporation and may fix and impose reasonable annual tax or
taxes which may be levied by cities under the laws of the State of Texas; and
may also fix, regulate and graduate the taxes so imposed by levying a greater
or a lesser tax depending upon the locations of poles or other obstructions.



Section 2.  Franchises; power of council.



   The city council shall have power by ordinance to grant, amend, renew
and extend all franchises of all public utilities of every character
operating within the City of Mount Pleasant, and for such purposes is granted
full power.  All ordinances granting, amending, renewing, or extending
franchises for public utilities shall be read at two (2) regular meetings of
the council.  Subsequent to the first reading of such ordinance but prior to
the second reading, the caption of such ordinance shall be published in the
official newspaper of the city and the expense of such publication shall be
borne by the proponent of the franchise.  No public utility franchise shall
be transferable except with the approval of the council expressed by
ordinance.



Section 3.  Term and plan of purchase.



   Any public utility franchise may be terminated by ordinance at any time
after the expiration of five (5) years after the beginning of operation of
such utility, provided that the city council shall have, by ordinance,
determined to acquire by condemnation or otherwise the properties of such
utility necessarily used in or conveniently useful for the operation thereof
within the city limits and provided further that in no event shall the city
so acquire such properties without the issue having been first submitted to
the qualified voters of the city and a majority of such voters having voted
in favor of so acquiring such properties by the city.



Section 4.  Right regulation.



   All grants, renewals, extensions, or amendments of public utility
franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be
subject to the right of the city.



   (a)   To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for failure to
begin construction or operation within the time prescribed or otherwise to
comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after
due notice and hearing.



   (b)   To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service,
and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable
standard of efficiency.



   (c)   To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of
products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates.



   (d)   To prescribe the form of accounts kept by each such utility;
provided, that if the utility shall keep its accounts in accordance with a
uniform system of accounts for said utility prescribed by the National
Association of Railroad and Public Utility Commissioners or a Federal Power
Commission or the Federal Communications Commission, their successor, or
successors, this shall be deemed sufficient compliance with this paragraph.



   (e)   To at any time examine and audit the accounts and other
reports, including reports on local operations by each public utility.



   (f)   To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may
be deemed desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of
the public.



   (g)   To at any time require such compensation and rental as may be
permitted by the laws of the State of Texas.



Section 5.  Consent of property owners.



   The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be
required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any
public utility; but nothing in this charter or any franchise granted
thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any property owner of any right
of action for damage or injury to his property as now or hereafter may be
provided by law.



Section 6.  Extension.



   All extensions of public utilities within the city limits shall become
a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as
such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights
contained in this charter, and in any original grant hereafter made.  The
right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original
grant and shall be terminable as provided in section 4. In case of an
extension of a public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted,
such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions
as the original grant.



Section 7.  Other conditions.



   All franchises, contracts, and agreements heretofore granted are
recognized as contracts between the City of Mount Pleasant and the grantee,
and the contractual rights as contained in any such franchises shall not be
impaired by the provisions of this charter, except that the power of the City
of Mount Pleasant to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition
of any utility property, is in all things reserved, and except the general
power of the city heretofore existing and herein provided for, to regulate
the rates and services of a grantee, which shall include the right to require
proper and adequate extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of
the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. 
Every public utility franchise hereafter granted, shall be held subject to
all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this
article, whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the
franchise.  Nothing in this charter shall operate to limit in any way, as
specifically stated, the discretion of the council or the electors of the
city in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with
any franchise grant. Any franchise grant hereinafter granted, shall not
exceed a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date thereof.



Section 8.  Franchise records.



   The city shall compile and maintain a public record of all public
utility franchises.



Section 9.  Accounts of municipally owned utilities.



   Accounts shall be kept for each public utility, owned or operated by
the city, in such manner as to show the true and complete finance results of
such city ownership and operation, including all assets, appropriately
subdivided into different classes, all liabilities subdivided by classes,
depreciation reserve, other reserves, and surplus; also revenues, operating
expenses including depreciation, interest payments, rental, and other
disposition of annual income.  The accounts shall show the actual capital
cost to the city of each public utility owned, also the cost of all
extensions, additions and improvements, and the source of the funds expended
for such capital purposes.  They shall show as nearly as possible the cost
of any service furnished to, or rendered by any such utility to any other
city or governmental department.  The council shall annually cause to be
made and published, a report showing the financial results of such city
ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section or
such data as the council shall deem expedient.



Section 10.  Regulations of rates and service.



   The city council shall have full power, after due notice and hearing,
to regulate by ordinance the rates and service of every public utility
operating in the City of Mount Pleasant.



Article IX.  Municipal Court



Section 1.  Municipal court created.



   There is hereby created in the City of Mount Pleasant, a court to be
known as the municipal court, with such jurisdiction, powers and duties as
are prescribed by the laws of the state.



Section 2.  Judge of the municipal court.



   Such court shall be presided over by a judge.  Such judge shall be
appointed by the city council, following the municipal election in
odd-numbered years and shall serve a two-year term.  The judge shall receive
such compensation as shall be determined by the council. In the absence of
the judge, the city council shall appoint a duly qualified person to serve in
an interim capacity.



Section 3.  Clerk of the municipal court.



   There shall be a clerk of the municipal court who shall be appointed by
the city manager.  The clerk shall have the power to administer oaths and
affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the court thereto, and
otherwise perform any and all acts necessary to the operation of such court
and conducting the business thereof.



   Deputy clerks of the municipal court are to be appointed by the city
manager and shall have the authority to act for and on behalf of the clerk of
the municipal court.



Article X.  General Provisions



Section 1.  Publicity of records.



   All records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the
city, shall be open to inspection by any citizen, any representative of a
citizen's organization, or any representative of the press at all reasonable
times and under reasonable regulations by the council.



Section 2.  Oath of office.



   Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his
office, take and subscribe the following oath or affirmation, to be filed and
kept in the office of the city secretary:



   “I,                           , do solemnly swear (or
affirm) that I will faithfully execute the duties of the office of      
                , of the City of Mount Pleasant, State of Texas, and
will, to the best of my ability, preserve, protect and defend the
constitution and laws of the United States and of the state and the charter
and ordinances of this city; and furthermore solemnly swear (or affirm) that
I have not directly or indirectly paid, offered or promised to pay,
contributed, nor promised to contribute any money, or valuable thing, or
promised any public office or employment, as a reward for the giving or
withholding of a vote at the election at which I was elected, or if the
office is one of appointment, to secure my appointment.  So help me God.”



Section 3.  Zoning Ordinance.



   For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals or general
welfare of the city and protecting and preserving places and areas of
historical, cultural, or architectural importance and significance, the
council may by ordinance and according to state law, regulate the location,
height, bulk and size of buildings and other structures, the size of yards,
courts and other open spaces, the density of population and the uses of
buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, business, residence or
other purposes.



Section 4.  Provision relating to assignment, execution and garnishment.



   The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be
liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill. 
The funds belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, firm or
corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or
sequestration; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any
debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any
person.  Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be
required to answer any such writ or garnishment on any account whatsoever. 
The city shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages of funds
by its employees, agents or contractors.



Section 5.  City not required to give security or execute bonds.



   It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which
the City of Mount Pleasant is a party, for any bond, undertaking or security
to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of said city in any of the state
courts; but in all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings same shall be
conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had
been given as required by law, and said city shall be just as liable as if
security or bond had been duly executed.



Section 6.  Effect of this charter on existing law.



   All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations now in force under
the city government of Mount Pleasant and not in conflict with the provisions
of this charter, shall remain in force under this charter until altered,
amended, or repealed by the council after this charter takes effect; and all
rights of the City of Mount Pleasant under existing franchises and contracts
are preserved in full force and effect.



Section 7.  Rearrangement and renumbering of charter, elimination of
gender-specific references and elimination of specific references to
provisions in state codes.



   The council shall have the power by ordinance to renumber and rearrange
all articles, sections and paragraphs of this Charter, or any amendments
thereto.  The council shall have the further power by ordinance to eliminate
gender-specific references within the various provisions of this charter and
to substitute gender-neutral terms, as it shall deem appropriate.  The
council shall have the further power to eliminate specific references to
provisions in state codes.  Upon the passage of any such ordinances, a copy
thereof, certified by the city secretary, shall be forwarded to the Secretary
of State of the State of Texas for filing.



Section 8.  Amending the charter.



   Amendments to this charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of
the city in the manner prescribed by state law.  The council shall, at
intervals not to exceed five (5) years, formally consider the need for
revisions(s) to the charter.  This review shall be based on a written report
from the city manager, with special attention given to conflicts, if any
between the charter and state law, and recommending such amendments to the
charter as may seem necessary for legal, administrative or other reasons.



Section 9.  Separability clause.



   If any section or part of any section of this charter shall be held
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holdings shall not affect
the remainder of this charter, nor the context in which such section or part
of section, so held invalid, may appear except to the extent that an entire
section or part of section may be separably connected in meaning and effect
with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly
apply.



Article XI.  City Manager



Section 1.  Appointment.



   The city council shall appoint a city manager at the organization
meeting of said council or as soon thereafter as practicable, who shall be
the administrative head of the municipal government, under the direction and
supervision of said council.



Section 2.  Residence of city manager.



   The city manager need not be a resident of the city at the time of
appointment but shall reside inside the city while in office.



Section 3 .  Term of office.



   The city manager shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall
be subject to discharge at the will of the city council.



Section 4.  Absence or disability of city manager.



   During the absence or disability of the city manager, the city council
shall designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of said
office.



Section 5.  Powers and duties.



   The powers and duties of the city manager shall be:



   (a)   To devote all his working time and attention to the affairs of
the city and be responsible to the city council for the efficient
administration of its affairs.



   (b)   To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced.



   (c)   To appoint and remove all heads of departments, offices and
agencies and all subordinate employees of the city, except the city attorney
and the judge of the municipal court.



   (d)   To exercise supervision and control over all departments,
offices, and agencies created by this charter or that may hereafter be
created by the city council, except as otherwise provided herein.



   (e)   To attend all meetings of the city council with the right to
take part in the discussions but having no vote.



   (f)   To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the
city or its inhabitants on any public utility franchise are faithfully kept
and performed; and upon knowledge of any violation thereof, to call the same
to the attention of the city council.



   (g)   To prepare and submit to the city council, prior to the
beginning of each fiscal year, a budget of proposed expenditures for the
ensuing year, showing in as much detail as practicable the estimated amounts
required, by months, for the efficient operation of each department of the
city government and the reasons for such estimated expenditures.



   (h)   To make a full written report to the city council as soon
after the close of each month's accounts as possible, showing the operation
and expenditures of each department of the city government for the preceding
month, and a comparison of such monthly expenditures by departments with the
monthly allowances made for such departments in the annual budget, and to
keep the council advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs
of the city.



   (i)   To act as purchasing agent for the city and to purchase all
merchandise, materials and supplies needed by the city to establish a
suitable storehouse where such supplies can be kept, and from which same
shall be issued as needed, and to adopt such rules and regulations governing
requisitions and the transaction of business between himself as such
purchasing agent, and the heads of the departments, officers and employees of
the city, as the city council may approve and as may be provided by state law.



   (j)   To recommend to the city council the salaries to be paid each
appointive officer and subordinate employee of the city, and it shall be the
duty of the council to pass ordinances or resolutions, from time to time
fixing the rates of compensation.



   (k)   To recommend to the city council in writing, from time to
time, for adoption, such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; and



   (l)   To do and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by
this charter or be required of him by the ordinances and resolutions of the
city council.



Section 6.  Departments.



   There shall be such administrative departments as finance, police,
fire, and health.  The council by ordinance may create, change and abolish
offices, departments or agencies other than the offices, departments and
agencies established by this charter.  The council may, if it deems
advisable, consolidate into one department two or more of the departments
hereby established.



Section 7.  Surety bond.



   All officers through whose office, agency or department city fiends are
collected, handled, deposited or disbursed, shall make good and sufficient
surety bonds in a surety company authorized to do business in Texas, payable
to the City of Mount Pleasant, so conditioned that the city shall be
protected against all actionable malfeasances or derelictions of official
duties; and such bonds shall be in principal sums as may be fixed by the
council to fully protect the city.



Section 8.  Shall be appointed.



   Until a city manager shall be appointed by the city council, the mayor
and council shall perform all duties and exercise the powers herein provided
for the city manager, as far as may be practicable.



Article XII.  Municipal Cemetery



   The city council shall have the authority to acquire, establish and
own, either by purchase, donation, bequest or otherwise, all property that
may be useful and necessary for the purpose of establishing and maintaining
such a cemetery.  For the purpose of establishing and maintaining such a
cemetery, the city council shall have the authority by ordinance and is
hereby authorized to levy annually an ad valorem tax on all real, personal
and mixed property within the territorial limits of the city, and upon all
franchises to any individual, firm, association or corporation, of not
exceeding the total tax of eight cents ($0.08) on the one hundred dollar
($100.00) assessed valuation of said property.



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS




CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Mount Pleasant,
Texas shall be designated as the “Code of Mount Pleasant, Texas” and may
be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Mount
Pleasant, Texas.



      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code
as modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.



      COUNCIL.  The legislative body of the city.



      COUNTY.  Titus County, Texas.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR
and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. 



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission or department of this municipality
unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of Texas.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter



analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart
a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.  Not all
chapters have subchapters.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or,” if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and
such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of
all municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.  Ordinances not requiring publication shall
take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in anyway be affected, released or discharged, but may be
prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued
in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any
existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be
specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired
amendment, substituted in its place.



      (2)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing
code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the
arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter or section.  In
addition to the indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed
ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the
ordinance.



   (B)   Supplementation of code.



      (1)   By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this
code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the
City Council.  A supplement to the code shall include all substantive
permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the City Council or
adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the
supplement and all changes made thereby in the code, and shall also include
all amendments to the Charter during the period.  The pages of a supplement
shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will,
where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially
obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been
inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the
latest ordinance included in the supplement.



      (2)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of
the code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the
omission thereof from reprinted pages.



      (3)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier
(meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the
supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts
of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so
to embody them into a unified code.  For example, the codifier may:



         (a)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate
subdivisions;



         (b)   Provide appropriate captions, headings and titles
for sections and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement,
and make changes in the captions, headings and titles;



         (c)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other
subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate
new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;



         (d)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of
the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this subchapter,” “this
division” and the like, as the case may be, or to “sections     to  
  ” (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the code which
embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the code);
and



         (e)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to
preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code,
but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of
ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. 
Example:  (`97 Code, § 1-2) (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed
1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute.  Example:  (Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 54.001) (`97 Code, § 1-2)
(Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85).



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information.



Example:



      § 31.10  ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS.



         This city has the authority to impose penalties for
ordinance violations.



      ('69 Code, § 1-5) (Ord. 10, passed 1-1-80)



      Statutory reference:



         General municipality penalty, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code,
§ 54.001



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act
is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by:



      (1)   A fine not to exceed $2,000.00 in all cases arising
under municipal ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning and public health
and sanitation other than vegetation and litter violations;



      (2)   A fine not to exceed $2,000.00, if a motor vehicle is
used in illegal dumping or an offense under the law or city ordinance
violated by the illegal dumping;



      (3)   A fine not to exceed $500.00 in all other cases,
provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty
provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state.



   (B)   Each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.  In the event that any such
violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the City Manager or the Chief of Police
or their assigns.



Statutory reference:



   Municipal penalties, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 54.001



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   CITY OFFICIALS





         31.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS





         32.   POLICE DEPARTMENT





         33.   CITY POLICIES; PERSONNEL





         34.   CODE OF ETHICS





         35.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT





         36.   RECORDS AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT





         37.   TAXATION AND FINANCES




CHAPTER 30:  CITY OFFICIALS



Section




Municipal Court Clerk




   30.01   Appointment and removal



   30.02   Powers and duties



   30.03   Deputy Municipal Court Clerk



MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK



§ 30.01  APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL.



   The City Manager shall appoint a Municipal Court Clerk who shall report
to and be supervised by the City Manager or his or her designated
representative.  The Court Clerk may be removed from office by the City
Manager.



(`87 Code, § 2-111) (Ord. 1986-15, passed 8-19-86; Am Ord. 1989-16, passed
10-3-89; Am. Ord. 1991-5, passed 10-1-91 ; Am. Ord. 2002-13, passed 2-19-02)



§ 30.02  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Court Clerk shall be responsible for all clerical and
quasi-judicial administrative functions of the Municipal Court and shall have
the same powers and authority which clerks of state courts of record have in
issuing process of said court and conducting the business thereof.



(`87 Code, § 2-112) (Ord. 1986-15, passed 8-19-86; Am. Ord. 1988-12, passed
10-20-88)



§ 30.03  DEPUTY MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK.



   The City Manager may appoint Deputy Municipal Court Clerks as necessary
to assure timely processing of municipal court cases.  Deputy Clerks may
lawfully perform all duties imposed upon the Court Clerk and are authorized
to administer oaths to complaints filed in the Municipal Court, make
certificates and affix the seal of such court.



(`87 Code, § 2-113) (Ord. 1986-15, passed 8-19-86; Am. Ord. 1988-12, passed
10-20-88; Am. Ord. 1989-16, passed 10-3-89; Am. Ord. 2002-13, passed 2-19-02)



CHAPTER 31:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



Civic Center Board



   31.01   Board created



   31.02   Vacancy



   31.03   Term of members



   31.04   Compensation of members



   31.05   Removal from office



   31.06   Organization



   31.07   Meetings



   31.08   Quorum



   31.09   Powers and duties



Library Board



   31.20   Board created



   31.21   Composition



   31.22   Appointment of members



   31.23   Members to be citizens



   31.24   Terms of members



   31.25   Compensation of members



   31.26   Removal of members from office



   31.27   Filling of vacancies



   31.28   Organization



   31.29   Meetings



   31.30   Rules of procedure; record of proceedings



   31.31   Quorum



   31.32   Powers and duties; recommendations subject to City Council



Parks and Recreation Board



   31.45   Board created



   31.46   Composition



   31.47   Appointment of members



   31.48   Members to be citizens



   31.49   Terms of members



   31.50   Compensation of members



   31.51   Removal of members from office



   31.52   Filling of vacancies



   31.53   Organization



   31.54   Meetings



   31.55   Rules of procedure; record of proceedings



   31.56   Quorum



   31.57   Powers and duties; recommendations subject to City Council



CIVIC CENTER BOARD



§ 31.01  BOARD CREATED.



    There is created in and for the city an administrative department to
be designated as the “Civic Center Board.”  The Board shall consist of
five members who shall be resident citizens of the city, unless such
residency shall be waived by the majority vote of the City Council.



(`87 Code, § 2-35) (Am. Ord. 2002-14, passed 2-19-02)



§ 31.02  VACANCY.



   All vacancies occurring in the membership of the Civic Center Board
shall be filled by appointment by a majority vote of the City Council and for
the unexpired term of the vacancy.



(`87 Code, § 2-36) (Am. Ord. 2002-14, passed 2-19-02)



§ 31.03  TERM OF MEMBERS.



   The term of office of the members of the Board shall commence on
February 1, except for the filling of vacancies. All members shall be
appointed for terms of two years.



(`87 Code, § 2-37) (Am. Ord. 2002-14, passed 2-19-02)



§ 31.04  COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.



   The members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be
allowed their actual expenses on any trips made by them with prior approval
of the City Council.



(`87 Code, § 2-38)



§ 31.05  REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.



   Any member of the Board shall be subject to removal from office by the
City Council for any cause deemed by the Council sufficient therefor in the
interest of public service and harmony.



(`87 Code, § 2-39)



§ 31.06  ORGANIZATION.



   The members of the Board shall select a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
and the City Manager shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as
Secretary to the Board. The Secretary so designated shall keep minutes and
submit a copy of the minutes of the Board to the City Manager as soon as
practical following each meeting.



(`87 Code, § 2-40)



§ 31.07  MEETINGS.



   The members of the Board shall hold such meetings as the Board may find
necessary and shall meet at the request of the Mayor, City Council or City
Manager.



(`87 Code, § 2-41)



§ 31.08  QUORUM.



   A simple majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum
of the Board for the transaction of all business. The position of any member
shall be declared vacant for failure to attend two consecutive meetings
without good cause and excuse by the Chairperson. Any excuse of a member for
nonattendance shall be shown in the minutes.



(`87 Code, § 2-42)



§ 31.09  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The powers and duties of the Board shall be as follows:



      (1)   Recommend rules and regulations governing the use of the
civic center and its equipment. These recommendations shall define, as nearly
as possible, that which shall be classified as “public use” and that
which shall be classified as “private use;”



      (2)   Recommend rules and regulations for the renting of the
civic center and its equipment for private use and the rates to be charged
therefor;



      (3)   Recommend general rules and regulations for the conduct
of all parties using the civic center and its equipment;



      (4)   From time to time make such other recommendations to the
City Council as the Board deems necessary for the best use of the civic
center and its equipment.



   (B)   Prior to their adoption, all recommendations of the Civic
Center Board shall be subject to approval, modification or veto by the City
Council.



(`87 Code, § 2-43)



LIBRARY BOARD



§ 31.20  BOARD CREATED.



   There is hereby created in and for the city an administrative
department to be designated as the “Library Board.”



(`87 Code, § 2-61) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



Cross-reference:



   Library regulations, see Ch. 92



§ 31.21  COMPOSITION.



   (A)   The Library Board shall be composed of five members.



   (B)   The Council may appoint no more than two emeritus members to
the Board.  Emeritus members of the Board shall be non-voting members.  An
emeritus member shall be a qualified elector of the city who has served ten
years on the Library Board and provided a significant contribution to the
city in the development and growth of the library.  With the exception of
voting and holding an officer position, an emeritus member shall have all the
rights and privileges of a member of the Library Board.  The terms of an
emeritus Board member shall be set in accordance with all other terms for
Board members under this code, however an emeritus member shall not be
subject to the term limitations for voting Board members contained in this
code.



(`87 Code, § 2-62) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-18-92; Am.
Ord. 2009-3, passed 3-17-09)



§ 31.22  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.



   The members of the Library Board shall be appointed by a majority vote
of the City Council.



(`87 Code, § 2-63) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.23  MEMBERS TO BE CITIZENS.



   Each member of the Library Board shall be a resident citizen of the
city, unless such citizenship shall be waived by a majority vote of the City
Council.



(`87 Code, § 2-64)



§ 31.24  TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   The term of office of the members of the Library Board shall commence
on February 1, except for the filling of vacancies. The members shall be
appointed for a term of two years with the terms of three members expiring on
January 31 of each odd-numbered year and terms of two of the members expiring
on January 31 of each even-numbered year.



(`87 Code, § 2-65) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-18-92)



§ 31.25  COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.



   The members of the Library Board shall serve without compensation.



(`87 Code, § 2-66) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.26  REMOVAL OF MEMBERS FROM OFFICE.



   Any member of the Library Board shall be subject to removal from office
by the City Council for any cause deemed by the Council sufficient therefor
in the interest of public service.



(`87 Code, § 2-67) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.27  FILLING OF VACANCIES.



   All vacancies occurring in the membership of the Library Board shall be
filled by appointment by a majority vote of the City Council and for the
unexpired term of the vacancy.



(`87 Code, § 2-68) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.28  ORGANIZATION.



   The members of the Library Board shall organize and select officers of
such Board from its membership.



(`87 Code, § 2-70) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.29  MEETINGS.



   The members of the Library Board shall hold such meetings as the Board
may determine or shall meet at the request of the City Council or City
Manager.



(`87 Code, § 2-71) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.30  RULES OF PROCEDURE; RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS.



   The Library Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a
record of its proceedings. A copy of such record shall be filed with the City
Secretary.



(`87 Code, § 2-72) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.31  QUORUM.



   A simple majority of the members of the Library Board shall constitute
a quorum of the Board for the transaction of all business.



(`87 Code, § 2-73) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.32  POWERS AND DUTIES; RECOMMENDATIONS SUBJECT TO CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   The powers and duties of the Library Board shall be as follows:



      (1)   Abide by applicable ordinances of the city;



      (2)   Recommend policies to govern the operation and program
of the library;



      (3)   Assist in planning and give guidance for expansion of
the library facilities;



      (4)   Assist in interpreting the policies and functions of the
Library Department to the public; and



      (5)   Encourage in every possible way the development and
advancement of the public library. 



(`87 Code, § 2-74) (Ord. 1969-1, passed 1-23-69; Am. Ord. 2001-20, passed
11-20-01)



   (B)   All recommendations of the Library Board shall be subject to
modification or veto by the City Council.



(`87 Code, § 2-74) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD



§ 31.45  BOARD CREATED.



   There is created in and for the city an administrative department to be
designated as the “Parks and Recreation Board.”



(`87 Code, § 15-1) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



Cross-reference:



   Parks and recreation, see Ch. 90



§ 31.46  COMPOSITION.



   The Parks and Recreation Board shall be composed of five members.



(`87 Code, § 15-2) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 1984-4, passed 3-6-84)



§ 31.47  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.



   The members of the Parks and Recreation Board shall be appointed by a
majority vote of the City Council.



(`87 Code, § 15-3) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.48  MEMBERS TO BE CITIZENS.



   Each member of the Parks and Recreation Board shall be a resident
citizen of the city unless such citizenship requirements shall be waived by a
majority vote of the City Council.



(`87 Code, § 15-4) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.49  TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   The term of office of the members of the Parks and Recreation Board
shall commence on February 1, except for the filling of vacancies. The
members shall be appointed for a term of two years, with the exception of
four members whose terms shall expire on January 31, 1968. Thereafter, all
members shall be appointed for terms of two years.



(`87 Code, § 15-5) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.50  COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.



   The members of the Board shall serve without compensation.



(`87 Code, § 15-6) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.51  REMOVAL OF MEMBERS FROM OFFICE.



   Any member of the Parks and Recreation Board shall be subject to
removal from office by the City Council for any cause deemed by the Council
sufficient therefor in the interest of public service.



(`87 Code, § 15-7) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.52  FILLING OF VACANCIES.



   All vacancies occurring in the membership of the Parks and Recreation
Board shall be filled by appointment by a majority vote of the City Council
and for the unexpired term of the vacancy.



(`87 Code, § 15-8) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.53  ORGANIZATION.



   The members of the Parks and Recreation Board shall organize and select
officers of such Board from its membership.



(`87 Code, § 15-10) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.54  MEETINGS.



   The members of the Parks and Recreation Board shall hold such meetings
as the Board may determine or shall meet at the request of the City Council
or City Manager.



(`87 Code, § 15-11) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.55  RULES OF PROCEDURE; RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS.



   The Parks and Recreation Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure
and keep a record of its proceedings. A copy of such record shall be filed
with the City Secretary.



(`87 Code, § 15-12) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.56  QUORUM



   A simple majority of the members of the Parks and Recreation Board
shall constitute a quorum of the Board for the transaction of all business.



(`87 Code, § 15-13) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



§ 31.57  POWERS AND DUTIES; RECOMMENDATIONS SUBJECT TO CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   The powers and duties of the Parks and Recreation Board shall
be as follows:



      (1)   To act in an advisory capacity in all matters pertaining
to public parks and recreation operated by the city;



      (2)   To assist in the planning of parks and recreation
programs and promote and stimulate public interest therein, and to that end,
solicit to the fullest possible extent the cooperation of all agencies;



      (3)   To make such recommendations as it deems proper in the
planning, designing and planting of shrubs, trees, grasses and other foliage
and make such recommendations as it deems proper in other improvements
considered most advantageous to the use of the parks and their facilities.



(`87 Code, § 15-14) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



   (B)   All recommendations of the Parks and Recreation Board shall be
subject to modification or veto by the City Council.



(`87 Code, § 15-15) (Ord. passed 7-3-67)



CHAPTER 32:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



General Provisions



   32.01   Arrest without warrant



   32.02   Cash bail



   32.03   Refusing to aid an officer



   32.04   Unlocking jail doors when prisoners present



Impoundment of Property



   32.15   Short title



   32.16   Application of provisions



   32.17   Declaration of nuisance



   32.18   Impoundment of nuisances authorized



   32.19   Declaration of lien



   32.20   Retention of property



   32.21   Redemption of impounded property



   32.22   Sale of impounded property



   32.23   Auction; bill of sale



   32.24   Fee



   32.25   Disposition of proceeds



   32.26   Records



   32.27   Disposition of impounded property not sold



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 32.01  ARREST WITHOUT WARRANT.



   Arrests, without warrant, may be made by the Chief of Police or any
other police officer of the city when offenses against the laws, sections of
this code or ordinances are committed in their presence or where persons are
found in suspicious places and under circumstances which reasonably show that
such persons have been guilty of some felony or breach of the peace or
threatened or about to commit some offense against the law.



(`87 Code, § 17-1)



§ 32.02  CASH BAIL.



   (A)   Acceptance authorized; forfeiture. The Chief of Police or any
other officer is authorized to receive from any person arrested for violation
of any section of this code, city ordinance or any state law of which the
municipal court has jurisdiction, cash bails for the appearance of such
persons before the municipal court. If such person voluntarily signs a
written agreement in which he or she agrees that in the event of failure to
make appearance by or upon the date therein named, his or her bail may be
forfeited by the municipal court to the city by an order of judgment of the
court, entered upon its minutes, without service of notice or citation of any
kind upon him or her and will in the same instrument authorize such officer,
in the event of such person’s failure to appear on said date, to plead
guilty for him or her and apply said cash bail to the payment of the fine and
costs which may be assessed against him or her.



(`87 Code, § 17-2) (Am. Ord. 2002-3, passed 2-5-02)



   (B)   Amount. Any officer so accepting any cash bail shall fix the
same at not less than $5.00. Should such officer deem such amount of bail
insufficient to compel the appearance of such person at the date fixed, then
he or she may demand such sum as a cash bail as in his or her judgment will
require the appearance of such person at the date set for trial; provided
that no cash bail shall be accepted unless voluntarily offered by the person
charged.



(`87 Code, § 17-3)



   (C)   Receipt. When a cash bail is tendered and accepted, the
officer accepting the same shall issue a special cash bail receipt therefor
to the person tendering such cash bail, a copy of which is to remain in the
cash bail receipt book. When a cash bail is returned to the person who
deposited it, a receipt shall be taken therefor. The same procedure shall
apply where the person who deposited the money is present and orders such
cash bail to be applied on the payment of any fine and costs assessed against
him or her. When such person fails to make his or her appearance and the
officer pleads guilty for him or her, such officer shall apply so much of the
cash bail as may be necessary for the satisfaction of such fine and costs,
and the balance shall be returned to the defendant. In the event such cash
bail is forfeited, then the entire sum shall be paid to the proper officer of
the city.



(`87 Code, § 17-4)



§ 32.03  REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER.



   If any person, being called on by the Chief of Police or any other
peace officer, shall refuse or fail to aid such officer in any manner in
which, by law, he or she may be rightfully called on to aid or assist in the
execution of a duty incumbent upon such officer, he or she shall be fined as
provided in § 10.99 of this code.



(`87 Code, § 17-5)



Cross-reference:



   Traffic code, see Title VII



§ 32.04  UNLOCKING JAIL DOORS WHEN PRISONERS PRESENT.



   When any prisoner is incarcerated in the city jail, only members of the
City Police Department shall unlock any door leading into or in said city
jail.



(`87 Code, § 17-6) (Ord. passed 9-2-52)



IMPOUNDMENT OF PROPERTY



§ 32.15  SHORT TITLE.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be known and may be cited as
“Impoundment of Property Regulations.”



(`87 Code, § 17-11) (Ord. passed 1-17-67)



§ 32.16  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be applicable to all properties
impounded by any officer, agent or employee of the city, except livestock,
dogs and cats.



(`87 Code, § 17-12) (Ord. passed 1-17-67)



§ 32.17  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.



   Any vehicle or other property or obstruction placed, left standing,
parked, erected or lying in violation of any section of this subchapter or
left unattended for more than 48 continuous hours in or on any public street,
alley, sidewalk, park or other public place of the city is declared to be a
nuisance.



(`87 Code, § 17-13) (Ord. passed 1-17-67)



§ 32.18  IMPOUNDMENT OF NUISANCES AUTHORIZED.



   Any property declared to be a nuisance under the provisions of this
subchapter when found shall be summarily removed by any police officer of the
city and taken to the Police Pound and shall be kept there until redeemed or
sold as provided in this subchapter.



(`87 Code, § 17-14) (Ord. passed 1-17-67)



§ 32.19  DECLARATION OF LIEN.



   The city shall have a lien on personal property impounded pursuant to
the provisions of this subchapter for all costs incurred in impounding,
storing and advertising such property; and such lien shall be prior and
superior to all other liens of every kind, save and except liens for ad
valorem taxes.



(`87 Code, § 17-15) (Ord. passed 1-17-67)



§ 32.20  RETENTION OF PROPERTY.



   The city may retain possession of any property impounded under the
provisions of this subchapter until all costs are paid and may sell the same
as provided in this subchapter.



(`87 Code, § 17-16) (Ord. passed 1-17-67)



§ 32.21  REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED PROPERTY.



   The owner or any person legally entitled to possession of any personal
property impounded under the provisions of this subchapter may redeem the
same as follows:



   (A)   Before sale.  By paying to the Chief of Police the impounding
fee and any other actual expenses incurred by the city in impounding and
keeping the impounded property, as determined by the Chief of Police.



   (B)   After sale. By paying to the buyer at the auction sale double
the amount paid by him or her for such personal property and any reasonable
expenses incurred by him or her for keeping same; provided that the property
must be redeemed from the auction buyer within 30 days after the date of the
auction sale, excluding the date of sale; otherwise, title to said property
shall become absolute in the auction buyer.



(`87 Code, § 17-17) (Ord. passed 1-17-67)



§ 32.22  SALE OF IMPOUNDED PROPERTY.



   (A)   Required. When any personal property, other than motor
vehicles, is not redeemed within 60 days after being impounded under the
provisions of this subchapter and when any motor vehicle is not redeemed
after compliance by the Chief of Police with the provisions of division (C)
of this section, the Chief of Police shall sell the same at public auction to
satisfy the lien of the city.



(`87 Code, § 17-18)



   (B)   Procedure when not motor vehicles. Before selling impounded
personal property, other than motor vehicles, the Chief of Police shall post
two notices thereof, one at the door of the county courthouse and one at the
entrance of the City Hall and shall cause a copy thereof to be published in a
newspaper published in the city once a week for two consecutive weeks, the
date of the first publication to be at least 14 days prior to the day of the
auction sale. The notice of sale shall describe the impounded property, state
that the same is unredeemed, state that the same will be sold at public
auction, designate the place of sale and state a time and date of sale which
shall not be less than 14 days from the date of posting such notices.



(`87 Code, § 17-19)



   (C)   Procedure for motor vehicles.



      (1)   Obtain records. When any motor vehicle has not been
redeemed within 30 days from the date of its impounding, it shall be the duty
of the Chief of Police to submit to the State Highway Department and similar
agency of the proper state when the vehicle is from another state all
information in his or her possession concerning said vehicle and to request
that said department supply to him or her all information the records of the
Department contained on said vehicle. Immediately on receipt of such
information, the Chief of Police shall notify the owner and lienholders as
shown by the records of said Department by registered mail, with return
receipt requested, that said vehicle has been impounded and of the provisions
of this subchapter in regard to redemption and sale of impounded property.



      (2)   Notice to owner, lienholders. In the event a motor
vehicle has not been redeemed within 15 days from receipt of the return
receipt or notice of nondelivery of said registered mail, the Chief of Police
shall prepare a notice of sale of such vehicle, in the manner described in
division (B) of this section, shall send a copy of said notice to owner and
lienholders, as shown by the records of said Highway Department, by
registered mail, and shall post and advertise said notices in the manner
required in such section. Notice by registered mail to the address shown on
the records of said Highway Department shall constitute notice of the pending
sale to such owner and lienholders.



      (3)   Owner not known.  When the Chief of Police is unable to
ascertain the names of the owner and lienholders, and the motor vehicle has
not been redeemed within 45 days from its impounding, no notice of sale other
than posting and advertising as provided by division (B) of this section
shall be required.



(`87 Code, § 17-20) (Ord. passed 1-17-67)



§ 32.23  AUCTION; BILL OF SALE.



   When any impounded personal property, including motor vehicles, is not
redeemed by the date and time designated in the notice of sale, the Chief of
Police shall sell such property at public auction and the City Auctioneer
shall execute a bill of sale of said property to the purchaser thereof;
provided, however, he or she shall not execute or deliver any but a
conditional bill of sale unless and until the title of said buyer has become
absolute by an expiration of 30 days in time, exclusive of the day of sale,
without such property being redeemed by the owner.



(`87 Code, § 17-21) (Ord. passed 1-17-67)



§ 32.24  FEE.



   The following fees shall be charged for the impoundment of property
under the provisions of this subchapter and shall be paid into the City
Treasury:



   (A)   For taking and impounding any personal property, plus any
wrecker or towing charges   $25.00



   (B)   For preparing advertisements of sale for each
article   $5.00



   (C)   For selling each article   $5.00



   (D)   For posting notices of sale relating to any one
article   $5.00



(`87 Code, § 17-22) (Ord. passed 1-17-67)



§ 32.25  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.



   After deducting the impounding fee and all other actual expenses
incurred by the city in impounding, storing and selling of property under the
provisions of this subchapter, as determined by the Chief of Police and not
to exceed a reasonable amount for each impounded article, he or she shall pay
the balance of the proceeds of such sale, if any, to the owner of the
property. If the owner fails to call for such proceeds they shall be paid
into the City Treasury. Within six months after such auction sale, the owner
may apply in writing to the Chief of Police and, upon satisfactory proof of
ownership, shall be entitled to receive the amount of the proceeds delivered
to the City Treasury.



(`87 Code, § 17-23) (Ord. passed 1-17-67)



§ 32.26  RECORDS.



   The Chief of Police shall keep a record book of all property impounded
under the provisions of this subchapter which shall contain: a description of
all property impounded; the date and time of impoundment; the date notices of
sale were posted, advertised and mailed to owners and lienholders; the return
of receipts of registered notices; the date of the sale at auction; the
amount realized for each article at such sale; the name and address of the
owner and lienholders, if known; the name and address of the auction buyer;
and any other such information as he or she may deem necessary.



(`87 Code, § 17-24) (Ord. passed 1-17-67)



§ 32.27  DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED PROPERTY NOT SOLD.



   Property impounded under the provisions of this subchapter which is
offered for sale at public auction in accordance with the procedure herein
prescribed and upon which no person bids shall thereafter be sold or
otherwise disposed of as junk. Money received for junk property shall be
disposed of in the same manner as proceeds from an auction sale under this
subchapter. Property that cannot be disposed of as junk shall be broken up
and carried to the City Dump.



(`87 Code, § 17-25) (Ord. passed 1-17-67)



CHAPTER 33:  CITY POLICIES; PERSONNEL



Section



City Policies



   33.01   Postponement of Council action



   33.02   Prohibition against city lending credit



   33.03   City agents prohibited from purchasing supplies from
delinquent taxpayers



   33.04   Prohibition against use of city equipment



   33.05   Indemnification of officers and employees



Personnel



   33.20   Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS) - election to
participate; adoption by reference



   33.21   Updated service credits; increase in retirement annuities



CITY POLICIES



§ 33.01  POSTPONEMENT OF COUNCIL ACTION.



   Any matter brought before the City Council must receive a majority vote
of the Council members present in order to be laid on the table or postponed.



(`87 Code, § 2-3) (Mo. passed 6-20-67; Am. Ord. 1980-8, passed 5-20-80)



§ 33.02  PROHIBITION AGAINST CITY LENDING CREDIT.



   Prior to doing any work or the furnishing of labor or material by the
city for any person, such person shall deposit with the city the amount of
money estimated by the City Manager to cover the cost of the work, labor,
material and contingencies. If there remains a surplus of funds, the same
shall be returned to the depositor; and if there is a deficit, such deficit
shall be promptly paid.



(`87 Code, § 2-4)



§ 33.03  CITY AGENTS PROHIBITED FROM PURCHASING SUPPLIES FROM DELINQUENT
TAXPAYERS.



   No agent or employee of the City of Mount Pleasant shall purchase for,
or on behalf of, the city any supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, motor
vehicles, motor vehicle parts or services from any person who owes delinquent
taxes to the city or who may be in arrears for two months with the city on
any other debt.



(`87 Code, § 2-5) (Ord. 1968-4, passed 6-18-68)



§ 33.04  PROHIBITION AGAINST USE OF CITY EQUIPMENT.



   No motor equipment, motor vehicles, motor graders or street, water and
sewer equipment belonging to the city shall be used for any private use or
purpose or any use other than that of the city, except with consent of the
City Council; provided, however, that police cars and fire trucks may be used
in the city, on permission of the City Manager, for such civic functions as
parades.



(`87 Code, § 2-6) (Ord. 1969-9, passed 6-3-69)



§ 33.05  INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   The city shall indemnify and hold harmless any final claim not covered
by insurance against any officer or employee arising within the scope of duty
or employment of the officer or employee with the city.



(`87 Code, § 2-7) (Ord. 1980-11, passed 10-7-80)



PERSONNEL



§ 33.20  TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM (TMRS)—ELECTION TO
PARTICIPATE; ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   Election to participate in the TMRS.  On behalf of the city,
the City Council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and
all of the employees of all departments participate in the Texas Municipal
Retirement System (hereafter “TMRS”) as provided in Tex. Gov’t Code
§§ 851.001 et seq., as amended; and all of the benefits and obligations of
such system are hereby accepted.



(Ord. 1995-18, passed 12-19-95; Am. Ord. 1995-24, passed 12-19-95; Am. Ord.
1998-16, passed 9-15-98; Am Ord. 2002-15, passed 2-19-02)



   (B)   Election to participate in the TMRS Supplemental Benefits
Fund.  The City Council elects to have the employees of all participating
departments of the city participate in and be covered by the Supplemental
Benefits Fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by Tex.
Gov’t Code, §§ 851.001et seq.; and all the benefits and obligations of
participation in said Fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such
employees.



   (C)   Adoption by reference.  Ordinances effecting the plan for
participation in the TMRS, employee contributions, updated service credits,
increases in benefits and retirement annuities and any other applicable
legislation of the city and state are adopted by reference into this code of
ordinances as if fully set forth herein and shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Secretary.



(Am. Ord. 2002-15, passed 2-19-02)



§ 33.21  UPDATED SERVICE CREDITS; INCREASE IN RETIREMENT ANNUITIES.



   (A)   Authorization of Updated Service Credits.



      (1)   On the terms and conditions set out in Tex. Gov't Code,
§§ 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8 as amended (hereinafter
referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as “System”) who has current
service credit or prior service credit in the System in force and effect on
the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by
reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at
least 36 months of credited service with the System, shall be and is hereby
allowed “Updated Service Credit” (as that term is defined in Tex. Gov't
Code, § 843.402(d) of the TMRS Act).



      (2)   On the terms and conditions set out in Tex. Gov't
Code,§ 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the System who is eligible for
Updated Service Credits on the basis of service with this city, who has
unforfeited credit for prior service and or current service with another
participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service,
and was a contributing member on the first day of January of the calendar
year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with Updated Service Credits
pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment set
forth in said Tex. Gov't Code, § 853.601, both as to the initial grant
hereunder and all future grants under this section.



      (3)   The Updated Service Credit hereby allowed and provided
for shall be 100% of the “base Updated Service Credit” of the member
(calculated as provided in Tex. Gov't Code, § 863.402(c) of the TMRS Act).



      (4)   Each Updated Service Credit allowed hereunder shall
replace any Updated Service Credit, prior service credit, or antecedent
service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.



      (5)   In accordance with the provisions of Tex. Gov't Code, §
863.501(d) of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the System by
employees of the several participating departments on account of current
service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section
on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city.



   (B)   Increase in retirement annuities.



      (1)   On terms and conditions set out in Tex. Gov't Code, §
854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for
payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the
System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the
city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from
service by such employees to the city.  An annuity increased under this
section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the
same person.



      (2)   The amount of the annuity increase under Tex. Gov't
Code, § 854.203 is computed as the sum of the prior service and current
service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose
service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70% of the percentage change
in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year
immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the
December that is 13 months before the effective date of Tex. Gov't Code, §
854.203.



      (3)   An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an
option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner
that the original annuity was reduced.



      (4)   If a computation hereunder does not result in an
increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be
changed hereunder.



      (5)   The amount by which an increase under Tex. Gov't Code,
§ 854.203 exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an
obligation of the city and its account in the municipality accumulation fund
of the System.



   (C)   Dates of allowances and increases.  The initial allowance of
Updated Service Credit and Increase in Retirement Annuities hereunder shall
be effective in January 1, 2001, subject to approval by the Board of Trustees
of the System.  An allowance of Updated Service Credits and an increase in
retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent
year until this section ceases to be in effect under Tex. Gov't Code, §
853.404(e) of the TMRS Act, provided that as to such subsequent year, the
actuary for the TMRS system has made the determination set forth in Tex.
Gov't Code, § 853.404(d) of the TMRS Act.



(Ord. 2001-14, passed 9-4-01)



CHAPTER 34:  CODE OF ETHICS



Section



   34.01   Definitions



   34.02   Policy and purpose



   34.03   Unethical activity



   34.04   Cumulative legal effect



 



   34.99   Penalty



§ 34.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISCRETIONARY AUTHORITY.  The power to exercise any judgment in a
decision or action.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person employed by the city, including those individuals
employed on a part- time basis, but such term shall not be extended to apply
to any independent contractor.



   ENTITY. A sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm,
corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company,
receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which
business may be conducted.



   OFFICER OR OFFICIAL. Any member of the City Council and any appointive
member of a board, commission, authority or committee set up by ordinance,
the charter or state law on a permanent basis, but no members of a board,
commission, authority or committee that functions only in an advisory or
study capacity and which has no discretionary authority.



   REMOTE INTEREST. An interest of a person or entity, including an
official, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. The
interest of a Council member in the property tax rate, general city fees,
city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or other similar
decision is a remote interest to the extent that the Council member is
affected in common with the general public.



   SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST. An interest in another person or an entity if:



      (1)   The interest is ownership of 5% or more of the voting
stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of
the equity or market value of the entity;



      (2)   Funds received by the person from the other person or
entity either during the previous 12 months or the previous calendar year
equaled or exceeded $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commission or professional
fees or $20,000.00 in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional
services, or 10% of the person’s gross income during that period, whichever
is less;



      (3)   The person serves as a corporate officer or member of
the Board of Directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity,
other than a corporate entity owned or created by the City Council; or



      (4)   The person is a creditor, debtor or guarantor of the
other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more.



   SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST IN REAL PROPERTY. An interest in real property
which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of $5,000.00 or
more.



   SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST IN PARTNERSHIPS, PROFESSIONAL CORPORATIONS AND
OTHER ENTITIES. If a city official or employee is a member of a partnership
or professional corporation, or conducts business through another entity, a
substantial interest of the partnership, professional corporation or entity
shall be deemed to be a substantial interest of the city official or employee
if:



      (1)   The partnership or professional corporation has fewer
than 20 partners or shareholders;



      (2)   Regardless of the number of partners or shareholders,
the official or employee has an equity interest, share or draw equal to or
greater than 5% of the capital or revenues of the partnership, professional
corporation or other entity; or



      (3)   With regard to the partnership, professional corporation
or other entity’s substantial interest in a client, the official or
employee has personally acted within the preceding 24 months in a
professional or fiduciary capacity for that client.



(`87 Code, § 2-171) (Am. Ord. 1990-18, passed 11-6-90)



§ 34.02  POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is declared to be the policy of the City of Mount Pleasant
that the proper operation of democratic government requires that:



      (1)   City officials and employees be independent, impartial
and responsible only to the people of the city;



      (2)   Governmental decisions and policies be made using the
proper procedures of the governmental structure;



      (3)   No city official or employee have any interest, direct
or indirect, nor engage in any business transaction or professional activity,
nor incur any obligation of any nature which is in conflict with the proper
discharge of his or her duties in the public interest;



      (4)   Public office not be used for personal gain;



      (5)   The City Council be maintained as a nonpartisan body;



      (6)   City officials and employees fully comply with state
statutes and laws, as amended, concerning conflicts of interest.



   (B)   In furtherance of this policy, the City Council has determined
that it is advisable to enact this Code of Ethics for all city officers,
officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid,
advisory or administrative, to serve not only as a guide for official conduct
of the city’s public servants, but also as a basis for discipline for those
who refuse to abide by its terms and provisions.



(`87 Code, § 2-172) (Am. Ord. 1990-18, passed 11-6-90)



§ 34.03  UNETHICAL ACTIVITY.



   No officer, official or employee of the city shall:



   (A)   Accept any gift or favor of more than $25.00 in value from any
person or entity that might reasonably tend to influence such officer,
official or employee in the discharge of official duties or grant in the
discharge of official duties any improper favor, service or thing of value;



   (B)   Use his or her official position to solicit or secure special
privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others;



   (C)   Disclose information that could adversely affect the property,
government or affairs of the city or directly or indirectly use any
information gained by reason of his or her official position or employment
for his or her own personal gain or benefit or for the private interest of
others;



   (D)   Transact any business on behalf of the city in his or her
official capacity with any business entity with which he or she is an
officer, agent or member or in which he or she owns a substantial interest.
In the event that such a circumstance should arise, then in the case of an
officer or official, he or she shall make known such interest and abstain
from voting on the matter, or in the case of reassignment, state the reasons
for doing so and have nothing further to do with the matter involved;



   (E)   Engage in any outside activities which will conflict with, or
will be incompatible with, his or her assigned duties in the employment of
the city, or reflect discredit upon the city, or which is employment with the
city will give him or her an advantage over others engaged in a similar
business, vocation or activity;



   (F)   Accept other employment or engage in outside activities
incompatible with the full and proper discharge of his or her duties and
responsibilities with the city or which might impair his or her independent
judgment in the performance of his or her public duties;



   (G)   Receive any fee or compensation for his or her services as an
officer, official or employee of the city from any source other than the
city, except as may otherwise be provided by law. This shall not prohibit an
officer, official or employee from performing the same or other services that
he or she performs for the city for a private organization if there is no
conflict with his or her city duties and responsibilities;



   (H)   Represent, directly or indirectly, or appear in behalf of the
private interest of others before any agency, board, commission, authority or
committee of the city or represent any private interest of others in any
action or proceeding involving the city or participate on behalf of others in
any litigation to which the city might be a party or even accept any retainer
or compensation that is contingent upon a specific action being taken by the
city or any of its agencies, boards, commissions, authorities or committees;



   (I)   Use the prestige of his or her position in behalf of any
political party or engage in any political activity which does not maintain
the nonpartisan policy of the city; provided however, that all employees are
encouraged to register and vote as they may choose in all local, state and
national elections;



   (J)   Knowingly perform or refuse to perform any act in order to
deliberately hinder the execution and implementation of any city ordinances,
rules or regulations or the achievement of official city programs.



(`87 Code, § 2-173) (Am. Ord. 1990-18, passed 11-6-90) Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.04  CUMULATIVE LEGAL EFFECT.



   In its legal effect, this chapter is cumulative of all provisions of
the City Charter, this code or state statutes or laws defining and
prohibiting conflicts of interests.



(`87 Code, § 2-175) (Am. Ord. 1990-18, passed 11-6-90)



§ 34.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any city officer, official or employee violating any provision
of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in § 10.99.



   (B)   The penalty prescribed herein shall not limit the power of the
City Council to discipline its members pursuant to applicable provisions of
the City Charter, this code or state statutes or laws defining and
prohibiting conflicts of interests.



   (C)   The penalty prescribed herein shall not limit the power of the
City Manager to discipline those employees under the City Manager’s
supervision pursuant to applicable provisions of the City Charter, this code,
the adopted personnel policies of the city or state statutes or laws defining
and prohibiting conflicts of interests.



(`87 Code, § 2-174) (Am. Ord. 1990-18, passed 11-6-90)



CHAPTER 35:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   35.01   Organization



   35.02   Emergency Management Director; powers and duties



   35.03   Emergency Management Plan



   35.04   Interjurisdictional program authorized



   35.05   Chapter to supersede conflicting rules



   35.06   City to incur no liability



   35.07   Chapter not to commit city funds



   35.08   Offenses



   35.09   Limitations of chapter



   35.10   Adoption of the National Incident Management System (NIMS)



 



   35.99   Penalty



§ 35.01  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   There exists the office of Emergency Management Director of
the City, which shall be held by the Mayor in accordance with state law.



   (B)   An Emergency Management Coordinator may be appointed by and
serve at the pleasure of the Director.



   (C)   The Director shall be responsible for a program of
comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the
duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. The Director may
delegate authority for execution of these duties to the Coordinator, but
ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the Director.



   (D)   The operational emergency management organization of the City
shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the
Director in the Emergency Management Plan, as well as organized volunteer
groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed
among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the
Emergency Management Plan.



(`87 Code, § 8-1) (Ord. 1986-6, passed 3-18-86)



§ 35.02  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management Director
shall include the following:



   (A)   Conduct an on-going survey of actual or potential hazards
which threaten life and property within the city and an on-going program of
identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures
which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such
hazards if a disaster did occur;



   (B)   Supervision of the development and approval of an Emergency
Management Plan for the city and shall recommend for adoption by the City
Council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation
of the Plan;



   (C)   Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The
declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven
days except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster
shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with
the City Secretary;



   (D)   Issuance of proclamations, regulations or directives which are
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such a proclamation,
regulation or directive shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to
bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed
with the City Secretary;



   (E)   Direction and control of the operations of the Mount Pleasant
emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency
management personnel;



   (F)   Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility
that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city;



   (G)   Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district,
state, regional or federal emergency management organizations;



   (H)   Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies
from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions
of the Emergency Management Plan;



   (I)   Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid
agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other
local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if
deemed desirable, of an agreement with Titus County and with other
municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of
emergency management efforts;



   (J)   Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of
all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private
contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency
management within the city;



   (K)   Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the City
Attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes;



   (L)   Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment,
supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for
herein;



   (M)   Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act 1975
(Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6889-7).



(`87 Code, § 8-2) (Ord. 1986-6, passed 3-18-86)



§ 35.03  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   A comprehensive Emergency Management Plan shall be developed and
maintained in a current state. The Plan shall set forth the form of the
organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers and designate officers and
employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. As provided by state
law, the Plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the
State Division of Emergency Management of the State of Texas. Insofar as
possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to
the recommendations of the State Division of Emergency Management. When
approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the
functions assigned by the Plan and to maintain their portion of the Plan in a
current state of readiness at all times. The Emergency Management Plan shall
be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during
the time of a disaster.



(`87 Code, § 8-3) (Ord. 1986-6, passed 3-18-86)



§ 35.04  INTERJURISDICTIONAL PROGRAM AUTHORIZED.



   The Mayor is authorized to join with the County Judge of the County of
Titus and the Mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of an
Emergency Management Council for the County of Titus and shall have the
authority to cooperate in the preparation of a Joint Emergency Management
Plan and in the appointment of a Joint Emergency Management Coordinator, as
well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of
emergency management insofar as said program may affect the City.



(`87 Code, § 8-4) (Ord. 1986-6, passed 3-18-86)



§ 35.05  CHAPTER TO SUPERSEDE CONFLICTING RULES.



   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and
promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede
and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar
as the latter may be inconsistent therewith.



(`87 Code, § 8-5) (Ord. 1986-6, passed 3-18-86)



§ 35.06  CITY TO INCUR NO LIABILITY.



   This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions
for the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither the
city, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual,
receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of
the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting
to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to
persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real
estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license of privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect,
designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or
premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or
practical enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with
his or her successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the
death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises
under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage
to, the property of such person.



(`87 Code, § 8-6) (Ord. 1986-6, passed 3-18-86)



§ 35.07  CHAPTER NOT TO COMMIT CITY FUNDS.



   No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city
in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter
without prior approval by the City Council, nor shall any person have any
right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and
specific approval of the City Council unless during a declared disaster.
During a declared disaster, the Mayor may expend and/or commit public funds
of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health,
life or property.



(`87 Code, § 8-7) (Ord. 1986-6, passed 3-18-86)



§ 35.08  OFFENSES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct,
hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the
enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or to
do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the
authority contained in this chapter.



   (B)   It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or
display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member
of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do
so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.



   (C)   Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other
device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning,
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to
the penalties imposed by this chapter.



(`87 Code, § 8-8(A) through (C)) (Ord. 1986-6, passed 3-18-86) Penalty, see
§ 35.99



§ 35.09  LIMITATIONS OF CHAPTER.



   This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or
federal statute nor with any naval order, rule or regulation.



(`87 Code, § 8-9) (Ord. 1986-6, passed 3-18-86)



§ 35.10 ADOPTION OF THE NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS).



   There is adopted by the city for the purpose of managing domestic
emergencies, no matter the cause, size or complexity, that certain incident
management system known as the National Incident Management System (NIMS)
developed and administered by the Secretary of Homeland Security as directed
by the President in Homeland Security Directive 5.



(Ord. 2004-22, passed 12-21-04)



§ 35.99  PENALTY.



   Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable as set forth in § 10.99.



(`87 Code, § 8-8(D)) (Ord. 1986-6, passed 3-18-86)



CHAPTER 36:  RECORDS AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT



Section



   36.01   Definitions



   36.02   Municipal records declared public property



   36.03   Policy



   36.04   Designation of Records Management Officer



   36.05   Records Management Plan to be developed; approval; authority



   36.06   Duties of Records Management Officer



   36.07   Duties and responsibilities of department heads



   36.08   Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing
with state



   36.09   Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of
records under schedule



   36.10   Destruction of unscheduled records



   36.11   Records center



   36.12   Preservation of permanent records



   36.13   Non-current records not to be maintained in office files



   36.14   Repeal of conflicting ordinances



§ 36.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEPARTMENT HEAD.  The officer who by ordinance or administrative
policy is in charge of an office of the City that creates or receives records.



   ESSENTIAL RECORD. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or
continuation of its operations in an emergency or disaster, to the
re-creation of its legal and financial status or to the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.



   MUNICIPAL RECORDS.  All documents, papers, letters, books, maps,
photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic
media or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or
characteristic and regardless of whether public access to them is open or
restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or
any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of
public business are declared to be the records of the city and shall be
created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner.



   PERMANENT RECORD.  Any record of the city for which the retention
period on a records control schedule is given as permanent.



   RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE. A document prepared by or under the authority
of the Records Management Officer listing the records maintained by the city,
their retention periods and other records disposition information that the
records management program may require.



   RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER. The person designated in § 36.04.



   RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN.  The plan developed under § 36.05.



   RECORDS MANAGEMENT.  The application of management techniques to the
creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records
for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control
schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the
protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and
space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and
distribution of forms, reports and correspondence and the management of
micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.



   RETENTION PERIOD.  The minimum time that must pass after the creation,
recording or receipt of a record or the fulfillment of certain actions
associated with a record before it is eligible for destruction.



(`87 Code, § 2-151) (Ord. 1987-4, passed 2-17-87; Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed
11-5-91)



§ 36.02  MUNICIPAL RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   All municipal records as defined in § 36.01 are declared to be the
property of the City. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his
or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though
he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction,
removal from files or use of such records is prohibited.



(`87 Code, § 2-152) (Ord. 1987-4, passed 2-17-87; Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed
11-5-91)



§ 36.03  POLICY.



   It is declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient,
economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution,
organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all municipal records
through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for their management
from creation to ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of
the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management
practice.



(`87 Code, § 2-153) (Ord. 1987-4, passed 2-17-87; Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed
11-5-91)



§ 36.04  DESIGNATION OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.



   The City Secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall
serve as Records Management Officer for the city. As provided by state law,
each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the
Director and Librarian of the Texas State Library within 30 days of the
initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable.



(`87 Code, § 2-154) (Ord. 1987-4, passed 2-17-87; Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed
11-5-91)



§ 36.05  RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN TO BE DEVELOPED; APPROVAL; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Records Management Officer shall develop a Records
Management Plan for the city for submission to the City Council. The Plan
must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve
the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records
of the municipality and to properly preserve those records of the
municipality that are of historical value. The Plan must be designed to
enable the Records Management Officer to carry out his or her duties
prescribed by state law and this chapter effectively.



   (B)   Once approved by the City Council, the Records Management Plan
shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs,
commissions, bureaus, boards, committees or similar entities of the city, and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed or disposed of in
accordance with the Plan.



   (C)   State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities or
recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department
head or the records in the department head’s care from the application of
this chapter and the Records Management Plan adopted under it and may not be
used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the
records management program of the City.



(`87 Code, § 2-155) (Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed 11-5-91)



§ 36.06  DUTIES OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.



   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, the Records
Management Officer shall:



   (A)   Administer the records management program and provide
assistance to department heads in its implementation;



   (B)   Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition policies,
systems, standards and procedures;



   (C)   In cooperation with department heads, identify essential
records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and
department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to
reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;



   (D)   Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the
historically valuable records of the city;



   (E)   Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for
recordkeeping supplies;



   (F)   Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a
uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city;



   (G)   Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules
issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the
records management program and the municipality’s records control schedules
are in compliance with state regulations;



   (H)   Disseminate to the City Council and department heads
information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local
government records;



   (I)   Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming,
destruction or other disposition of the records of the city are carried out
in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management
program and the requirements of state law;



   (J)   Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under
approved records control schedules or through records destruction
authorization requests, the volume of records microfilmed or stored
electronically and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such
disposal or disposition;



   (K)   Report annually to the City Council on the implementation of
the Records Management Plan in each department of the city, including
summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under division (J) of
this section;



   (L)   Bring to the attention of the City Council noncompliance by
department heads or other municipal personnel with the policies and
procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records
Act.



(`87 Code, § 2-156) (Ord. 1987-4, passed 2-17-87; Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed
11-5-91)



§ 36.07  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS.



   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, department heads
shall:



   (A)   Cooperate with the Records Management Officer in carrying out
the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and
economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this
chapter;



   (B)   Adequately document the transaction of government business and
the services, programs and duties for which the department head and his or
her staff are responsible; and



   (C)   Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their
preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition only in
accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program
of the City and the requirements of this subchapter.



(`87 Code, § 2-157) (Ord. 1987-4, passed 2-17-84; Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed
11-5-91)



§ 36.08  RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES TO BE DEVELOPED; APPROVAL; FILING WITH
STATE.



   (A)   The Records Management Officer, in cooperation with department
heads, shall prepare records control schedules on a department-by-department
basis listing all records series created or received by the department and
the retention period for each series. Records control schedules shall also
contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records
as the Records Management Plan may require.



   (B)   Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended
as needed by the Records Management Officer on a regular basis to ensure that
it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and
that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the
department and the records management program of the city.



   (C)   Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended
schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and the
City Council.



   (D)   Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be
submitted to and accepted for filing by the Director and Librarian as
provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule
shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The Records Management
Officer shall submit the records control schedules to the Director and
Librarian.



(`87 Code, § 2-158) (Ord. 1987-4, passed 2-17-84; Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed
11-5-91)



§ 36.09  IMPLEMENTATION OF RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES; DESTRUCTION OF
RECORDS UNDER SCHEDULE.



   (A)   A records control schedule for a department that has been
approved and adopted under § 36.08 shall be implemented by department heads
according to the policies and procedures of the Records Management Plan.



   (B)   A record whose retention period has expired on a records
control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending
on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending
lawsuit or the department head requests in writing to the Records Management
Officer that the record be retained for an additional period.



   (C)   Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records
control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the
Records Management Officer from the City Council.



(`87 Code, § 2-159) (Ord. 1987-4, passed 2-17-87; Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed
11-5-91)



§ 36.10  DESTRUCTION OF UNSCHEDULED RECORDS.



   A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control
schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same
manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the Records
Management Officer has submitted to and received back from the Director and
Librarian an approved destruction authorization request.



(`87 Code, § 2-160) (Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed 11-5-91)



§ 36.11  RECORDS CENTER.



   The records center operation shall utilize one or more buildings to
store inactive records; to insure the security of such records from
deterioration, theft or damage during the period of storage; and to permit
fast, efficient retrieval of information from stored records.



(`87 Code, § 2-161) (Ord. 1987-4, passed 2-17-87; Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed
11-5-91)



§ 36.12  PRESERVATION OF PERMANENT RECORDS.



   The Records Management Officer shall develop procedures to insure the
permanent preservation of historically valuable records of the city. If
city-owned facilities are not available, the Records Management Officer shall
arrange for the transfer of the records to the Texas State Library for
perpetual care and preservation in one of its nearby regional historical
resource depositories or shall make other arrangements for their permanent
preservation not contrary to law or regulation.



(`87 Code, § 2-162) (Ord. 1987-4, passed 2-17-87; Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed
11-5-91)



§ 36.13  NON-CURRENT RECORDS NOT TO BE MAINTAINED IN OFFICE FILES.



   Records no longer required in the conduct of current business by any
office of the city shall be promptly transferred to the records center or
archives or the state library or be destroyed at the time such action is
designated on an approved records schedule. Such records shall not be
maintained in current office files or equipment.



(`87 Code, § 2-163) (Ord. 1987-4, passed 2-17-87; Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed
11-5-91)



§ 36.14  REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.



   That all ordinances, orders or resolutions, or parts thereof,
heretofore passed and adopted by the City Council, and in conflict herewith,
are repealed to the extent that they are in conflict herewith.



(`87 Code, § 2-164) (Ord. 1987-4, passed 2-17-84; Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed
11-5-91)



CHAPTER 37:  TAXATION AND FINANCES



Section



General Provisions



   37.001   Adoption of state law relative to payment of taxes and
penalties



   37.002   Tax lien created



   37.003   City Attorney as agent for city



   37.004   Personal property taxed



Property Tax Exemptions



   37.020   Residence homestead exemption



   37.021   Over 65 exemption



   37.022   Effective date of exemptions



   37.023   Administration of exemptions



Hotel Occupancy Tax



   37.035   Definitions



   37.036   Tax rate



   37.037   Collection of tax by lodging provider



   37.038   Exceptions



   37.039   Registration of lodging provider; form and contents;
execution; certificate of authority



   37.040   Determination generally; returns; payments



   37.041   Deficiency determinations



   37.042   Determination if no return made



   37.043   Collection of tax by city



   37.044   Administration of subchapter; recordkeeping



Rental Charge for Utilities Operating in the City



   37.070   Imposed; amount; when payable



   37.071   Report of gross receipts of payer



   37.072   Examination of books and records of payer



   37.073   Charge is not a tax but is additional to taxes



   37.074   Chapter does not grant franchise; cancellation of privilege
and refund of rental



   37.075   Dedication of funds



   37.076   Bowie-Cass Electric Cooperative



Taxation of Telecommunications Services



   37.090   Tax authorized



   37.091   Application of exemption repealed



   37.092   Rate of tax



   37.093   Tax shall not reduce any amount payable to city pursuant to
any franchise, street use ordinance or otherwise payable by any provider of
telecommunications services



Tax Abatement



   37.105   Abatement guidelines



   37.106   Reinvestment zones



   37.107   Zone affected



   37.108   Zone renewed



   37.109   Requirements



   37.110   Duration



   37.111   Agreements required



Funds



   37.125   Municipal Court Building Security Fund



   37.126   Municipal Court Technology Fund



 



   37.999   Penalty



   Appendix A:     Reinvestment zone boundaries



   Appendix B:     Statement of incentives for business establishments
located in Reinvestment  Zone Number One



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 37.001  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW RELATIVE TO PAYMENT OF TAXES AND PENALTIES.



   The provisions of state law applicable to municipalities shall apply to
and govern the payment of taxes due and owing to the city and penalties in
connection therewith to the same extent as if such provisions have been, by
the terms thereof, made applicable to city taxes by ordinances of the city.



(`87 Code, § 22-1)



Statutory reference:



   Municipal taxation, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 1026 et seq.



§ 37.002  TAX LIEN CREATED.



   (A)   A lien is created on all property, personal and real, in favor
of the city for all taxes, ad valorem, occupation or otherwise. Such lien
shall exist from the first day of January in each year, until all the taxes
are paid. Such lien shall be prior to all other claims and liens then
existing or thereafter arising, and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of
any kind or judicial writ of any kind can ever defeat such lien.



   (B)   The lien for taxes created above shall attach to all property
of the taxpayer owned on the first day of January and subsequently acquired,
whether assessed or not.



(`87 Code, § 22-2)



Cross-reference:



   Tax liens, see Charter, Art. III, § 10



§ 37.003  CITY ATTORNEY AS AGENT FOR CITY.



   The City Attorney shall act as the agent for the city in the sale of
all lands purchased by the city at delinquent tax sales.



(`87 Code, § 22-6)



§ 37.004  PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXED.



   The City shall tax all tangible personal property as defined and
described in the Texas Constitution, Art. VIII, § 1-j and in Tex. Tax Code,
§ 11.251 in Tax Year 1990 and each year thereafter.



(`87 Code, § 22-6.5) (Am. Ord. 1989-20, passed 12-5-89)



PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS



§ 37.020  RESIDENCE HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION.



   Pursuant to the provisions of the Texas Property Tax Code, (Tex. Tax
Code, §§ 11.01 et seq.), an individual is entitled to an exemption from ad
valorem taxes levied by the city of 20% of the appraised value of his or her
residence homestead. If said 20% of appraised value produces an exemption in
a tax year of less than $5,000.00 when applied to a particular residence
homestead, the individual is entitled to an exemption of $5,000.00 of the
appraised value.



(`87 Code, § 22-7) (Am. Ord. 1989-4, passed 4-4-89)



§ 37.021  OVER 65 EXEMPTION.



   Pursuant to the provisions of the Texas Property Tax Code (Tex. Tax
Code, §§ 11.01 et seq.), and in addition to the exemption provided by §
37.020, an individual who is 65 years of age or older is entitled to an
exemption from ad valorem taxes levied by the city of $3,000.00 of the
appraised value of his or her residence homestead.



(`87 Code, § 22-8) (Am. Ord. 1989-4, passed 4-4-89)



§ 37.022  EFFECTIVE DATE OF EXEMPTIONS.



   The exemptions provided for in this subchapter shall be effective for
the tax year beginning January 1, 1989 and for each subsequent tax year,
unless amended or repealed as provided by law.



(`87 Code, § 22-9) (Am. Ord. 1989-4, passed 4-4-89)



§ 37.023  ADMINISTRATION OF EXEMPTIONS.



   The exemptions provided for in this subchapter shall be administered in
accordance with the provisions of the Texas Property Tax Code (Tex. Tax Code,
§§ 11.01 et seq.).



(`87 Code, § 22-10) (Am. Ord. 1989-4, passed 4-4-89)



HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX



§ 37.035 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  The City of Mount Pleasant and, variously, the incorporated
territory of Mount Pleasant and also its extraterritorial jurisdiction,
wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by Tex. Tax Code
Ch. 351.



   CONSIDERATION. The cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or dormitory
space, but shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services
rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying such room or
space for occupancy and shall not include any tax assessed for the occupancy
thereof by any other governmental agency.



   DUE DATE.  The twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for
which the tax is to be computed.



   FOLIO.  Primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates
interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a
minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of
occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts
of applicable tax, and the means of payment.



   GUEST.  Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has
the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease,
concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement.



   GUEST ROOM.  A room in a hotel occupied, or intended, arranged, or
designed for sleeping, and rented for more than $2.00 per day.



   HOTEL.  Any structure or any portion of a structure, including any
hotel, motel, inn, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, rooming
house, or bed and breakfast, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or
is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid
in money, goods, labor, or otherwise.  The meaning does not include any
hospital, sanitarium, nursing home, or the dormitory facilities at an
institution of higher education.



   LODGING PROVIDER.  Any person operating a hotel in the city,
including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises,
lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person
operating such hotel; and who is subject to collecting and remitting the tax
imposed upon guests.



   MONTHLY PERIOD.  The calendar months of any year.



   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession
of any guest room in a hotel.



   PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any guest who, as of a given date, has or shall
have occupied or has or shall have established the right of occupancy to any
guest room in a hotel for more than 30 continuous days.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure,
association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company,
corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any
other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the
singular number.



   RENT.  The consideration charged for the occupancy of a guest room,
valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all
receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and
also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the
guest, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.



   TAX.  The tax on occupants imposed by this subchapter, as provided for
by Tex. Tax Code Ch. 351.



(`87 Code, § 22-30) (Ord. 1972-8, passed 8-15-72; Am. Ord. 2008-17, passed
8-5-08)



§ 37.036  TAX RATE.



   There shall be paid by the guest for every occupancy of a guest room in
the city a tax at the rate of 7% of the amount of rent unless an exception is
provided under § 37.038.



(`87 Code, § 22-31) (Am. Ord. 1992-14, passed 9-15-92; Am. Ord. 2008-17,
passed 8-5-08)



Statutory reference:



   Maximum tax amount limited by state law, see Tex. Tax Code, § 351.003



§ 37.037  COLLECTION OF TAX BY LODGING PROVIDER.



   Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall collect a
tax of 7% on the amount of rent from the guest unless an exception is
provided under § 37.038.  The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to
each guest, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the
amounts of this and other tax applicable.  This tax shall be due from the
guest, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that
the rent is collected.  The lodging provider shall be liable for any amount
of tax that he or she fails to collect appropriately; and must remit to the
city any amount of tax collected in excess of that which should have been
collected.



(`87 Code, § 22-32) (Ord. 1972-8, passed 8-15-72; Am. Ord. 2008-17, passed
8-5-08)



§ 37.038  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No tax shall be collected from a guest after becoming a
permanent resident.  A guest becomes a permanent resident either after 30
continuous days’ occupancy, or upon notifying the lodging provider in
writing of his or her intention to occupy a guest room for longer than 30
continuous days and then proceeding to actually occupy the guest room for
such period.  A guest who would express intent, but fails to stay 30
continuous days, is not a permanent resident and is not excepted from the
tax.  However, a guest who expresses intent and does stay is excepted from
the tax as of the date he or she notified the lodging provider of his or her
intention.



   (B)   No tax shall be collected from the federal government nor an
officer or employee of said government when traveling on government business
and presenting official identification.  The American Red Cross, federally
chartered credit unions and the regional home loan banks are recognized as
instrumentalities of the federal government.



   (C)   No tax shall be collected from the following Texas
quasi-governmental entities formed under the Texas Local Government, and
Health and Safety Codes, nor an officer or employee of any thereof when
presenting a hotel occupancy tax exemption certificate: public facility
corporations, housing authorities, housing finance corporations, and health
facilities development corporations.



   (D)   No tax shall be collected from a State of Texas officer or
employee when presenting a photo identification card or other documentation
that indicates that the bearer is exempt from paying hotel occupancy tax.



   (E)   No tax shall be collected from a foreign diplomat when
presenting a tax exemption card issued by the United States Department of
State.



(Ord. 2008-17, passed 8-5-08)



§ 37.039  REGISTRATION OF LODGING PROVIDER; FORM AND CONTENTS; EXECUTION;
CERTIFICATE OF AUTHORITY.



   Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging
provider in the city shall immediately register with the Finance Director on
a form provided by that official.  Persons engaged in such business must so
register not later than 30 days after the date that the ordinance codified
herein becomes effective.  Such registration shall set forth the name under
which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the
location of his or her place(s) of business and such other information which
would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the Finance
Director.  The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural
person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or
partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer.  The Finance
Director shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate
of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. 
A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a
lodging provider.  Each certificate shall state the name and location of the
business to which it is applicable.



(Ord. 2008-17, passed 8-5-08)



§ 37.040  DETERMINATION GENERALLY; RETURNS; PAYMENTS.



   (A)   Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and
payable to the Finance Director monthly on or before the twentieth day of the
month next succeeding the respective monthly period.  The tax shall become
delinquent for any monthly period after the twentieth day of the succeeding
month in which it remains unpaid.



   (B)   Penalty for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider
who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall
be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of 15%.



   (C)   Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without
imposing penalty; authority; requirements.  If the failure to make any
return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential
cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by
affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of
the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty.



   (D)   Waiving of penalty.  Only the governing authority of the city
may waive the penalty prescribed.



   (E)   Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required
to file; contents.  On or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding
each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with
appropriate remittance shall be filed with the Finance Director.  The return
shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, and non-taxable rent earned, the
amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other
information as may be required by the Finance Director.



   (F)   Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements;
remittance; penalty.  The governing authority of the city may, for good
cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days.  No
extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application
of the lodging provider.  Such grant may not be applicable for longer period
than 12 consecutive months.  A lodging provider granted an extension shall
remit tax equaling not less than 100% of the tax paid for the corresponding
period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the
date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension.  No
penalty shall be charged during the extension period.



   (G)   Collection fee allowed lodging providers.  Lodging providers
collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted
for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting,
reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the
time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be 1% of the amount due, but
only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment.



(Ord. 2008-17, passed 8-5-08)



§ 37.041  DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS.



   (A)   Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of
recomputation.  If the Finance Director is not satisfied with the return or
returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city
by any lodging provider, he or she may compute and determine the amount
required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his or her
possession or that may come into his or her possession. One or more
deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more
monthly periods.



   (B)   Penalty.  Penalty shall be assessed upon the amount of any
determination, as provided by § 37.040.



   (C)   Notice of determination; service of.  The Finance Director
shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his or her
determination.  The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail,
such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at their address as
it appears in the records of the city.  Service by mail is complete when
delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when
made by statutory overnight delivery.



   (D)   Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be
mailed.  Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every
notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within four years after
the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for
which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within four years after the
return is filed, whichever period should last expire.



   (E)   Appeal or protest of deficiency determination.  Within ten
days of being served a notice of deficiency determination, the lodging
provider may contest such in writing addressed to the Finance Director.  The
lodging provider shall include such documents as they believe may present
grounds for abatement of the determination.  The Finance Director shall give
written notice of his or her decision to the lodging provider in the same
manner as provided in division (C) of this section.  The decision of the
Finance Director shall be deemed final unless an appeal is made in writing to
the governing authority with ten days of the lodging provider having been
served with the Finance Director’s decision.  The governing authority
shall approve or disapprove the appeal, and notify the appellant of its
decision.



(Ord. 2008-17, passed 8-5-08)



§ 37.042  DETERMINATION IF NO RETURN MADE.



   (A)   Estimate of gross receipts.  If any lodging provider fails to
make a return, the Finance Director shall make an estimate of the amount of
the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the
amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax.  The
estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the
lodging provider failed to make the return, and shall be based upon the
returns from the preceding calendar year.  This estimate shall be considered
“prima facie” correct.  Written notice shall be given in the manner
prescribed in § 37.041(C), and the lodging provider shall enjoy the same
rights of protest as prescribed in § 37.041(E).



   (B)   Penalty shall be assessed upon the amount of any
determination, as provided by § 37.040.



(Ord. 2008-17, passed 8-5-08)



§ 37.043  COLLECTION OF TAX BY CITY.



   (A)   Action of delinquent tax; time for.  At any time within four
years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due
and payable, and at any time within four years after the delinquency of any
tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the governing authority
may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the
city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, court fees,
filing fees, attorney’s fees and other legal fees incident thereto.  The
governing authority may also seek to have the lodging provider enjoined from
operating the hotel until such time as the delinquency is paid, as well as to
require forfeiture of any applicable collection fee retained by the lodging
provider.



   (B)   Lodging provider selling or quitting business.  If any
lodging provider liable for any amount under this subchapter sells out his or
her business or quits his or her business, he or she shall make a final
return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting
the business.



   (C)   Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to
withhold tax from purchase money.  If any lodging provider liable for any
amount of tax, interest or penalty under this subchapter sells out his or her
business or quits the business, his or her successors or assigns shall
withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the
former owner produces from the Finance Director either a receipt reflecting
full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due.



   (D)   Liability for failure to withhold.  If the purchaser of a
business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he or she
shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be
withheld by him or her to the extent of the purchase price.



   (E)   Credit for tax or penalty paid more than once or erroneously
or illegally collected.  Whenever the amount of any tax or penalty has been
paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority.  If the
lodging provider or person determines that he or she has overpaid or paid
more than once, which fact has not been determined by the Finance Director,
such person shall have four years from the date of payment to file a claim in
writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded.  The
claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the
claim and any other information available will be considered.  The governing
authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of
its action.



(Ord. 2008-17, passed 8-5-08)



§ 37.044  ADMINISTRATION OF SUBCHAPTER; RECORDKEEPING.



   (A)   Authority of Finance Director.  The Finance Director shall
administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter for the collection
of the tax.



   (B)   Records required from lodging providers and the like; form. 
Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a
minimum of four years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and
such other documents as the Finance Director may prescribe, and in such form
as he or she may require.  The records shall at all times be available for
examination within the city.



   (C)   Examination of records; audits.  The Finance Director or any
person authorized in writing by him or her may examine the books, papers,
records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging
provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in
order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by
the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be
paid.  Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging
provision, unless the Finance Director shall authorize another place within
the city.  In the event that the tax has been delinquent for at least two
complete fiscal quarters, the reasonable cost of the examination may be
assessed against the lodging provider.



   (D)   Authority to require reports; contents.  In administration of
the provisions of this subchapter, the Finance Director may require the
filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their
possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which
are subject to the tax.  The reports shall be filed with the Finance
Director when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental
charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for
exemption, or such other information as the Finance Director may prescribe.



(Ord. 2008-17, passed 8-5-08)



RENTAL CHARGE FOR UTILITIES OPERATING IN THE CITY



§ 37.070  IMPOSED; AMOUNT; WHEN PAYABLE.



   Not later than 30 days following the end of each March, June, September
and December of each and every year, every person occupying or using the
streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other public places in the
city, with poles, pipes, lines (overhead or underground, wire or pipe) and
for other fixtures shall, as a condition to such further occupancy, pay to
the city for such privileges, a rental equal to and not to exceed 6% of the
gross receipts received by such person, association, organization or
corporation from its business, including long distance telephone calls,
conducted in the corporate limits of the city for the preceding quarter.



(`87 Code, § 22-57) (Ord. 1980-1, passed 1-8-80; Am. Ord. 1995-20, passed
11-21-95)



§ 37.071  REPORT OF GROSS RECEIPTS OF PAYER.



   (A)   Every person using or maintaining any telegraph, telephone,
electric light or other poles, gas, lines or wires, pipes and other fixtures
in any of the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other places
within the corporate limits of the city shall, on the first day of November
of each year, file with the City Secretary a sworn report showing the gross
receipts from the business conducted by such person or within the corporate
limits of the city for the preceding year, including long distance telephone
calls, ending the September 30.



   (B)   Upon receipt of the rental charge imposed by this subchapter,
the City Finance Director shall deliver to the person paying the same a
receipt therefor, which receipt shall authorize such person to use and occupy
the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks and other public ways of the
city in carrying on its business for three months.



(`87 Code, § 22-58) (Ord. 1980-1, passed 1-8-80)



§ 37.072  EXAMINATION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS OF PAYER.



   The City Council may, when it sees fit, have the books and records of
any person required to pay the rental charge imposed by this subchapter
examined by a representative of the city to ascertain whether the statement
filed in accordance with § 37.071 is accurate, but nothing in this section
shall be construed to prevent the city from ascertaining the facts by any
other method. The expenses of the audit are to be paid by the person being
examined.



(`87 Code, § 22-59) (Ord. 1980-1, passed 1-8-80)



§ 37.073  CHARGE IS NOT A TAX BUT IS ADDITIONAL TO TAXES.



   The rental charge provided for in this subchapter is not charged as a
tax, but is made for the privilege enjoyed by the persons upon whom it is
imposed of using the streets, easements, alleys and other public ways of the
city in the conduct of their businesses, and such charge is additional to all
ad valorem and franchise taxes and to all taxes of every nature imposed on
such persons.



(`87 Code, § 22-60) (Ord. 1980-1, passed 1-8-80)



§ 37.074  CHAPTER DOES NOT GRANT FRANCHISE; CANCELLATION OF PRIVILEGE AND
REFUND OF RENTAL.



   This subchapter does not grant a franchise to any utility or person to
use the streets, easements, alleys and other public ways and shall never be
so construed by the court or otherwise. The city reserves the right to cancel
the privilege granted under this subchapter and refund the unearned rentals
paid to the city.



(`87 Code, § 22-61) (Ord. 1980-1, passed 1-8-80)



§ 37.075  DEDICATION OF FUNDS.



   All funds collected from this fee shall be totally dedicated to the
Street Department for its annual operating budget for each fiscal year
hereafter.



(`87 Code, § 22-63) (Am. Ord. 1995-20, passed 11-21-95)



§ 37.076  BOWIE-CASS ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE.



   (A)   Street rental charges.  The cooperative shall pay for the
period of time beginning on October 1, 1986 up to and including September 30,
1996 a rental sum for its use of the roads, streets, highways, alleys and
public property within the city limits of the city as are necessary to serve
its member customers who reside therein to the extent and for the time
permitted by law governing such rural electric cooperatives, which rental
shall be based upon a sum equal to 2% of its gross receipts from the sale of
electric light and power to its members whom it serves within the city limits
of the city.



      (1)   The rental sum shall be due and payable to the city
quarterly.



      (2)   Should the cooperative fail to pay said compensation
within 30 days after the quarterly rental amount is determined to be due, the
city shall have the right to collect said rental then due and owing by all
legal and equitable remedies given by the law for the collection of debts or
otherwise.



(`87 Code, § 22-71) (Ord. 1986-23, passed 10-21-86)



   (B)   No enhanced rights conferred.  Nothing in this subchapter
shall confer or be considered to confer any rights to the cooperative greater
than those rights, powers and authorities conferred in Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat.,
Art. 1528b.



(`87 Code, § 22-72) (Ord. 1986-23, passed 10-21-86)



TAXATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES



§ 37.090  TAX AUTHORIZED.



   A tax is authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the
city,. For purposes of this subchapter, the sale of telecommunications
services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other
telecommunications device from which the call or other communication
originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is
consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed.



(`87 Code, § 22-81) (Ord. 1987-7, passed 5-19-87)



§ 37.091  APPLICATION OF EXEMPTION REPEALED.



   The application of the exemption provided for in Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat.,
Art. 1066c, § 4B(a) is repealed by the city, as authorized by § 4B(b)
thereof.



(`87 Code, § 22-82) (Ord. 1987-7, passed 5-19-87)



§ 37.092  RATE OF TAX.



   The rate of tax imposed by this subchapter shall be the same as the
rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as
authorized by the Legislature of the State of Texas.



(`87 Code, § 22-83) (Ord. 1987-7, passed 5-19-87)



§ 37.093  TAX SHALL NOT REDUCE ANY AMOUNT PAYABLE TO CITY PURSUANT TO ANY
FRANCHISE, STREET USE ORDINANCE OR OTHERWISE PAYABLE BY ANY PROVIDER OF
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.



   The tax provided for in this subchapter shall not serve as an offset
to, be in lieu of or in any way reduce any amount payable to the city
pursuant to any franchise, street use ordinance, charter provision, statute
or, without limitation by the foregoing enumeration, otherwise payable by any
provider of telecommunications services; it being the express intent hereof
that all such obligations, impositions and agreements of every kind and
nature shall remain in full force and effect without reduction or limitation
hereby.



(`87 Code, § 22-84) (Ord. 1987-7, passed 5-19-87)



TAX ABATEMENT



§ 37.105  ABATEMENT GUIDELINES.



   The city adopts as abatement guidelines the statement of incentives
enclosed as Appendix B.



(`87 Code, § 22-91) (Am. Ord. 1995-8, passed 6-1-95)



§ 37.106  REINVESTMENT ZONES.



   The city, after conducting such hearings and having heard such evidence
and testimony, has made the following findings and determinations based on
the testimony presented to it:



   (A)   That a public hearing on the adoption of the reinvestment zone
has been properly called, held and conducted and that notices of such
hearings have been published as required by law and mailed to all taxing
units overlapping the territory inside the proposed reinvestment zone;



   (B)   That the boundaries of the reinvestment zone should be the
area as described in the enterprise zone description attached hereto as
Appendix A;



   (C)   That the creation of the reinvestment zone for
commercial-industrial tax abatement with boundaries as described in Appendix
A will result in benefits to the city and to the land included in the zone
and the improvements sought are feasible and practical;



   (D)   That the reinvestment zone, as defined in Appendix A meets the
criteria for the creation of a reinvestment zone as set forth in the Tex. Tax
Code, § 312.202  in that it is “reasonably likely as a result of the
designation to contribute to the retention or expansion of primary employment
or to attract major investment in the zone that would be a benefit to the
property and that would contribute to the economic development of the city.”



(`87 Code, § 22-92) (Am. Ord. 1995-8, passed 6-1-95)



§ 37.107  ZONE AFFECTED.



   Pursuant to Tex. Tax Code, § 312.202 et seq., the city creates a
reinvestment zone for commercial- industrial tax abatement encompassing only
the area described by Appendix A, and such reinvestment zone is designated
and shall hereafter be designated as Reinvestment Zone Number One.



(`87 Code, § 22-93) (Am. Ord. 1995-8, passed 6-1-95)



§ 37.108  ZONE RENEWED.



   The original zone took effect on November 21, 1989 and terminated on
November 21, 1994, the renewed zone takes effect on November 21, 1994 and
terminates on November 21, 1999 or at an earlier time designated by
subsequent ordinance.



(`87 Code, § 22-94) (Am. Ord.1995-8, passed 6-1-95)



§ 37.109  REQUIREMENTS.



   To be considered for execution of an agreement for tax abatement, the
commercial-industrial project shall:



   (A)   Be located wholly within the zone as established herein;



   (B)   Not include property that is owned or leased by a member of
the City Council of the city.



   (C)   Conform to the requirements of the city’s zoning ordinance
and all other applicable laws and regulations.



(`87 Code, § 22-95)



§ 37.110  DURATION.



   Written agreements with property owner(s) located within the zone shall
provide the terms regarding duration of exemption and share a taxable real
property value exempt from taxation as shown in Appendix B.



(`87 Code, § 22-96) (Ord. 1995-8, passed 6-1-95)



§ 37.111  AGREEMENTS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Written agreements under Tex. Tax Code, §§ 312.204 or
312.211 must include provisions for:



      (1)   Listing the kind, number and location of all proposed
improvements of the property;



      (2)   Access to and inspection of property by municipal
employees to ensure that the improvements or repairs are made according to
the specification and conditions of the agreements;



      (3)   Limiting the uses of the property consistent with the
general purpose of encouraging development or redevelopment of the zone
during the period that property tax exemptions are in effect;



      (4)   Recapturing property tax revenue lost as a result of the
agreement if the owner of the property fails to make the improvements or
repairs as provided by the agreement.



      (5)   Containing each term agreed to by the owners of the
property;



      (6)   Requiring the owner of the property to certify annually
to the governing body of each taxing unit that the owner is in compliance
with each applicable term of the agreement; and



      (7)   Providing that the governing body of the municipality
may cancel or modify the agreement if the property owner fails to comply with
the agreement.



   (B)   An agreement made under Tex. Tax Code, §§ 312.204 or 312.211
may include, at the option of the governing  body of the municipality,
provisions for:



      (1)   Improvements or repairs by the municipality to streets,
sidewalks, and utility services or facilities associated with the property,
except that the agreement may not provide for lower charges or rates than are
made for other services or properties or a similar character;



      (2)   An economic feasibility study, including a detailed list
of estimated improvement costs, a description of the methods of financing all
estimated costs, and the time when related costs or monetary obligations are
to be incurred;



      (3)   A map showing existing uses and conditions of real
property in the reinvestment zone;



      (4)   A map showing proposed improvements and uses in the
reinvestment zone; and



      (5)   Proposed changes of zoning ordinances, the master plan,
the map, building codes and city ordinances.



(Tex. Tax Code, § 312.205) (`87 Code, § 22-97) (Am. Ord. 1995-8, passed
6-1-95)



FUNDS



§ 37.125 MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND.



   (A)   The Municipal Court Building Security Fund is created.



      (1)   The city adopts a courtroom security fee as approved in
Senate Bill 182.



      (2)   The fee shall be assessed to all defendants convicted in
a trial for a misdemeanor offense in municipal court and shall be required to
pay a $3.00 fee as a cost of court.



      (3)   A person is considered convicted for purposes of this
section if a sentence is imposed on the person, the person receives community
supervision, including deferred adjudication, or the person enters a plea and
enters a court authorized dismissal program.



      (4)   The security fee shall be collected by the municipal
court clerk and deposited in the Municipal Court Building Security Fund.



   (B)   The Municipal Court Building Security Fund may be used only to
finance the following items when used for the purpose of providing security
services for any building housing the Municipal Court of the City of Mt.
Pleasant:



      (1)   The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying
systems;



      (2)   Handheld metal detectors;



      (3)   Walk-through metal detectors;



      (4)   Identification cards and systems;



      (5)   Electronic locking and surveillance equipment;



      (6)   Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables or contract
security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security
services;



      (7)   Signage;



      (8)   Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems;



      (9)   Locks, chains or other security hardware;



      (10)   Any other items or services permitted by law.



   (C)   The Municipal Court Building Security Fund shall be
administered by or under the direction of the governing body of the
municipality.



(Ord. 1997-11, passed 10-7-97)



§ 37.126  MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND.



   (A)   Establishment of Municipal Court Technology Fund.



      (1)   There is created and established a Municipal Court
Technology Fund, here-in-now known as the Fund, pursuant to the Tex. Code of
Criminal Procedure, Art. 102.0172.



      (2)   The Fund may be maintained in an interest bearing
account and may be maintained in the General Revenue Account.



   (B)   Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and
collection.



      (1)   The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00.



      (2)   The fee shall be assessed and collected from the
defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the Municipal Court as
a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:



         (a)   A sentence is imposed on the person;



         (b)   The person is placed on community supervision,
including deferred adjudication community supervision; or



         (c)   The Court defers final disposition of the
person’s case.



      (3)   The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense
committed on or after September 8, 1999.



      (4)   The Clerk of the Court shall collect the fee, and the
fee shall be deposited into the Municipal Court Technology Fund.



   (C)   Designated use of the Fund and administration.



      (1)   The Fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of
technological enhancements for a municipal court or municipal court of
record, including:



         (a)   Computer systems;



         (b)   Computer networks;



         (c)   Computer hardware;



         (d)   Computer software;



         (e)   Imaging systems;



         (f)   Electronic kiosks;



         (g)   Electronic ticket writers; and



         (h)   Docket management systems.



      (2)   The Fund shall be administered by or under the direction
of the City Council of the city.



(Ord. 1999-13, passed 9-7-99; Am. Ord. 2005-5, passed 8-16-2005)



§ 37.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect
the tax as provided by § 37.037 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$500.00.  Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as
provided by § 37.040, to keep adequate records or to open them for
inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the
governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to
evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00.  Each and
every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued
or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished
accordingly.



(Ord. 2008-17, passed 8-5-08)



   (B)   (1)   Every person who shall operate any business without
the payment of the rentals provided for in §§ 37.070 through 37.077 of this
chapter shall be subject to a penalty of $100.00 for each and every day that
such person shall conduct such business using and occupying the streets,
easements, alleys or other public ways of the city without such payment,
which sum may be recovered by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction
by a suit filed therein.



      (2)   Every person and the local manager or agent of such
person failing or refusing to make the report required by § 37.071  shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined as provided in § 10.99, and every day’s
failure or refusal shall be deemed a separate offense.



(`87 Code, § 22-62) (Ord. 1980-1, passed 1-8-80)



APPENDIX A: REINVESTMENT ZONE BOUNDARIES



   The area of the proposed reinvestment zone is as follows:



   For a 17.9 square mile tract of land consisting of approximately 11,450
acres, more or less, located within the city and extending into Titus County,
Texas and particularly described as follows:



   Beginning at the intersection of U.S. Highway 271 South and Cypress
Creek.



   Thence north on U.S. 271 approximately 4,200 feet to the proposed
relocated SE 12 located south of the end of the proposed airport runway.



   Thence east on relocated SE 12 approximately 4,000 feet, then northerly
approximately 4,800 feet to the intersection of old SE 12 and SE 1.



   Thence north approximately 2,300 feet on SE 1.



   Thence west on SE 1 1,300 feet.



   Thence north 1,300 feet on SE 1.



   Thence west on SE 1 800 feet.



   Thence north on SE 1 1,300 feet to the intersection of SW 48.



   Thence west on SW 48 2,600 feet to Highway 271.



   Thence north on U.S. 271 approximately 1.7 miles to Patrick Street.



   Thence west on Patrick Street 1,400 feet more or less to the St. Louis
Southwestern Railroad.



   Thence north on St. Louis Southwestern Railroad approximately 2 miles
to the intersection of East 7th Street.



   Thence east on East 7th Street 600 feet more or less to the
intersection of North Lide Avenue.



   Thence north on North Lide Avenue 300 feet more or less to the
intersection of East 8th Street.



   Thence east on East 8th Street approximately one mile to Cecelia Drive.



   Thence south on Cecelia Drive 300 feet more or less to the intersection
of 4th Street.



   Thence east on 4th Street 600 feet more or less to the intersection of
Carr Drive.



   Thence south on Carr Drive 1,650 feet more or less to the intersection
of East 1st Street.



   Thence east on East 1st Street 5,600 feet more or less to the crossing
of Baynes Creek.



   Thence north along Baynes Creek approximately 1.1 miles to the St.
Louis Southwestern Railroad.



   Thence east along the railroad 3,700 feet more or less to SE 7.



   Thence north to U.S. 67 on SE 7 5,700 feet more or less.



   Thence west on U.S. 67 approximately 600 feet to the intersection of FM
1001.



   Thence in a northeasterly direction along FM 1001 for approximately 1.1
miles to the intersection of I-30 north side access road.



   Thence west along the north side access road of Interstate 30
approximately 4.1 miles to the intersection of FM 1734.



   Thence northwesterly on FM 1734 approximately 1.1 miles to the
intersection of 271 North.



   Thence north on U.S. 271 approximately 1.5 miles to the intersection of
County Road NW-12.



   Thence west on NW-12 300 feet more or less to Tankersley Creek.



   Thence south along Tankersley Creek approximately 1.2 miles to the
intersection of 1734.



   Thence along the south side of 1734 3,300 feet more or less to the
Tankersley Lake.



   Thence from Tankersley Lake 1.4.miles southwesterly around the lake
across the dam approximately 1.4 miles to the north side access road of
Interstate 30.



   Thence west on the north side of access road of I-30 approximately 1.2
miles to the intersection of the St. Louis Southwestern Railroad.



   Thence west along the St. Louis Southwestern Railroad approximately 3.2
miles to the intersection with Texas Utilities Railroad.



   Thence across Interstate 30 on Texas Utilities Railroad for 1,600 feet
more or less to the south side access road.



   Thence east on the south side access road approximately 4.8 aisles to
Tankersley Creek.



   Thence south along Tankersley Creek approximately 7.5 miles to the
intersection of Cypress Creek.



   Thence east along Cypress Creek 2,800 feet more or less to the
intersection of Highway 271 South.



   The only portion of the above described area not included in the
proposed enterprise zone is described as follows:



   Beginning at the intersection of Ferguson Road and Gibson Street.



   Thence north on Gibson Street 3,950 feet more or less Highway 67.



   Thence east on Highway 67 3,000 feet more or less to Mulberry Street.



   Thence south on Mulberry Street 350 feet more or less to 15th Street.



   Thence west on 15th Street 300 feet more or less to Memorial Street.



   Thence south on Memorial Street 1,300 feet to 12th Street.



   Thence east on 12th Street 1,200 feet more or less to North Jefferson.



   Thence north on North Jefferson 900 feet more or less to 14th Street.



   Thence east on 14th Street 1,000 feet more or less to Washington Street.



   Thence south on Washington Street 1,200 feet more or less to 9th Street.



   Thence west on 9th Street 650 feet more or less to North Jefferson.



   Thence south on North Jefferson 900 feet more or less to 6th Street.



   Thence west on 6th Street 875 feet more or less to Johnson Avenue.



   Thence south on Johnson Avenue 2,310 feet more or less to Ferguson Road.



   Thence west on Ferguson Road 3,300 feet more or less to the beginning
point at Gibson Street.



(`87 Code, Ch. 22, Attachment 1)



APPENDIX B: STATEMENT OF INCENTIVES FOR BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS LOCATED IN
REINVESTMENT ZONE NUMBER ONE



I.   STATEMENT OF INTENTIONS.



   The Titus County Commissioners’ Court and City Council of the city
have concurred on the intent to establish a reinvestment zone as authorized
by the Texas Reinvestment Zone Act, Tex. Tax Code, 312.001 et seq.As
authorized by the Act, certain incentives will be available to the qualifying
businesses which choose to locate within the designated area.



(`87 Code, Ch. 22, Attachment 2)



II.   QUALIFYING BUSINESSES.



   A.   Location. To be eligible for any incentive, a business must
locate within the boundaries as established by the County of Titus and city,
as approved by the Texas Department of Commerce. The area designated is shown
as Appendix A to this statement.



   B.   Restrictions of type of entities qualifying. A qualifying
business shall include any industrial concern, manufacturing concern or
wholesale or retail concern locating within the boundaries of the
reinvestment zone. Private residences, multifamily dwellings or apartments
locating within the boundaries of the reinvestment zone number one shall not
qualify for any of the incentives provided for in this statement. In
addition, any business which is determined by the Texas Department of
Commerce to be ineligible for participation in a reinvestment zone shall not
qualify for these incentives outlined in this statement. Any determination as
to qualification of a business for such incentives shall be submitted to the
administrative authority responsible for the administration of the
reinvestment zone for determination as to its qualification.



   C.   Relocation of existing business. Any business existing in Titus
County, Texas which relocates from an existing location outside the
boundaries of the reinvestment zone to a location within the Reinvestment
Zone shall be eligible for those incentives provided in this statement.



(`87 Code, Ch. 22, Attachment 2)



III.    REAL PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT INCENTIVES.



   The County of Titus, City of Mount Pleasant, Texas, and the other
taxing units overlapping the territory inside the reinvestment zone shall
abate taxes on any increase in value of those real property improvements for
those qualifying businesses which locate within the boundaries of the
reinvestment zone. The improvements for which tax abatements shall qualify
shall be measured from the greater of the appraised values as shown on the
records of the appropriate taxing authorities or the purchase price of the
real property as provided by the purchaser of the property. Such taxes shall
be abated for a period of seven years from the time such improvements are
added to the tax rolls of the various entities as set forth in the Guidelines
and Criteria of the zone.



(`87 Code, Ch. 22, Attachment 2)




GUIDELINES AND CRITERIA
Tax Abatement in Mount Pleasant, Texas




SECTION 1.  DEFINITIONS.



   ABATEMENT. The full or partial exemption from ad valorem taxes of
certain real property as defined in the Tex. Property Tax Code and shall
include personal property, as defined in said code, in a reinvestment zone
designated by an affected jurisdiction for economic development purposes.



   AFFECTED JURISDICTION.  The city and any governmental entity or school
district, the majority of which is located in Mount Pleasant, that levies ad
valorem taxes upon and provides services to property located within the
proposed or existing reinvestment zone designated by the city.



   AGREEMENT.  Written contractual agreement between a property owner
and/or lessee and an affected jurisdiction for the purpose of tax abatement.



   BASE YEAR VALUE. The assessed value of eligible property January 1
preceding the execution of the agreement, plus (if applicable) the agreed
upon value of eligible property improvements made after January 1 but before
the execution of the agreement.



   EXPANSION.  The addition of buildings, structures, machinery or
equipment for purposes of increasing capacity.



   FACILITY. Property improvements completed on commercial and industrial
buildings and structures, including machinery and equipment.



   IMPROVEMENTS. Includes for the purpose of establishing for the
eligibility under subsections 7(b), any activity at the location, including
but not limited to repairs to existing structures, new construction or the
demolition of unneeded structures.



   REINVESTMENT ZONE.  A specific parcel of property designated by the
city or the county (as applicable) within which a tax abatement can be
granted.



(`87 Code, Ch. 22, Attachment 2)



SECTION 2.  ABATEMENT AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   Authorized facility.  A facility may be eligible for
abatement if it is a commercial or industrial facility, including retail
establishments.



   (B)   Creation of new value. Abatements may only be granted for the
additional value of eligible property improvements made subsequent to and
specified in an abatement agreement between the affected jurisdiction and the
property owner or lessee subject to such limitations as the governing bodies
may require.



   (C)   New and existing facilities.  Abatement may be granted for
new facilities and improvements to existing facilities for the purpose for
modernization or expansion.



   (D)   Eligible property. Abatement may be extended to the value of
building structures, fixed machinery and equipment, site improvements, plus
that office space and related fixed improvements necessary to operation and
administration of the business.



   (E)   Ineligible property. The following property shall be fully
taxable and ineligible for tax abatement: private residences, multi family
dwellings, apartment complexes, inventories, rolling stock, property owned or
used by the State of Texas or its political subdivisions or by any
organization owned, operated or directed by a political subdivision of the
State of Texas.



   (F)   Terms of abatement.  Abatement shall be granted effective
with the January 1 valuation date immediately following the completion of the
value added project prior to going on the tax roles.



   (G)   Economic qualifications. Any business existing in the city
which relocates from an existing location outside the boundaries of the
reinvestment zone to a location within the reinvestment zone shall be
eligible for tax abatement based on value added at the new location.



   (H)   Maximum available abatement. Taxes shall be abated for a
period of seven years from the time such improvements are added to the tax
rolls of the various entities.



   (I)   Nontransferability. In the event property is sold which is
under a tax abatement agreement, the agreement shall terminate and the abated
property shall become fully taxable for the year in which the sale is
consummated and all subsequent years.



(`87 Code, Ch. 22, Attachment 2)



SECTION 3.  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any present or potential owner of taxable property in an
affected jurisdiction may request the creation of a reinvestment zone and tax
abatement by filing a written request with the affected jurisdiction and
attaching a plat and metes and bounds description effectively describing the
said reinvestment zone.



   (B)   The application shall consist of a completed application form
accompanied by a general description of the proposed use and the general
nature and extent of the modernization, expansion or new improvements to be
undertaken, a descriptive list of the improvements which will be a part of
the facility, a map and property description and a time schedule for
undertaking and completing the planned improvements.



   (C)   The initial application for the creation of a reinvestment
zone and tax abatement shall be made to the designated administrative liaison
who is appointed jointly by the Mayor of the city and the County Judge of
Titus County. The reinvestment zone governing body shall provide the affected
jurisdiction a feasibility study setting out the impact of the proposed new
reinvestment zone area.



(`87 Code, Ch. 22, Attachment 2)



SECTION 4.  PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   Should any affected jurisdiction be able to show just cause in
its public hearing why the granting of an abatement will have a substantial
adverse effect on its bonds, tax revenue, service capacity or the provision
of service, that showing shall be the reason for the governing body to deny
any designation of the reinvestment zone, the granting of abatement or both.



   (B)   Neither the reinvestment zone nor the abatement agreement
shall be authorized if it is determined that:



      (1)   There would be a substantial adverse affect on the
provision of government service or tax base;



      (2)   The applicant has insufficient financial capacity;



      (3)   Planned or potential use of property would constitute a
hazard to public safety, health or morals; or



      (4)   Violation of other codes and laws.



(`87 Code, Ch. 22, Attachment 2)



SECTION  5.  AGREEMENT.



   Pursuant to Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 1066(f), § 5, the city agrees
to create a reinvestment zone for commercial and industrial tax abatement
encompassing only the area described in Appendix A.



(`87 Code, Ch. 22, Attachment 2)



SECTION 6.  RECAPTURE.



   (A)   In the event that a facility is completed and begins business
but subsequently discontinues business for any reason except a natural
disaster for a period of one year during the abatement period, then the
abatement agreement shall terminate and so shall the abatement of the taxes
for the current and future calendar years during which the business no longer
operates. The taxes which were to be abated for that calendar year shall be
paid to the affected taxing authorities within 60 days from termination.



   (B)   Should the governing body determine that the company or
individual is in default according to the terms and conditions of its
agreement, the governing body shall notify the company or individual in
writing at the address stated in the agreement and if such is not cured
within 60 days from the date of such notice (“cured period”), then the
agreement shall be terminated.



   (C)   In the event that the company or individual:



      (1)   Allows its unabated ad valorem taxes owed any of the
affected jurisdictions to become delinquent and fails to timely and properly
follow the legal procedure for their protests or contests;



      (2)   Fails to continue to operate beyond the terms of
abatement for a period half as long as the abatement; or



      (3)   Violates any of the terms and conditions of the
abatement agreement with any of the affected jurisdictions and fails to cure
during the “cure period,” the agreement then shall be terminated by every
affected jurisdiction and all taxes previously abated by virtue of every
agreement will be recaptured by each affected jurisdiction and shall be paid
by applicant to each affected jurisdiction within 60 days of the termination.



(`87 Code, Ch. 22, Attachment 2)



SECTION 7.  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   The Chief Appraiser of the county shall annually determine an
assessment of the real and personal property comprising the reinvestment
zone. Each year, the company or individual receiving abatement shall furnish
the Assessor with such information as may be necessary for abatement. Once
value has been established, the Chief Appraiser shall notify the affected
jurisdictions which levies taxes on the amount of the assessment.



   (B)   The agreement shall stipulate that the employees and/or
designated representatives of the affected jurisdictions will have access to
the reinvestment zone during the term of the abatement to inspect the
facility to determine if the terms and conditions of the agreement are being
met. All inspections will be made only after giving 24-hours' prior notice
and will only be conducted in such manner as to not unreasonably interfere
with the construction and/or operation of the facility. All inspections will
be made with one or more representatives of the company or individuals in
accordance with its safety standards.



   (C)   Upon completion of construction, the affected jurisdictions
shall annually evaluate each facility and report possible violations to the
contract and agreement to the governing bodies and its attorneys.



(`87 Code, Ch. 22, Attachment 2)



SECTION 8.  SUNSET PROVISION.



   These guidelines and criteria are effective upon the date of their
adoption and will remain in force for two years at which time all
reinvestment zone and tax abatement contracts created pursuant to its
provisions will be reviewed by the governing bodies to determine whether the
goals have been achieved. Based on that review, the guidelines and criteria
will be modified, renewed or eliminated, providing that such actions shall
not affect existing contracts.



(`87 Code, Ch. 22, Attachment 2)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   GENERAL UTILITIES





         51.   SEWERS





         52.   WATER





         53.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE




CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL UTILITIES



Section



General Provisions



   50.01   Liability of city for damage



   50.02   Cover required for cisterns, wells



   50.03   Water wells



Rates and Charges



   50.20   Application for service



   50.21   Payment of rates and charges; penalty for delinquency



   50.22   Disconnection of service for nonpayment; procedure



   50.23   Reconnection fees



   50.24   Payment of utility fee by bad check



Meters



   50.40   Required



   50.41   Installation; maintenance



   50.42   Ownership



   50.43   Tampering



   50.44   Testing, fees, reimbursements



   50.45   Placement by public utility companies



Water and Sewer Extension



   50.55   Method of extending mains



   50.56   Size of mains



   50.57   City may act as sponsor



   50.58   Appurtenances furnished by city



   50.59   Extension across lot or tract



   50.60   Ownership of mains, no vested rights



   50.61   Water and sewer improvements by assessment



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  LIABILITY OF CITY FOR DAMAGE.



   The city shall not be liable for any damage to the property of any
consumer of any utility service furnished by the city due to temporary
interruption of service, backflow of the sewerage system or any other cause
outside the direct control of the city.



(`87 Code, § 24-1)



§ 50.02  COVER REQUIRED FOR CISTERNS, WELLS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, use, keep or maintain
within the corporate limits of the city any cistern or well without having
the top of such cistern or well adequately and completely covered with a
wooden or metallic cover, which covers shall be at all times maintained in a
good and substantial condition.



(`87 Code, § 24-2) (Ord. passed 8-2-60) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.03  WATER WELLS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or take water
from a private well in the city without first reporting the location of the
well to the City Building Official and posting a sign on the premises where
the well is located reading “Water Well.”



   (B)   The provision requiring the posting of the sign shall be
applicable only when the city has in effect an ordinance rationing water and
prohibiting the use for watering yards, flowers, shrubs and gardens.



(`87 Code, § 24-6) (Ord. 1971-8, passed 6-21-71) Penalty, see § 10.99



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 50.20  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.



   Written application, upon forms furnished by the city, shall be made
for water, sewer, and garbage collection.  Such application shall state the
name and address of the applicant, the type of utility service desired, the
purposes for which the application is made and such other information as the
city may request.



(`87 Code, § 24-16) (Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01)



§ 50.21  PAYMENT OF RATES AND CHARGES; PENALTY FOR DELINQUENCY.



   The rates and charges fixed and prescribed by this chapter shall be due
and payable in the utility billing office of the city on or before the tenth
day after the date of billing the same. In the event that such rates and
charges are not paid in full by such due date, a penalty of 10% of the amount
due and payable shall be added to such rates and charges.



(`87 Code, § 24-23) (Ord. passed 12-20-55)



§ 50.22  DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE FOR NONPAYMENT; PROCEDURE.



   In the event that any consumer of utility services furnished by the
city does not pay the rates and charges, plus the penalty, on or before the
twenty-first day after the billing date of same, the Finance Director shall
have the authority to disconnect or terminate or cause to be disconnected or
terminated all utility services furnished such consumer. In the event a
consumer fails to pay the rates and charges at the time specified in §
50.21, the Finance Director shall mail to the consumer by ordinary mail at
the address shown by city records a notice that if the rates and charges plus
the penalty are not paid on or before the twenty-first day after the billing
date, the city shall cause the utilities to be disconnected.



(`87 Code, § 24-24) (Ord. passed 12-20-55; Am. Ord. 1978-6, passed 5-16-78;
Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01)



§ 50.23  RECONNECTION FEES.



   (A)   Any consumer of the utility services furnished by the city
whose utility services have been disconnected or terminated for the
nonpayment of the rates and charges therefor may have such utility services
resumed by paying all rates, charges and penalties due by him or her to the
city, as well as a $30.00 reconnection fee during normal business hours. 



   (B)   If service is reconnected after hours, holidays, or weekends,
the reconnection fee charged will be $50.00 payable along with the
outstanding bill by the conclusion of the next normal business day.  If
payment is not received, then utility service will be disconnected and shall
not be reconnected until all charges including an additional $30.00
reconnection fee is paid in full.



(`87 Code, § 24-25) (Ord. 1985-27, passed 9-17-85; Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed
11-6-01)



§ 50.24  PAYMENT OF UTILITY FEE BY BAD CHECK.



   Any person who attempts to pay the city for services by a check which
is returned to the city unpaid shall, in addition to all other charges, fees
and penalties provided by the code, pay an additional charge of $25.00.



(`87 Code, § 24-27) (Ord. 4-1976, passed 1-6-76; Am. Ord. 1981-10, passed
10-20-81; Am. Ord. 1988-8, passed 9-6-88; Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01)



METERS



§ 50.40  REQUIRED.



   Meters shall be required to measure the consumption of each water
service furnished by the city.



(`87 Code, § 24-17)  (Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01)



§ 50.41  INSTALLATION; MAINTENANCE.



   All meters required by this chapter and used to measure the consumption
of utility services furnished by the city shall be installed and maintained
by the city.



(`87 Code, § 24-18) (Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01)



§ 50.42  OWNERSHIP.



   All water meters used for the measurement of the consumption of any
water service furnished by the city shall be the property of the city.



(`87 Code, § 24-19) (Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01)



§ 50.43  TAMPERING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized
employee of the city, to tamper with any meter or to in any manner injure any
meter or to manipulate or attempt to manipulate any meter in any manner so as
to affect its registration or measurement of the metered water service.



(`87 Code, § 24-20) (Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.44  TESTING, FEES, REIMBURSEMENTS.



   (A)   Each customer in whose name a water meter is being carried by
the city shall be entitled to have his or her water meter tested by the city
upon the following terms and conditions.



   (B)   In the event a customer requests the city to test his or her
meter, and the size of said meter is two inches or less, a service charge
shall be added to the water bill of the customer in the amount of $50.00 to
cover the city’s cost of removing and testing the meter. In the event the
size of said meter is greater than two inches, the service charge shall be
equal to the city’s actual cost of removing and testing the meter, with
said cost to be approved by the Director of Utilities. Said service charge
shall not be billed by the city to the customer in the event the meter is
found to register at a rate greater than 2% of its properly calibrated rate.



   (C)   A customer shall be entitled to have the city’s test of his
or her meter conducted in his or her presence or in the presence of his or
her authorized representative.



   (D)   A written report showing the results of the test of the meter
shall be sent by the city to the customer within ten days after completion of
the test.



   (E)   In the event the meter is found to register at a rate greater
than 2% of its properly calibrated rate, the customer shall receive a refund
for the overcharge for the period the meter was in use, not to exceed six
months. In the event a meter used for domestic or residential services is
found to register at a rate less than 25% of its properly calibrated rate,
the city may bill the customer for the undercharge for the period the meter
was in service, not to exceed six months. When a meter is used for other than
domestic or residential services and is found to register at a rate less than
5% of its properly calibrated rate, the customer may be billed for the
undercharge for the period the meter was in service, not to exceed six months.



   (F)   If a meter is found not to register, the city may bill the
customer at the minimum monthly meter rate for the preceding six months, or
upon an estimate of consumption for the preceding six months, based upon the
customer’s prior use during the same season of the year, if conditions
remain unchanged.



(`87 Code, § 24-21) (Ord. 1984-17, passed 12-18-84; Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed
11-6-01)



§ 50.45  PLACEMENT BY PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANIES.



   Gas and electrical utility companies operating inside the city shall
not place any meters on any building or at any location prior to
authorization by the City Building Official. If any meter is placed without
such authorization, the Building Official shall have the same removed at once
and shall charge the utility company a removal fee of $15.00. In removing the
illegally placed meter, the City Building Official may use any qualified city
employee or any authorized employee of the utility company or may employ some
qualified person to remove the same. If there are charges made by any person
employed for such purposes, these charges shall be in addition to the $15.00
charged by the city.



(`87 Code, § 24-22) (Ord. passed 11-1-66; Am. Ord.2001-18, passed 11-6-01))



WATER AND SEWER EXTENSION



§ 50.55  METHOD OF EXTENDING MAINS.



   (A)   Upon request of any individual owner or developer of a platted
lot or lots within the city Pleasant and upon the approval of the City
Engineer, the city may investigate the practicability of extending water
and/or sanitary sewer mains and necessary appurtenances to platted lot to
lots for which request is made.  Subdivisions shall comply with Chapter 154
of this code of ordinances.  The owner or developer shall pay the total cost
of installation for utility services.  Total cost shall be defined as to
include engineering, surveying and construction costs.



   (B)   If the owner or developer decides to proceed with the project
based on an engineer's estimate, a written request shall be submitted to the
city, along with a complete set of plans and specifications.



   (C)   The City Engineer may then authorize the owner or developer to
have the project performed under a private contract.  The city shall approve
the contractor and shall inspect the construction project to insure that work
is performed in conformity with standards and specifications provided by the
engineer.  The owner or developer shall be responsible to the private
contractor for all costs associated with the construction of the project.



(`87 Code, § 24-81) (Ord. 1984-15, passed 12-4-84; Am. Ord. 1985-5, passed
3-5-85; Am. Ord. 1995-2, passed 1-10-95; Am. Ord. 2002-30, passed 3-5-02)



Cross-reference:



   Subdivisions, see Ch. 154



§ 50.56  SIZE OF MAINS.



   (A)   The City Engineer shall determine appropriate size water
and/or sanitary sewer line for each project. The minimum size water line for
noncommercial structures shall be six inches and the minimum sanitary sewer
shall be six inches. The minimum size water line for commercial structures
shall be eight inches and the minimum sanitary sewer shall be six inches.



   (B)   The City Engineer may require construction of a main larger
than minimum size in order to serve other areas or provide for future
extension of such service. In such instances, the city shall pay the
difference in material costs between the main or mains that is required by
owner or developer and the size requested by the City Engineer.



   (C)   Water mains will not be allowed to dead end and must be looped
into system or a fire hydrant must be placed at termination point, at the
owner’s expense.



(`87 Code, § 24-82) (Am. Ord. 1995-2, passed 1-10-95)



§ 50.57  CITY MAY ACT AS SPONSOR.



   Upon approval by the City Council, the city may find it necessary to
act as sponsor for certain projects. The City Council may elect to pay for a
part or all of the cost of such a project. However, the project must be
deemed necessary for the protection of health and welfare to a particular
area, city personnel must be able to complete the project in a timely manner
and funds must be available within the budget to adequately fund project.



(`87 Code, § 24-83) (Ord. 1985-5, passed 3-5-85; Am. Ord. 1995-2, passed
1-10-95)



§ 50.58  APPURTENANCES FURNISHED BY CITY.



   The owner or developer shall be responsible for the total costs of
water and/or sanitary sewer mains and necessary appurtenances that are solely
for the purpose of providing utility service to a platted lot or lots. This
shall include the intersection tap into existing main, all appurtenances
necessary upon the new extension for proper operation and ending with
termination of extension, including tap into existing main. Appurtenances
which are not solely necessary for proper utility service or fire protection
to platted lot or lots shall be provided by city, as determined by the City
Engineer.



(`87 Code, § 24-84) (Am. Ord. 1995-2, passed 1-10-95)



§ 50.59  EXTENSION ACROSS LOT OR TRACT.



   All extensions of water and/or sanitary sewer service shall be
installed across the entire width of platted lot or lots. Width shall be
defined as being that side of a platted lot or tract which faces a public
easement to which utility service will be constructed from property line to
property line.



(`87 Code, § 24-85) (Am. Ord. 1995-2, passed 1-10-95)



§ 50.60  OWNERSHIP OF MAINS, NO VESTED RIGHTS.



   (A)   All mains, facilities and appurtenances constructed under the
provisions of this subchapter shall become the property of the city and
extension thereto may be made at any time.



   (B)   No person shall acquire any vested rights under the terms of
this subchapter.



(`87 Code, § 24-86) (Ord. 1985-5, passed 3-5-85; Am. Ord. 1995-2, passed
1-10-95)



§ 50.61  WATER AND SEWER IMPROVEMENTS BY ASSESSMENT.



   Upon the recommendation of the City Manager and the City Engineer, the
City Council may consider and determine the necessity for the extension and
construction of water and/or sanitary sewer main improvements by providing
for the payment of a part of the cost of such improvements by assessments to
be made against the benefitted property and the owners thereof under the
terms and provisions of Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 1110C, as amended and as
may hereafter be amended.



(`87 Code, § 24-87) (Ord. 1985-5, passed 3-5-85; Am. Ord. 1995-2, passed
1-10-95)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   51.01   Sanitary sewer connections required



   51.02   Privies, cesspools, septic tanks



   51.03   Inspection of connections



Industrial Waste



   51.20   Definitions



   51.21   Prohibited discharges



   51.22   Chemical discharges



   51.23   Heavy metals and toxic materials



   51.24   Garbage



   51.25   Storm water and other unpolluted drainage



   51.26   Temperature



   51.27   Radioactive wastes



   51.28   Impairment of facilities



   51.29   Compliance with existing authority



   51.30   Approving authority requirements



   51.31   Approving authority review and approval



   51.32   Requirements for traps



   51.33   Requirements for building sewers



   51.34   Sampling and testing



   51.35   Industrial waste charge



   51.36   Surcharge for excessive B.O.D., pH or suspended solids



   51.37   Assessment and payment of charges



   51.38   Old and new connection permits



   51.39   Conditions of permits



   51.40   Power to enter property



   51.41   Authority to disconnect service



   51.42   Notice



   51.43   Continuing prohibited discharges



   51.44   Hauled wastewater



Sewer Charges



   51.55   Definitions



   51.56   Tapping fees



   51.57   Basis



   51.58   Schedule A; single-family and multi-family residences



   51.59   Schedule B; business, commercial and industrial concerns



   51.60   Schedule C; rates outside city limits; billing



 



   51.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.01  SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.



   All owners or occupants of any building(s) or structure(s) used or
occupied by any person situated within the incorporated city limits of Mount
Pleasant, are required to connect to the sanitary sewer system in the manner
provided in the code. Where connection to the sanitary sewer system is not
feasible or cost prohibitive, the owner or occupant of such building(s) or
structure(s) shall be permitted to construct a septic system in conformity
with § 51.02.



(`87 Code, § 24-3) (Ord. passed 7-6-48; Am. Ord. 1971-9, passed 9-7-71; Am.
Ord. 1995-3, passed 2-7-95)



§ 51.02  PRIVIES, CESSPOOLS, SEPTIC TANKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct, dig, maintain
or use any dry toilet, surface privy, cesspool or septic tank within the
city; provided, however, when connection to the city’s sewer system is
impossible or impractical at any time, the construction, maintenance and use
of a dry or chemical toilet or septic tank constructed in conformity to state
law and approved by the Plumbing Inspector may be permitted until such time
as connection to the city’s sewer system may be made.



(`87 Code, § 24-4) Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.03  INSPECTION OF CONNECTIONS.



   All connections made with the city sanitary sewer system shall be made
under the direction of the Director of Utilities. Upon completion of such
work, the Director of Utilities shall be notified when such work is ready for
inspection. All such work shall be left uncovered for examination until
inspected and approved; provided, however, that such inspection shall be made
within 24 hours after such notification.



(`87 Code, § 24-5) (Am. Ord. 2002-31, passed 3-5-02)



INDUSTRIAL WASTE



§ 51.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The City Manager or duly authorized representative.



   B.O.D. (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen by weight
expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20°C.



   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal (also called house lateral and house
connection).



   CITY. The City of Mount Pleasant, Texas, or any authorized person
acting on its behalf.



   C.O.D. (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  Measures of the oxygen consuming
capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or waste water
expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in
a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic
matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand.



   CONTROL MANHOLE. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some
point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the
public sewer.



   CONTROL POINT. A point of access to a course of discharge before the
discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.



   DIRECTOR OF UTILITIES. The Director of Utilities of the city, or his or
her duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, processing, storage and
sale of food products and produce.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Waste resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing, trade or business from the development of any natural resource
or any mixture of the waste with water or normal waste water or distinct from
normal waste water.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE CHARGE. The charge made on those persons who discharge
industrial wastes into the city’s sewerage system.



   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l). The same as parts per million and is a
weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the
factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other
body of surface water or groundwater.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTE WATER. Waste water excluding industrial waste
water discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average
concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 200 mg/l and B.O.D.
is not more than 250 mg/l.



   OVERLOAD. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment
facility in excess of its engineered design capacity.



   PERSON. Includes a corporation, organization, government or
governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate trust,
partnership, association and any other legal entity.



   pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed in grams per liter.



   PUBLIC SEWER. Pipe or conduit carrying waste water or unpolluted
drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use subject to
control by the city.



   SANITARY SEWER. A public sewer that conveys domestic waste water or
industrial wastes or a combination of both and into which storm water,
surface water, groundwater and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally
passed.



   SLUG. Any discharge of water, waste water or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.



   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth
in the latest edition, at the time of analysis of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Waste Water, as prepared, approved and published
jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works
Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.



   STORM SEWER. A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and
drainage and into which domestic waste water or industrial wastes are not
intentionally passed.



   STORM WATER. Rainfall or any other forms of precipitation.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids measured in mg/l that either float on the
surface of or are in suspension in water, waste water or other liquids and
which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device.



   TO DISCHARGE.  Includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run,
allow to seep or otherwise release or dispose of or allow, permit or suffer
any of these acts or omissions.



   TRAP. A device designed to skim, settle or otherwise remove grease,
oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances.



   UNPOLLUTED WASTE WATER. Water containing:



      (1)   No free or emulsified grease or oil;



      (2)   No acids or alkalies;



      (3)   No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor
in receiving water;



      (4)   No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension,
colloidal state or solution;



      (5)   No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases;



      (6)   Not more than ten mg/l each of suspended solids and
B.O.D.; and



      (7)   Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the
Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in Standard Methods.



   WASTE. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid,
gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial
activities.



   WASTE WATER. A combination of the water-carried waste from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
any ground, surface and storm water that may be present.



   WASTE WATER FACILITIES. Includes all facilities for collection,
pumping, treating and disposing of waste water and industrial wastes.



   WASTE WATER TREATMENT PLANT. Any city-owned facilities, devices and
structures used for receiving, processing and treating waste water,
industrial waste and sludges from the sanitary sewers.



(`87 Code, § 24-47)



§ 51.21  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which, by
itself or by interaction with other wastes, may:



      (1)   Injure or interfere with waste water treatment processes
or facilities;



      (2)   Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or



      (3)   Create a hazard in receiving waters of the waste water
treatment plant effluent.



   (B)   All discharges shall conform to the requirements of this
subchapter.



(`87 Code, § 24-48) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.22  CHEMICAL DISCHARGES.



   (A)   No discharge to public sewers may contain:



      (1)   Cyanide greater than one mg/l;



      (2)   Fluoride other than that contained in the public water
supply;



      (3)   Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l;



      (4)   Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable
or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or



      (5)   Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand
(C.O.D.).



   (B)   No waste or waste water discharged to public waters may
contain:



      (1)   Strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated
plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;



      (2)   Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in
excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and 65°C);



      (3)   Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the
composite waste water at the waste water treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the approving authority for such materials; or



      (4)   Obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases
in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of § 51.21(A) of the code.



   (C)   No waste, waste water or other substance may be discharged
into public sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel at the waste water facilities.



   (D)   All waste, waste water or other substance containing phenols,
hydrogen sulfide or other taste and odor-producing substances shall conform
to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After
treatment of the composite waste water, concentration limits may not exceed
the requirements established by state, federal or other agencies with
jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters.



(`87 Code, § 24-49) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.23  HEAVY METALS AND TOXIC MATERIALS.



   (A)   No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals
greater than amounts specified in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in
terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), determined on the basis of individual
sampling in accordance with Standard Methods are:



      (1)   Arsenic                     0.05
mg/l;



      (2)   Barium                      5.0
mg/l;



      (3)   Boron
                        1.0 mg/l;



      (4)   Cadmium                      0.02
mg/l;



      (5)   Chromium (Total)                  5.0
mg/l;



      (6)   Copper                      1.0
mg/l;



      (7)   Lead                         0.1
mg/l;



      (8)   Manganese                      1.0
mg/l;



      (9)   Mercury                      0.005
mg/l;



      (10)   Nickel
                        1.0 mg/l;



      (11)   Selenium                      0.02
mg/l;



      (12)   Silver                        0.1
 mg/l; and



      (13)   Zinc
                        5.0  mg/l.



   (C)   No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged
into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying
conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes and other applicable
provisions.



   (D)   Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include, but are
not limited to:



      (1)   Antimony;



      (2)   Beryllium;



      (3)   Bismuth;



      (4)   Cobalt;



      (5)   Molybdenum;



      (6)   Tin;



      (7)   Uranyl ion;



      (8)   Rhenium;



      (9)   Strontium;



      (10)   Tellurium;



      (11)   Herbicides;



      (12)   Fungicides; and



      (13)   Pesticides.



(`87 Code, § 24-50) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.24  GARBAGE.



   (A)   No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it
is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the
flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than
½ inch in any dimension are prohibited.



   (B)   The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
3/4 horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater.



(`87 Code, § 24-51) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.25  STORM WATER AND OTHER UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.



   (A)   No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers:



      (1)   Unpolluted storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof
runoff or subsurface drainage;



      (2)   Unpolluted cooling water;



      (3)   Unpolluted industrial process waters; or



      (4)   Other unpolluted drainage.



   (B)   In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act and other
statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other
watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in division (A) of this
section may be discharged.



(`87 Code, § 24-52) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.26  TEMPERATURE.



   No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher
than 150°F (65°C) or any substance which causes the temperature of the
total waste water treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of 10°F or
more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to
110°F.



(`87 Code, § 24-53) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.27  RADIOACTIVE WASTES.



   (A)   No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into
public sewers without the permission of the approving authority.



   (B)   The approving authority may establish, in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of
radioactive wastes into public sewers.



(`87 Code, § 24-54) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.28  IMPAIRMENT OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   No person may discharge into public sewers any substance
capable of causing:



      (1)   Obstruction to the flow in sewers;



      (2)   Interference with the operation of treatment processes
of facilities; or



      (3)   Excessive loading of treatment facilities.



   (B)   Discharges prohibited by division (A) of this section include,
but are not limited to, materials which exert or cause concentrations of:



      (1)   Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l, including
but not limited to:



         (a)   Fuller’s earth;



         (b)   Lime slurries; and



         (c)   Lime residues;



      (2)   Dissolved solids greater than 500 mg/l, including but
not limited to:



         (a)   Sodium chloride; and



         (b)   Sodium sulfate;



      (3)   Excessive discoloration, including but not limited to:



         (a)   Dye wastes; and



         (b)   Vegetable tanning solutions; or



      (4)   B.O.D., C.O.D. or chlorine demand in excess of normal
plant capacity.



   (C)   No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that
may:



      (1)   Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such manner
as to clog the sewers;



      (2)   Overload skimming and grease handling equipment;



      (3)   Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively
treated by normal waste water treatment processes due to the nonamendability
of the substance to bacterial action; or



      (4)   Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to
excessive quantities.



   (D)   No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which:



      (1)   Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the
processes and facilities employed; or



      (2)   Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



   (E)   The approving authority shall regulate the flow and
concentration of slugs when they may:



      (1)   Impair the treatment process;



      (2)   Cause damage to collection facilities;



      (3)   Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal waste
water; or



      (4)   Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial
use.



   (F)   No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous
substances which may violate division (A) of this section if present in
sufficient quantity or size, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Ashes;



      (2)   Cinders;



      (3)   Sand;



      (4)   Mud;



      (5)   Straw;



      (6)   Shavings;



      (7)   Metal;



      (8)   Glass;



      (9)   Hair and fleshings;



      (10)   Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage
grinders;



      (11)   Rags;



      (12)   Feathers;



      (13)   Tar;



      (14)   Plastics;



      (15)   Wood;



      (16)   Unground garbage;



      (17)   Whole blood;



      (18)   Paunch manure;



      (19)   Entrails;



      (20)   Slops;



      (21)   Chemical residues;



      (22)   Paint residues;



      (23)   Bulk solids.



(`87 Code, § 24-55) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.29  COMPLIANCE WITH EXISTING AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the
public sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging:



      (1)   Waste water;



      (2)   Industrial waste;



      (3)   Polluted liquids; or



      (4)   Unpolluted waters or liquids.



   (B)   Unless authorized by the Texas Water Commission, no person may
deposit or discharge any waste included in division (A) of this section on
public or private property in or adjacent to any:



      (1)   Natural outlet;



      (2)   Watercourse;



      (3)   Storm sewer; or



      (4)   Other area within the jurisdiction of the city.



   (C)   The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that
wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the
provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal,
state and local governments.



(`87 Code, § 24-56) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.30  APPROVING AUTHORITY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers
may:



         (a)   Deleteriously affect waste water facilities,
processes, equipment or receiving waters;



         (b)   Create a hazard to life or health; or



         (c)   Create a public nuisance;



      (2)   Then the approving authority shall require:



         (a)   Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;



         (b)   Control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and



         (c)   Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating
the wastes.



   (B)   The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a
discharge or proposed discharge is included under division (A) of this
section.



   (C)   The approving authority shall reject wastes when:



      (1)   It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is
included under division (A) of this section; and



      (2)   The discharge does not meet the requirements of division
(A) of this section.



(`87 Code, § 24-57) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.31  APPROVING AUTHORITY REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   If pretreatment or control is required, the approving
authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment and
processes.



   (B)   The design and installation of equipment and processes must
conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws.



   (C)   Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment,
flow-equalizing or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities
in effective operating condition at his or her own expense.



(`87 Code, § 24-58) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.32  REQUIREMENTS FOR TRAPS.



   (A)   Discharges requiring a trap include:



      (1)   Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts;



      (2)   Oil;



      (3)   Sand;



      (4)   Flammable wastes; and



      (5)   Other harmful ingredients.



   (B)   Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall,
at his or her own expense and as required by the approving authority:



      (1)   Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity
approved by the approving authority;



      (2)   Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy
accessibility for cleaning and inspection;



      (3)   Maintain the trap in effective operating condition.



   (C)   The Director of Utilities, Building Inspector, Health
Inspector and/or other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
identification are entitled to enter any public or private lands, buildings
or other properties connected to the city’s public sewer system for the
purpose of regularly inspecting traps for compliance with the provisions of
this section, and all persons responsible for discharges requiring a trap
shall cooperate in permitting such entrance.



   (D)   When, upon inspection as provided for in division (C) of this
section, a trap is found to be in an inoperative or unclean condition to such
a degree that grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes and/or other harmful
ingredients are being discharged into the city’s public sewers in such a
manner as to clog same and/or to impair or interfere with the operation or
efficiency of wastewater treatment processes, facilities or equipment, the
city may immediately have such trap cleaned and returned to an operative
condition through the use of city personnel and equipment and may charge the
person responsible for the discharge and for maintenance of the trap a fee in
the amount of $200.00, which fee shall be added to said person’s monthly
bill for water and/or sanitary sewer services. In the event that said fee is
not paid on or before the twenty-first day after the billing date of the
monthly bill to which said fee has been added, the city shall have the
authority to disconnect or terminate all water and/or sanitary sewer services
furnished said person, as provided in § 50.22.



(`87 Code, § 24-59) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73; Am. Ord. 1987-21, passed
12-1-87; Am. Ord. 2002-31, passed 3-5-02)



§ 51.33  REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING SEWERS.



   Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall, at his or her own expense and as required by the
approved authority:



   (A)   Install an accessible and safely located control manhole;



   (B)   Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate
observations sampling and measurement of the waste; and



   (C)   Maintain the equipment and facilities.



(`87 Code, § 24-60) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.34  SAMPLING AND TESTING.



   (A)   Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted
methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and
determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb and property.
Note: The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour
composite sample from all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a
grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all
outfalls. Where applicable, 16-hour, 8-hour or some other period may be
required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH.



   (B)   Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes required by this subchapter shall be:



      (1)   Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods; and



      (2)   Determined from suitable samples taken at the control
manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority.



   (C)   B.O.D. and suspended solids shall be determined from composite
sampling.



   (D)   The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to
determine flow, B.O.D. and suspended solids.



   (E)   The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its
sole discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken.



(`87 Code, § 24-61) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.35  INDUSTRIAL WASTE CHARGE.



   (A)   Effective October 1, 1977, all persons making discharges of
industrial waste (except manufacturers of ice, processors of bottled drinking
water and bottlers of soft drinks) shall pay a monthly charge for sewer use
for bathrooms, restrooms, fixtures and machines as set forth in § 51.59,
plus the following charges based upon the amount of water used in their
operations:  $0.20 per 1,000 gallons of water used as shown by the water
meter of the above-named commercial concerns.



   (B)   All persons whose sewage originates in whole or in part from
outside the corporate limits of the city shall be charged 50% more than those
inside the corporate limits.



(`87 Code, § 24-62) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73; Am. Ord. 1977-6, passed
9-20-77)



§ 51.36  SURCHARGE FOR EXCESSIVE B.O.D., pH OR SUSPENDED SOLIDS.



   All wet-operated industrial and manufacturing concerns whose sanitary
sewer waste shall at any time be determined by the approving authority to
have a B.O.D. content in excess of 250 ppm and/or a pH content of less than
5.5 or more than 9.0 shall bear an additional surcharge as follows:



   (A)   For each 1,000 gallons of water used, a charge of $0.05 per
1,000 gallons of water for each 100 ppm over 250 ppm of B.O.D. content;



   (B)   For each 1,000 gallons of water used, a charge of $0.05 for
each½ of pH either above or below the above-stated range;



   (C)   For each 1,000 gallons of water used, a charge of $0.05 per
1,000 gallons of water for each 100 ppm over 250 ppm of total suspended
solids content.



(`87 Code, § 24-63) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73; Am. Ord. 1978-5, passed
8-1-78)



§ 51.37  ASSESSMENT AND PAYMENT OF CHARGES.



   The charges assessed by this subchapter shall be assessed against the
person in whose name the water meter is assessed; and if there is no water
meter, then in the name of the person who has the sewer permit. Sewer, water
and other charges of the city shall be on the same billing and payment made
at the time and in the amount shown on the billing.



(`87 Code, § 24-64) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.38  OLD AND NEW CONNECTION PERMITS.



   (A)   A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers
prior to the effective date of this subchapter (January 23, 1973) may
continue without penalty so long as he or she:



      (1)   Does not increase the quantity or quality of discharge,
without permission of the approving authority;



      (2)   Has discharged the industrial waste at least three
months prior to the effective date of this subchapter (January 23, 1973); and



      (3)   Applies for and is granted a permit no later than 120
days after the effective date of this subchapter (January 23, 1973).



   (B)   After the effective date of this subchapter, any person not
then discharging industrial waste into the city sewer system or desiring to
increase an existing discharge shall apply for a permit, giving the following
information:



      (1)   Location of the discharge;



      (2)   Approximate volume of the daily discharge, or increase,
as the case may be;



      (3)   Contents of the discharge and analysis of the various
substances in the discharge; and



      (4)   Copy of plans of plant showing, among other things, the
pretreatment facilities and sampling point.



(`87 Code, § 24-65) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.39  CONDITIONS OF PERMITS.



   (A)   The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting
all the requirements of § 51.38, provided that the person:



      (1)   Submits an application within 60 days after the
effective date of this subchapter on forms supplied by the approving
authority;



      (2)   Secures approval by the approving authority of plans and
specifications for pretreatment facilities when required; and



      (3)   Has complied with all requirements for agreements or
arrangements, including but not limited to, provisions for:



         (a)   Payment of charges;



         (b)   Installation and operation of pretreatment
facilities where required; and



         (c)   Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and
strength; and



      (4)   Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of
this subchapter and approval of the approving authority.



   (B)   A person applying for a new or additional discharge shall:



      (1)   Meet all conditions of division (A) of this section; and



      (2)   Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste.



   (C)   The city shall not issue a permit for a new or additional
discharge if no sewage lines are at the discharge point or if present
facilities are not adequate for the discharge. The acceptance of an
application by the city shall not constitute an obligation on the city to
construct facilities where the same do not exist or are inadequate.



(`87 Code, § 24-66) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.40  POWER TO ENTER PROPERTY.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized
employees of the city, county or state bearing proper credentials and
identification are entitled to enter any public or private lands, buildings
or other properties for the purpose of enforcing this subchapter, and all
permit holders and their agents and employees shall cooperate in permitting
such entrance.



   (B)   Anyone entering and acting under this authority shall observe
the establishment’s rules and regulations concerning safety, internal
security and fire protection.



   (C)   Except when caused by negligence or failure of the permit
holder to maintain safe conditions or cooperate with inspecting officials,
the city shall indemnify the permit holder against loss or damage to his or
its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the permit holder and
growing out of the sampling operation and not otherwise.



   (D)   (1)   The Director of Public Works and other duly
authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the
city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of:



         (a)   Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or
repair;



         (b)   Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system
lying within the easements; and



         (c)   Conducting any other authorized activity.



      (2)   All activities shall be conducted in full accordance
with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved.



   (E)   No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire
into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic,
paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the
kind and source of discharge to the public sewers.



(`87 Code, § 24-67) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.41  AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT SERVICE.



   (A)   The city may terminate water and waste water disposal service
and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when:



      (1)   Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment
process are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these
structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of waste water;



      (2)   A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent
from the waste water treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for
discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering
waste water to the city’s system that cannot be sufficiently treated or
requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic
treatment; or



      (3)   The industrial customer:



         (a)   Discharges industrial waste or waste water that is
in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority;



         (b)   Discharges waste water at an uncontrolled,
variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the waste water
treatment system;



         (c)   Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary
sewer services when due; or



         (d)   Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public
sewers.



   (B)   If service is disconnected pursuant to subsection (A)(2) of
this section, the city shall:



      (1)   Disconnect the customer;



      (2)   Supply the customer with the governmental agency’s
report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and



      (3)   Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial
customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to
remove the objectionable characteristics from his or her industrial wastes
and until the person pays for the disconnection and connection fees.



(`87 Code, § 24-68) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.42  NOTICE.



   The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this
subchapter with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. The city may
disconnect without notice if the nature of the discharge is such as to
materially damage the city sewer system, but in such case the city shall
endeavor to notify the permit holder of the disconnect. However, there shall
be no liability for failure to do so.



(`87 Code, § 24-69) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.43  CONTINUING PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   No person may continue discharging in violation of this subchapter
beyond the time limit provided in the notice.



(`87 Code, § 24-70) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



§ 51.44  HAULED WASTEWATER



   (A)   Domestic hauled wastewater may be accepted into the Wastewater
Treatment Plant (WWTP) only at locations designated by the Chief Operator,
and at such times as are established by the Chief Operator.  The hauled
wastes shall  not violate any part of the city's Industrial Waste Ordinance
or any other requirement or ordinances established by the city.



   (B)   The transport and discharge of industrial waste, grease or
grit trap waste, or any waste of unknown origin to the WWTP is prohibited.



   (C)   Transporters shall be required to furnish documentation that
identifies the source or sources or the waste proposed for discharge.



   (D)   The Chief Operator or his or her designated representative may
collect samples of any load discharged at the WWTP to insure compliance with
applicable standards.  The transporter shall make available a sample port on
the vehicle, and bear all cost associated with sampling.



   (E)   A charge of $0.04 per gallon shall be made for each load of
transported waste delivered to the WWTP.  This charge is based on the cost
of treatment and will be adjusted on an as needed basis to reflect change in
the cost to treat such waste.  The transporter shall make prompt payment of
discharge fees.  No transporter shall be allowed to discharge waste to the
WWTP while delinquent in payment of charges.



   (F)   Failure to abide by any of the conditions stated in this
section or failure to comply with any other ordinance or policy of the City
or Mount Pleasant shall result in immediate revocation of discharge
privileges.



(Ord. 2002-31, passed 3-5-02) Penalty, see § 10.99



SEWER CHARGES



§ 51.55  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them.



   APARTMENT HOUSE. A single or multiple structure constituting a
collection of dwellings for housing a number of people grouped in three or
more families, assigned to different sections in the same structure or
structures.



   BATHROOM UNIT. A unit consisting of one commode, one wash basin and one
bathtub or shower stall.



   BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL CONCERNS. Any privately owned going business
operated for the purpose of private gain.



   FAMILY. Any number of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit.



   FIXTURES. Bathtub, shower bath, lavatory, commode, laundry tub, washing
machine, urinal, sink, floor drains, drinking fountain and all other plumbing
fixtures through which waste water or other disposal is conveyed into the
sanitary sewer system.



   ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE. A building used exclusively as living quarters
for a family and occupied by only a single family.



   ROOMING HOUSE. A house or building where there are one or more bedrooms
which the proprietor uses for the purpose of furnishing lodging to such
persons he or she shall choose, for which lodging he or she receives a
compensation.



   SANITARY SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried waste from
residences, commercial and business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments.



   SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM. The system of the city consisting of disposal
plant, gathering lines, lift stations and all other facilities thereof with
which sanitary sewage is deposited for transportation, treatment and ultimate
disposal.



   SOLID WASTES. Those wastes resulting from the maintenance and operation
of a residence, business or commercial concern, charitable institution,
industrial and manufacturing concerns and any other endeavor which, if
deposited into the sanitary sewage conduits on private properties and into
the sanitary sewer lines of the city, cannot be conveyed to such conduits and
lines bearing substance without clogging or blocking such private conduits
and public sanitary sewer lines.



   TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE. A building used exclusively as living quarters
for two families and occupied by not more than two families.



(`87 Code, § 24-41) (Ord. passed 4-4-67; Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01)



§ 51.56  TAPPING FEES.



   (A)   The following fees shall be charged and collected for all taps
made to the city’s sanitary sewer system:



         Tap Size (Inches)          Fee



         4               $400.00



         All over 4 inches          Actual cost.



   (B)   In addition to the above tap fees, road bores will be $20.00
per foot.  If open road cuts are allowed by the Director of Utilities the
cost shall be an additional $150.00 per tap.



   (C)   If a city crew is required to locate a pre-existing tap by the
landowner or contractor, the fee will be the full price for a tap.



(`87 Code, § 24-42) (Ord. 4-1976, passed - -; Am. Ord. 1983-3, passed
10-4-83; Am. Ord. 1988-8, passed 9-6-88; Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01;
Am. Ord. 2003-20, passed 10-21-03)



§ 51.57  BASIS.



   The monthly charges for the use of the city’s sanitary sewer systems
and lines shall be based on a fixed charge and/or the volume of water
consumed by various classified users as the case may be and as enumerated in
this subchapter.



(`87 Code § 24-43) (Ord. passed 4-4-67; Am. Ord. 1982-4, passed 9-21-82)



§ 51.58  SCHEDULE A; SINGLE-FAMILY AND MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCES.



   (A)   For each single-family residence and each individual family
unit of a multi-family residence and/or apartment house connected to the
city’s water system, the monthly charge to be paid by same for use of the
sewer services furnished by the city shall be based on the volume of water
consumed during the month, up to a maximum consumption of 15,000 gallons,
calculated as follows:



      (1)   Minimum charge (0 to 2,000
gallons):            $12.70



      (2)   2,000-15,000 gallons, per 1,000
gallons:            $2.12



      (3)   Over 15,000 gallons, per 1,000
gallons:            No charge.



   (B)   For each single-family residence and each individual family
unit of a multi-family residence and/or apartment house not connected to the
city’s water system, the monthly charge to be paid by same for use of the
sewer services furnished by the city shall be as follows:



      (1)   Single-family
residence:                  $26.25



      (2)   Multi-family residence, each family
unit:            $26.25



      (3)   Apartment house, each family
unit:            $26.25.



(`87 Code, § 24-44) (Ord. passed 4-4-67; Am. Ord. 1994-10, passed 7-19-94;
Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 6-30-98; Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01; Am. Ord.
2002-48, passed 9-17-02; Am. Ord. 2007-9, passed 9-18-07; Am. Ord. 2016-15,
passed 9-20-16; Am. Ord. 2018-10, passed 9-18-18)



§ 51.59  SCHEDULE B; BUSINESS, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL CONCERNS.



   (A)   For each business, commercial, industrial and/or manufacturing
concern connected to the city’s water system, the monthly charge to be paid
by same for use of the sewer services furnished by the city shall be based on
the volume of water consumed during the month, calculated as follows:



      (1)   Minimum charge (0 to 2,000
gallons):               $12.70



      (2)   Over 2,000 gallons, per 1,000
gallons:               $2.12.



   (B)   For each business, commercial, industrial and/or manufacturing
concern not connected to the city’s water system, the monthly charge to be
paid by same for use of the sewer services furnished by the city shall be
based on the volume of water consumed during the month from Tri-Water,
calculated as above.



   (C)   Exceptions to this schedule of charges shall be determined by
the City Council on a case by case basis, when it is determined that the said
business, commercial, industrial and/or manufacturing concern returns only a
small ratio of its water purchased into the city’s sewer system.



(`87 Code, § 24-45) (Ord. passed 4-4-67; Ord. 1971-2, passed 2-2-71; Am.
Ord. 1994-10, passed 7-19-94; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 6-30-98; Am. Ord.
2001-18, passed 11-6-01; Am. Ord. 2002-48, passed 9-17- 02; Am. Ord. 2007-9,
passed 9-18-07; Am. Ord. 2016-15, passed 9-20-16; Am. Ord. 2018-10, passed
9-18-18)



§ 51.60  SCHEDULE C; RATES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS; BILLING.



   (A)   Persons residing outside of the city limits and using city
sewer facilities shall be charged 50% more than those rates set out in §§
51.56, 51.58 and 51.59 of the code.



   (B)   Water, sewer and such other charges as the City Council may
direct shall be shown on one bill, and the bill shall be directed to the
person in whose name the water meter is registered; or the sewer is
registered, if no water meter. The bill shall be paid at the place, time and
in the amount shown on the face of it.



   (C)   Northeast Texas Community College, Chapel Hill Independent
School District, and Harts Bluff Independent School District shall be exempt
from this section.



(`87 Code, § 24-46) (Ord. passed 4-4-67; Ord. 1973-3, passed 2-6-73; Am.
Ord. 1980-10, passed 9-16-80; Am. Ord. 1985-27, passed 9-17-85; Am. Ord.
1998-11, passed 6-30-98; Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01; Am. Ord. 2016-7,
passed 8-2-16)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person who violates §§ 51.20et seq. or continues
prohibited discharges is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine as provided in § 10.99.



   (B)   In addition to proceeding under the authority of division (A)
of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil
remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other
ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges.



(`87 Code, § 24-71) (Ord. 1973-2, passed 1-16-73)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER



Section




Rates and Charges




   52.01   Deposit required



   52.02   Refund of deposit



   52.03   Tapping fees



   52.04   Rates established



   52.05   Rates for customers outside city limits



   52.06   Rates for mobile home parks



   52.07   Rates for apartments and low rent housing units



   52.08   Rates for contractors




Water Conservation Plan




   52.20   Introduction



   52.21   Utility profile



   52.22   Water conservation goals



   52.23   Development, implementation, enforcement



   52.24   Record management system



   52.25   Coordinating with regional water planning groups



   52.26   Contract requirements




Drought Contingency Plan




   52.35   Declaration of policy, purpose and intent



   52.36   Public involvement and education



   52.37   Coordination with regional water planning groups



   52.38   Authorization



   52.39   Application



   52.40   Definitions



   52.41   Triggering criteria for initiation and termination of
drought response stages



   52.42   Drought response stages



   52.43   Enforcement



   52.44   Variances



   52.45   Contracts with other political subdivisions and/or wholesale
customers



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 52.01  DEPOSIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   The applicant shall pay to the city a deposit in such amount
as set forth below:



      (1)   Residential   $50.00



      (2)   Commercial and industrial:



         An amount equal to two months estimated billing but no less
than a minimum of   $55.00



      (3)   Industrial, where the average monthly use is 1,000,000
gallons or more, the deposit shall equal one-twelfth of the annual bill as
may be determined by the City Manager; or in lieu thereof, deposit a bond
with the city for such amount, which bond shall be written in some company
doing business in Texas authorized to write such bonds.



   (B)   Each applicant for water service and/or any consumer of the
utility services furnished by the city, in whose name a water meter is
registered with the city, shall pay a $30.00 connection fee for each
connection and/or reconnection to the water system of the city.



(`87 Code, § 24-31) (Ord. 1969-12, passed 7-1-69; Am. Ord. 1985-27, passed
9-17-85; Am. Ord. 1993-1, passed 1-5-93; Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01)



§ 52.02  REFUND OF DEPOSIT.



   (A)   Any deposit made to the city by any applicant may be refunded
after a three-year period if there has been timely payment of their utility
bill within the past three years and they have not been on the cut- off list.
Refuse of deposits is on a per-account basis.



   (B)   A deposit may not be required if a customer has previously had
their deposit refunded for timely payment. However, this only applies to like
accounts (for example: business to business or residence to residence).



   (C)   Deposits may also be refunded after termination of service,
less any amount which is due and owed to the city.



(`87 Code, § 24-32) (Ord. 1993-1, passed 1-5-93)



§ 52.03  TAPPING FEES.



   (A)   The following fees shall be charged and collected for all taps
made to the city’s mains for water service.



      Tap Size (Inches)      Fee



         3/4         $500.00



         All over 2 inches   Actual cost



   (B)   In addition to the above tap fees, road bores will be $10.00
per foot for ¾- and 1-inch taps and  $15.00 per foot for 2-inch taps.  If
open road cuts are allowed by the Director of Utilities the cost shall be an
additional $150.00 per tap.



   (C)   If a city crew is required to locate a pre-existing tap by the
landowner or contractor, the fee will be the full price for a tap.



(`87 Code, § 24-33) (Ord. 4-1976, passed - -; Am. Ord. 1983-3, passed
10-4-83; Am. Ord. 1988-8, passed 9-6-88; Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01;
Am. Ord. 2003-20, passed 10-21-03)



§ 52.04  RATES ESTABLISHED.



    The schedule of monthly rates or charges for water services furnished
by the city shall be as follows:



   (A)   Minimum charge (0 to 2,000
gallons):               $15.13



   (B)   Over 2,000 gallons, per 1,000
gallons:               $2.90



   (C)   Raw water, per 1,000
gallons:                  $0.69.



(`87 Code, § 24-34) (Am. Ord. 1997-9, passed 9-16-97; Am. Ord. 1998-15,
passed 9-15-98; Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01; Am. Ord. 2002-48, passed
9-17-02; Am. Ord. 2006-14, passed 9-5-06; Am. Ord. 2008-22, passed 9-16-08;
Am. Ord. 2016-14, passed 9-20-16; Am. Ord. 2018-9, passed 9-18-18)



§ 52.05  RATES FOR CUSTOMERS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.



   Persons residing outside the corporate limits of the city and using
water furnished by the city shall be charged 50% more than those rates and
tapping fees set forth in the code.



(`87 Code, § 24-35) (Ord. passed 12-20-55; Am. Ord. 1971-2, passed 2-2-71;
Am. Ord. 1994-10, passed 7-19-94; Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01)



§ 52.06  RATES FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS.



   If the city determines that individual meters are not feasible to be
separately metered for a mobile home park, the owner shall pay the minimum
monthly rate or charge for water at the same rate as is provided in the code
on 75% of the units of the rated capacity of the park. The number of gallons
for such payment shall be computed by multiplying 2,000 by 75% of the rated
capacity of the mobile home park, and all water over this amount shall be
computed as scheduled in the code for water used over the minimum amount.
However, this does not prevent the owner of a mobile home to install
sub-metering for his own use, but the rate shall remain the same.



(`87 Code, § 24-36) (Ord. 1971-2, passed 2-2-71; Am. Ord. 1971-4, passed
4-6-71; Am. Ord. 2008-1, passed 2-5-08)



§ 52.07  RATES FOR APARTMENTS AND LOW-RENT HOUSING UNITS.



   (A)   If the city determines that individual meters are not feasible
to be separately metered for an apartment or low-rent housing complex, the
owner shall pay the minimum monthly rate or charge for water at the same rate
as is provided in the code on 90% of the units of the rated capacity of the
apartment or low-rent housing complex. The number of gallons for such payment
shall be computed by multiplying 2,000 by 90% of the rated capacity of the
apartment or low-rent housing complex, and all water over this amount shall
be computed as scheduled in the code for water used over the minimum amount.
This does not prevent the owner of an apartment or low-rent housing complex
to install sub-metering, but the rate shall remain the same.



   (B)   When an apartment or low-rent housing complex is undergoing
extensive remodeling or renovation such that 25% or more of the units of the
rated capacity of the apartment or low rent housing complex are not habitable
and cannot be rented, the City Council may, for a period not to exceed four
months, reduce the above minimum charge or rate for such apartment or
low-rent housing complex by calculating same on the basis of 75% of the units
of the rated capacity of the apartment or low-rent housing complex. In such
instances, the number of gallons for such payment shall be computed by
multiplying 2,000 by 75% of the rated capacity of the apartment or low-rent
housing complex, and all water over this amount shall be charged as scheduled
in the code for water used over the minimum amount.



   (C)   For the purposes of this section, the rated capacity of an
apartment or low-rent housing complex shall be defined as the total number of
units connected to the city’s water system through the same water meter.



(`87 Code, § 24-37) (Ord. 1971-5, passed 4-6-71; Am. Ord. 1986-11, passed
6-3-86; Am. Ord. 2008-1, passed 2-5-08)



§ 52.08  RATES FOR CONTRACTORS.



   (A)   Any contractor or other person purchasing water from the city
other than through a residential or commercial meter installed to measure the
consumption of water from a particular lot or tract of land and/or a
particular building or structure shall be charged at the rate of $2.90 per
1,000 gallons of water used.



   (B)   Any contractor or person purchasing water under this section
shall pay a minimum monthly fee of $35.00, shall pay a deposit of $485.00 and
shall obtain a construction meter from the Director of Utilities. The
contractor shall be required to identify the fire hydrant to be used to draw
the water and any other instructions for use of the construction meter. The
meter shall be read and billed no less than every 30 days. In the event that
the contractor is found in violation of any provision of this subchapter, the
contractor shall be prohibited from the issuance of a construction meter for
a period of 12 months.



(`87 Code, § 24-38) (Ord. 1985-18, passed 6-18-85; Am. Ord. 1991-4, passed
9-11-91; Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 11-6-01; Am. Ord. 2003-19, passed 10-21-03;
Am. Ord. 2016-18, passed 11-1-16; Am. Ord. 2018-9, passed 9-18-18)



WATER CONSERVATION PLAN



§ 52.20  INTRODUCTION.



   (A)   The city has developed this Water Conservation Plan for water
supplied by the city to both retail and wholesale water customers. This Plan
is adopted pursuant to 30 Tex. Admin. Code Ch. 288. The purpose of this Plan
is to encourage a permanent reduction in the quantity of water required
through the implementation of efficient water supply and water use practices.
The emphasis and the basic goal of this Plan is to achieve lasting, long-term
improvements in water use efficiency.



   (B)   The city has water rights in three area lakes: 10,000 ac/ft in
Lake Bob Sandlin, 3,590 ac/ft in Lake Cypress Springs and 3,000 ac/ft in Lake
Tankersley.



   (C)   The city is located in Northeast Texas. Rainfall averages are
approximately 45 inches per year. The rolling hills of the area are vegetated
with some native and some improved grassland. The oil and timber industries
are active in this area, as well as some farming and cattle operations. The
sandy and clay soils are also suitable for truck crops and gardening.



(Ord. 2001-4, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord.
2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



§ 52.21  UTILITY PROFILE.



   The city provides water to its populace and sells treated water to both
the Tri-Water Special Utility District and the City of Winfield. The city
will be investigating the possibility of supplying other regional cities
and/or water supply corporations in the future. Attachments I and II to this
chapter, which are on file in the Office of the City Secretary, contain
additional information regarding population, customer base, water supply
system, wastewater system, and water use data.



(Ord. 2001-4, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2005-3, passed 4-19-05; Am. Ord.
2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord. 2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



§ 52.22  WATER CONSERVATION GOALS.



   (A)   The objective of this Water Conservation Plan is to accomplish
a permanent reduction in the quantity of water required through the
implementation of efficient water supply and water use practices.
Specifically, the water conservation goals for the city are:



      (1)   Specific, quantified five- and ten-year targets.



         (a)   Five-year target: Reduce water consumption as
measured in gallons per capita per day (gpcd) by 1.0% to 92.97 gpcd;



         (b)   Ten-year target: Reduce water consumption as
measured in gallons per capita per day by 3% to 91.09 gpcd.



      (2)   To reduce unaccounted for water; and



      (3)   To implement an increase in the reuse or recycling of
water.



   (B)   Through the structured and systematic application of the
contents of this Water Conservation Plan, the city expects to see a reduction
in per capita water use during the next 30 years. In addition, over the next
ten years, the city's goal is to reduce the quantity of unaccounted for water
and to implement an official water reuse and recycling program. Specifically,
the water loss goals for the city are:



      (1)   Specific, quantified five- and ten-year water loss
targets:



         (a)   Five-year target: Reduce water loss as measured in
gallons per capita per day (gpcd) by one gallon gpcd;



         (b)   Ten-year target: Reduce water loss as measured in
gallons per capita per day (gpcd) by three gallons gpcd.



      (2)   Identify unmetered sources and meter them:



         (a)   Fire hydrant flushing;



         (b)   Public buildings;



         (c)   Recreation facilities.



   (C)   The city maintains meters to measure both raw water and
treated water. These meters are calibrated annually to within ±5% accuracy
to insure proper measurement of the quantity of water diverted from the
various sources.



   (D)   This Water Conservation Plan addresses nine aspects associated
with the implementation of the Water Conservation Plan. They are as follows:
(1) universal metering and meter repair/replacement; (2) leak detection and
water audits; (3) public information and education program; (4) water
conservation oriented rate structures; (5) water conserving plumbing
fixtures; (6) water conservation retrofit programs; (7) water conserving
landscapes; (8) wastewater reuse/recycling; and (9) reservoir systems
operations plan. These are summarized below.



      (1)   Universal metering and meter repair/replacement. The
city meters all water produced and tests these master meters annually. All
water service connections to the city's water supply system will be metered.
Meters will continue to be monitored for accuracy annually and replaced on a
15-year cycle.



      (2)   Leak detection and water audits.



         (a)   The city maintains a program of leak detection,
leak repair and water loss accounting in the water transmission lines and
distribution system to control unaccounted for losses of water. Data is
recorded daily and reviewed on a monthly basis. Water audits are conducted
annually. Real water losses are identified and corrected. Real water losses
are minimized by replacement of deteriorating water mains and appurtenances,
and are inspected by city staff on an on-going basis.



         (b)   The leak detection program described in the Plan
is currently in use by the city which reduces real water losses:



            1.   Intermittent night-flow measurements are
conducted annually;



            2.   Pressure is controlled to just above the
standard-of-service level by use of SCADA system;



            3.   The city has one pressure zone;



            4.   Surges in pressure are limited by control
valves;



            5.   Night-time pressure is reduced by control
valves when feasible.



      (3)   Public information and education program.



         (a)   The city makes available consumer information
encouraging water conservation from the Texas Water Development Board and
American Water Works Association (AWWA). There are several different
publications currently available.



         (b)   The city may mail out material developed by the
staff, materials obtained from the Texas Water Development Board, Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality or other sources semi-annually (once in
the spring and once in the summer) to all customers.



         (c)   The city is committed to creating and implementing
a formal and on-going education program, which may address some or all of the
following:



            1.   Provide qualified individuals to speak at
institutions, organizations and groups throughout the area at regular
intervals;



            2.   Conduct or sponsor exhibits on conservation,
water saving devices and other methods to promote water conservation and
efficiency;



            3.   Provide and distribute brochures and other
materials to area citizens;



            4.   Work in cooperation with schools to establish
an education program and provide conservation videos, brochures and teaching
aids; and



            5.   Develop welcome packages for new citizens to
educate and provide the benefits of conservation and availability of native
water efficient plants, trees, shrubs and grasses.



      (4)   Water conservation oriented rate structures. The city
reviews its rate structure on a regular basis. The city is committed in
future reviews to be conservation minded as rate structures are deliberated.
The city's utility rate structure is cost based to discourage excessive use
of water. The city will continue to review rates annually to ensure water
revenues exceed expenses and replacement costs and to discourage excessive
and wasteful use.



      (5)   Water conserving plumbing fixtures. The city has adopted
the 2003 International Plumbing Code, and all new construction or renovations
in the city use water conserving fixtures, including but not limited to the
following:



         (a)   Shower heads: no more than 2½ gallons per minute
at 60-pounds per square inch of pressure;



         (b)   Lavatory/sink faucets and aerators: no more than
2.2 gallons per minute at 60-pounds per square inch of pressure;



         (c)   Toilets: no more than 1.6 gallons per flush;



         (d)   Urinals: no more than 1.0 gallons per flush;



         (e)   Drinking water fountains: must be self-closing;



         (f)   Hot water pipes: hot water lines not in or under a
concrete slab will be insulated;



         (g)   Pressure reduction valves; pressure reduction
valves may be installed where system pressures exceed 80-pounds per square
inch;



         (h)   Swimming: swimming pools will have re-circulation
filtration equipment.



      (6)   Water conservation retrofit program. In Mount Pleasant,
the retrofit of existing plumbing fixtures shall be accomplished through the
voluntary efforts of individual consumers for their homes and businesses.
Adoption of a Water Conservation Plumbing Code can provide a gradual
upgrading of plumbing fixtures in existing structures. Many water conserving
plumbing devices are available at local hardware stores and can be installed
by the consumer. Additional information on retrofitting will be provided
through public education.



      (7)   Water conserving landscapes. The city encourages water
conservation landscaping and is committed to informing and educating the
public regarding this method of water conservation.



      (8)   Wastewater reuse/recycling. The city encourages reusing
and recycling water whenever it is found to be fiscally, environmentally and
institutionally practical and prudent. The city is currently using the
treated effluent from Southside Wastewater Treatment Plant for plant wash
down and chemical feed water. The city will continue to investigate and
evaluate alternatives for reuse and/or recycling water as part of its
Conservation Plan.



      (9)   Reservoir systems operations plan. The city currently
purchases raw water from two wholesale providers. The city has annual water
rights up to 10,000 acre-feet from Lake Bob Sandlin, which is operated by the
Titus County Fresh Water Supply District, and 3,590 acre-feet from Lake
Cypress Springs, which is operated by the Franklin County Water Utility
District. This wholesale purchase of raw water requires the city to
coordinate its withdraw of water from these sources to conform with the water
conservation plans developed for both Lake Bob Sandlin and Lake Cypress
Springs. Additionally the city owns and maintains Lake Tankersley reservoir,
which supplies annual water rights of 3,000 acre-feet. This reservoir
provides raw water to the city only in the event of a significant water
shortage from the two sources.



(Ord. 2001-4, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2005-3, passed 4-19-05; Am. Ord.
2008-7, passed 3-18-08; Am. Ord. 2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord. 2014-1,
passed 3-17-14; Am. Ord. 2016-17, passed 11-1-16)



§ 52.23  DEVELOPMENT, IMPLEMENTATION, ENFORCEMENT.



   The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby authorized and
directed to implement the applicable provisions of the Plan upon
determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health,
safety, and welfare. The City Manager or his or her designee shall have the
authority to initiate or terminate water conservation measures or other water
supply emergency response measures as described in the plan.



(Ord. 2001-4, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2005-3, passed 4-19-05; Am. Ord.
2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord. 2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



§ 52.24  RECORD MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.



   (A)   The city shall utilize a record management system to record
water pumped, water deliveries, water sales and water losses which allows for
the desegregation of water sales and uses into the following user classes:



      (1)   Residential (including multi-family residential);



      (2)   Commercial;



      (3)   Industrial;



      (4)   Wholesale.



   (B)   City staff shall track targets and goals by utilizing the
following procedures:



      (1)   Logs shall be maintained for meter calibration, meter
testing, and meter replacement programs.



      (2)   Annual water audits shall be documented and kept in the
utility department files.



      (3)   Staff shall keep a record of the number of mail-outs
distributed semi-annually.



      (4)   Rates will be tracked by ordinances adopted.



      (5)   Logs shall be maintained for the utility's leak
detection program, including but not limited to the following:



         (a)   Annual intermittent night-flow measurements;



         (b)   SCADA system.



   (C)   This system will provide the data necessary for the city to
monitor the progress of this Water Conservation Plan and will enable the city
to evaluate the effectiveness of each area of the program.



(Ord. 2001-4, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2008-7, passed 3-18-08; Am. Ord.
2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord. 2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



§ 52.25  COORDINATING WITH REGIONAL WATER PLANNING GROUPS.



   The service area of the City of Mt. Pleasant is located within the
Northeast Texas (Region D) Regional Water Planning Group and the City of Mt.
Pleasant has provided a copy of this Water Conservation Plan to the Region D
Water Planning Group.



(Ord. 2005-3, passed 4-19-05; Am. Ord. 2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord.
2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



§ 52.26  CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS.



   In every water supply contract entered into by the city or renewed by
ordinance, resolution, or tariff and including any contract extension, after
official adoption of this Water Conservation Plan, the contract shall include
a requirement for the wholesale customer to develop and implement a water
conservation plan using the applicable elements of Title 30 TAC Chapter 288.
If the customer intends to resell the water, then the contract between the
initial supplier and customer shall provide that the contract for resale of
the water shall have water conservation requirements; so that each successive
customer in the resale of the water will be required to implement water
conservation measures in accordance with the provisions of the same chapter.



(Ord. 2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN



§ 52.35  DECLARATION OF POLICY, PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   In order to conserve the available water supply and protect
the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic
water use, sanitation and fire protection and to protect and preserve public
health, welfare and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply
shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the City of Mount
Pleasant (hereinafter referred to as "city") adopts the following regulations
and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water.



   (B)   Water uses regulated or prohibited under this Drought
Contingency Plan (hereinafter referred to as "Plan") are considered to be
non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or
other emergency water supply condition are deemed to constitute a waste of
water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in § 52.43.



(Ord. 2001-3, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord.
2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



§ 52.36  PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT AND EDUCATION.



   (A)   The city will hold a public meeting prior to adoption of these
regulations. The purpose of this meeting will be to solicit comments from the
public and water users pertaining to the regulations, restrictions, and
implementation of the Plan.



   (B)   The city will periodically provide the public with information
about the Plan, including information about the conditions under which each
stage of the Plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response
measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided
by one or more of the following methods: television notices, radio notices,
press releases and/or utility bill inserts.



(Ord. 2001-3, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord.
2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



§ 52.37  COORDINATION WITH REGIONAL WATER PLANNING GROUPS.



   The service area of the city is located within the Northeast Texas
Regional Water Planning Area, Region D, and the city has provided a copy of
this Plan to the Northeast Texas Regional Water Planning Committee.



(Ord. 2001-3, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord.
2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



§ 52.38  AUTHORIZATION.



   The City Manager, (hereinafter referred to as "Manager"), or his or her
designee is authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of
this Plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect
public health, safety and welfare. The Manager, or his or her designee, shall
have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply
emergency response measures as described in this Plan.



(Ord. 2001-3, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord.
2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



§ 52.39  APPLICATION.



   The provisions of this Plan shall apply to all persons, customers and
property utilizing water provided by the city. The terms PERSON and CUSTOMER
as used in the Plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations and all other legal entities.



(Ord. 2001-3, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord.
2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



§ 52.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AESTHETIC WATER USE. Water use for ornamental or decorative puiposes
such as fountains, reflecting pools and water gardens.



   COMMERCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL WATER USE. Water use which is integral to
the operations of commercial and non-profit establishments and governmental
entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants and
office buildings.



   CONSERVATION. Those practices, techniques and technologies that reduce
the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the
efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water
so that a supply is conseived and made available for future or alternative
uses.



   CUSTOMER. Any person, company or organization using water supplied by
the city.



   DOMESTIC WATER USE. Water use for personal needs or for household or
sanitary purposes, such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation or
for cleaning a residence, business, industiy or institution.



   EVEN NUMBER ADDRESS.  Street addresses, box numbers or rural postal
route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6 or 8 and locations without addresses.



   INDUSTRIAL WATER USE. The use of water in processes designed to convert
material of lower value into forms having greater usability and value.



   LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION USE. Water used for the irrigation and maintenance
of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned, including
residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks and
rights-of-way and medians.



   NON-ESSENTIAL WATER USE. Water uses that are not essential nor required
for the protection of public, health, safety and welfare, including:



      (1)   Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic
fields and golf courses, except otherwise provided under this Plan;



      (2)   Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat,
trailer, airplane or other vehicle;



      (3)   Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways,
driveways, parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced areas;



      (4)   Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for
purposes other than immediate fire protection;



      (5)   Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or
accumulate in any gutter or street;



      (6)   Use of water to fill, refill or add to any indoor or
outdoor swimming pools or Jacuzzi-type pools;



      (7)   Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or
scenic puiposes except where necessary to support aquatic life;



      (8)   Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a
reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such
leak(s); and



      (9)   Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or
any other purposes other than fire fighting.



   ODD NUMBERED ADDRESS. Street addresses, box numbers or rural postal
route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7 or 9.



(Ord. 2001-3, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord.
2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



§ 52.41  TRIGGERING CRITERIA FOR INITIATION AND TERMINATION OF DROUGHT
RESPONSE STAGES.



   (A)   The Manager, or his or her designee, shall monitor water
supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and shall determine when
conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the Plan.
Public notification of the initiation or termination of drought response
stages shall be by means of televised notices and press releases.



   (B)   The triggering criteria described below are based on a
statistical analysis of the vulnerability of the water source under drought
of record conditions.



      (1)   Stage 1: mild water shortage conditions.



         (a)   Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be
requested to voluntarily conserve water and adhere to the prescribed
restrictions on certain water uses, as defined in § 52.42, if one or more of
the following conditions exist:



            1.   Total daily water demand equals or exceeds
85% of safe system capacity or 14.0 mgd (million gallons per day) for three
consecutive days;



            2.   The levels in Lake Bob Sandlin are declining
at a rate that could disrupt the water supply in the future.



         (b)   Requirements for termination. Stage 1 of the Plan
may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have
ceased to exist for a period of 14 consecutive days.



      (2)   Stage 2: moderate water shortage conditions.



         (a)   Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be
required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain
non-essential water uses provided in § 52.42, if one or more of the
following conditions exist:



            1.   Total daily water demand equals or exceeds
90% of the safe system capacity or 14.9 mgd for three consecutive days;



            2.   System demands cause ground and/or elevated
water storage levels to fall daily and recover completely only during the
overnight low demand periods;



            3.   Lake Bob Sandlin levels continue declining at
a rate that makes water supply problems imminent although the supply is still
currently adequate.



         (b)   Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of the Plan
may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have
ceased to exist for a period of seven consecutive days. Upon termination of
Stage 2, Stage 1 becomes operative.



      (3)   Stage 3: severe water shortage conditions.



         (a)   Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be
required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain
non-essential water uses provided in § 52.42, if one or more of the
following conditions exist:



            1.   Total daily water demand equals or exceeds90%
of the safe system capacity or 14.9 mgd for seven consecutive days;



            2.   Failure of a raw water or high service
pumping unit could cause disruption of service;



            3.   Ground and/or elevated storage levels no
longer achieve full recovery even in low demand periods;



         (b)   Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of the Plan
may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have
ceased to exist for a period of seven consecutive days. Upon termination of
Stage 3, Stage 2 becomes operative.



      (4)   Stage 4: critical water shortage conditions.



         (a)   Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be
required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain
non-essential water uses provided in § 52.42, if one or more of the
following conditions exist:



            1.   Total daily water demand equals 100% of the
safe system capacity or 16.5 mgd for one day;



            2.   Water demand exceeds the safe limits of the
system;



            3.   Water levels in the elevated storage
reservoirs cannot be maintained to insure adequate fire protection;



            4.   Lake Bob Sandlin levels continue to decline
at a rate that could cause complete failure of the pumping equipment.



         (b)   Requirements for termination. Stage 4 of the Plan
may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have
ceased to exist for a period of three consecutive days. Upon termination of
Stage 4, Stage 3 becomes operative.



      (5)   Stage 5: emergency water shortage conditions.



         (a)   Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be
required to comply with the requirements and restrictions for Stage 5 of this
Plan when the Manager, or his or her designee, determines that a water supply
emergency exists based on one or more of the following conditions:



            1.   A major water line breaks or a pump or system
failure occurs which causes unprecedented loss of capability to provide water
service;



            2.   Natural or man-made contamination of the
water supply source(s);



            3.   System storage levels and pressures prevent
fire protection.



         (b)   Requirements for termination. Stage 5 of the Plan
may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have
ceased to exist for a period of 24 consecutive hours (one day).



(Ord. 2001-3, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord.
2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



§ 52.42  DROUGHT RESPONSE STAGES.



   The Manager, or his or her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or
demand conditions on a daily basis and, in accordance with the triggering
criteria set forth in § 52.41, shall determine that a mild, moderate,
severe, critical or emergency condition exists and shall implement the
following actions upon publication of notice in a newspaper of general
circulation.



   (A)   Stage 1: mild water shortage conditions.



      (1)   Supply management measures. In order to manage a limited
water supply and/or reduce water demand, the city will implement the
following supply management measures:



         (a)   Reduce or discontinue flushing of water mains;



         (b)   Discontinue fire hydrant testing;



         (c)   Implement measures to return any system component
to full production capability (for example, pumping equipment, storage
facilities and the like);



         (d)   Repair all existing main breaks.



      (2)   Voluntary water use restrictions.



         (a)   Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit
the irrigation of landscaped areas to Sundays and Thursdays for customers
with a street address ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6 or 8), and
Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address ending in
an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9) and to irrigate landscapes only between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on designated watering days.



         (b)   All operations of the city shall adhere to water
use restrictions prescribed for Stage 2 of the Plan.



         (c)   Water customers are requested to practice water
conservation and to minimize or discontinue water use for non-essential
purposes.



      (3)   Goal. The city and Titus County Fresh Water Supply
District will work together to achieve a voluntary 10% reduction in total
daily water use.



   (B)   Stage 2: moderate water shortage conditions.



      (1)   Supply management measures. In order to manage a limited
water supply and/or reduce water demand, the city will implement the
following supply management measures:



         (a)   All of the measures described for Stage 1;



         (b)   Reduced or discontinued irrigation of public
landscaped areas, including parks and ballfields.



      (2)   Water use restrictions. Under threat of penalty for
violation, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons.



         (a)   Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end
sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems shall be limited to Sundays and
Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number (0, 2,
4, 6 for 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street
address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9). The irrigation of
landscaped areas is further limited to the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. on designated watering days. However, irrigation of landscaped areas is
permitted at anytime if it is by means of a hand-held hose, a faucet filled
bucket or watering can of five gallons or less or drip irrigation system.



         (b)   Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike,
boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is prohibited except on designated
watering days between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. Such
washing, when allowed, shall be done with a handheld bucket or a hand-held
hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Vehicle
washing may be done at anytime on the immediate premises of a commercial car
wash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted
from these regulations if the health, safety and welfare of the public is
contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning, such as garbage trucks and
vehicles used to transport food and perishables.



         (c)   Use of water to fill, refill or add to any indoor
or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools or Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited
except on designated watering days between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.



         (d)   Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for
aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support
aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a
recirculating system.



         (e)   Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited
to fire fighting and related activities or other activities necessary to
maintain public health, safety and welfare, except that use of water from
designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under
special permit from the city.



         (f)   Use of water for the irrigation of golf course
greens, tees and fairways is prohibited except on designated watering days
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. However, if the golf course
utilizes a water source other than that provided by the city, the facility
shall not be subject to these regulations.



         (g)   All restaurants are prohibited from serving water
to its patrons except when requested. The following uses of water are defined
as non-essential and are prohibited:



            1.   Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways,
driveways, parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced areas;



            2.   Use of water to wash down buildings or
structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection;



            3.   Use of water for dust control;



            4.   Flushing gutters or permitting water to run
or accumulate in any gutter or street; and



            5.   Failure to repair a controllable leak(s)
within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the
repair of such leak(s).



      (3)   Goal. The city and Titus County Fresh Water Supply
District will work together to achieve a 15% reduction in total daily water
use.



   (C)   Stage 3: severe water shortage conditions.



      (1)   Supply management measures. In order to manage a limited
water supply and/or reduce water demand, the city will continue implementing
all of the measures described for Stage 1 and Stage 2. Irrigation of public
landscaped areas, including parks and ballfields shall be discontinued.



      (2)   Water use restrictions. All requirements of Stage 2
shall remain in effect during Stage 3, except:



         (a)   Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to
designated watering days between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and
shall be by means of hand-held hoses, hand-held buckets, drip irrigation or
permanently installed automatic sprinkler system only. The use of hose-end
sprinklers is prohibited at all times;



         (b)   The watering of golf courses tees is prohibited
unless the golf course utilizes a water source other than that provided by
the city;



         (c)   The use of water for construction purposes from
designated fire hydrants under special permit is to be discontinued.



      (3)   Goal. The city and Titus County Fresh Water Supply
District will work together to achieve a 25% reduction in total daily water
use.



   (D)   Stage 4: critical water shortage conditions.



      (1)   Supply management measures. In order to manage a limited
water supply and/or reduce water demand, the city will continue implementing
all of the measures described in Stages 1, 2 and 3.



      (2)   Water use restrictions. All requirements of Stages 2 and
3 shall remain in effect during Stage 4, except:



         (a)   Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to
designated watering days between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and
shall be by means of hand-held hoses, hand-held buckets or drip irrigation
only. The use of hose-end sprinklers or permanently installed automatic
sprinkler systems are prohibited at all times;



         (b)   Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike,
boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle not occurring on the premises of a
commercial car wash or a commercial service station and not in the immediate
interest of public health, safety and welfare is prohibited. Further, such
vehicle washing at commercial car washes and commercial service stations
shall occur only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.;



         (c)   The filling, refilling or adding of water to
swimming pools, wading pools and Jacuzzi- type pools is prohibited;



         (d)   Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for
aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support
aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a
recirculating system;



         (e)   No applications for new, additional, expanded or
increased-in-size water service connections, meters, service lines, pipeline
extensions, mains or water service facilities of any kind shall be allowed or
approved.



      (3)   Goal. The city and Titus County Fresh Water Supply
District will work together to achieve a 30% reduction in total daily water
use.



   (E)   Stage 5: emergency water shortage conditions.



      (1)   Goal. Achieve a 75% reduction in total daily water use.



      (2)   Supply management measures.



         (a)   In order to manage a limited water supply and/or
reduce water demand, the city will continue implementing all of the measures
described in Stages 1, 2, 3 and 4 above.



         (b)   In addition, the city will use any or all
alternative supply sources available and will implement the usage of
reclaimed water for non-potable purposes where available.



      (3)   Water use restrictions. All requirements of Stages 2, 3
and 4 shall remain in effect during Stage 5, except:



         (a)   Irrigation of landscaped areas is absolutely
prohibited;



         (b)   Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike,
boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is absolutely prohibited;



         (c)   All water usage except that required to protect
the public health and safety is absolutely prohibited.



      (4)   When emergency water shortage conditions exist for Titus
County Fresh Water Supply District they will refer to Section VII of their
Drought Plan and implement measures for pro rata water allocation.



(Ord. 2001-3, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord.
2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



§ 52.43  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of
water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural,
governmental or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of
this Plan.



   (B)   Any person who violates this Plan is guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $250 and not
more than $2,000. Each day that one or more of the provision in this Plan is
violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of
three or more distinct violations of this Plan, the Manager shall, upon due
notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the
premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such
circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of are-connection charge,
established at $75, and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing
service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the Manager that
the same action shall not be repeated while the Plan is in effect. Compliance
with this Plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in the district
court.



   (C)   Any person, including a person classified as a water customer
of the city, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or
originates, shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the
violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable
presumption that the person in apparent control of the property committed the
violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he or she
did not commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for
violations of their minor children, and proof that a violation committed by a
child occurred on property within the parents' control shall constitute a
rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation, but any such
parent may be excused if he or she had previously directed the child not to
use the water as it was used in violation of this Plan and that the parent
could not have reasonably known of the violation.



   (D)   Any city police officer, or other city employee designated by
the Manager, may issue a citation to a person he or she reasonably believes
to be in violation of this subchapter. The citation shall be prepared in
duplicate and shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, if
known, the offense charged and shall direct him or her to appear in the Mount
Pleasant Municipal Court on the date shown on the citation. That appearance
date shall be complete upon delivery of the citation to the alleged violator,
to an agent or employee of a violator or to a person over 14 years of age who
is a member of the violator's immediate family or is a resident or the
violator's residence. The alleged violator shall appear in Mount Pleasant
Municipal Court to enter a plea of guilty or not guilty for the violation of
this Plan. If the alleged violator fails to appear in Mount Pleasant
Municipal Court, a warrant for his or her arrest may be issued. A summons to
appear may be issued in lieu of an arrest warrant. These cases shall be
expedited and given preferential setting in Mount Pleasant Municipal Court
before all other cases.



(Ord. 2001-3, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord.
2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



§ 52.44  VARIANCES.



   (A)   The Manager, or his or her designee, may, in writing, grant
temporary variance of existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this
Plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an
emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation or fire
protection for the public or the person requesting such variance and if one
or more of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   Compliance with this Plan cannot be technically
accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other
condition for which the Plan is in effect;



      (2)   Alternative methods can be implemented which will
achieve the same level of reduction in water use.



   (B)   Persons requesting an exemption from the provision of this
subchapter shall file a petition for variance with the city within five days
after the Plan or a particular drought response state has been invoked. All
petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the Manager, or his or her
designee, and shall include the following:



      (1)   Name and address of the petitioner(s);



      (2)   Purpose of the water use;



      (3)   Specific provision(s) of the Plan from which the
petitioner is requesting relief;



      (4)   Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of
the Plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur
to the petitioner or others if the petitioner complies with this subchapter;



      (5)   Description of the relief requested;



      (6)   Period of time for which the variance is sought;



      (7)   Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the
petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intention of this Plan
and the compliance date;



      (8)   Other pertinent information.



   (C)   Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the
following conditions, unless waived or modified by the Manager, or his or her
designee:



      (1)   Variances granted shall include a timetable for
compliance;



      (2)   Variances granted shall expire when the Plan is no
longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified
requirements.



   (D)   No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any
violation of this Plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance.



(Ord. 2001-3, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord.
2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



§ 52.45  CONTRACTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS AND/OR WHOLESALE
CUSTOMERS.



   Tri-Special Utility District, the City of Winfleld and any future
political subdivisions and/or wholesale customers obtaining contracts for
water and/or wastewater services from the city will be required to do one of
the following:



   (A)   Prepare a Drought Contingency Plan and obtain approval of the
same from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality;



   (B)   Officially adopt the applicable provisions of the city's
Drought Contingency Plan;



   (C)   All present and future wholesale contracts will be subject to
the provisions of Tex. Water Code, § 11.039 and water will be distributed by
the provisions stated in this code.



         "Texas Water Code, § 11.039 - Distribution of Water During
Shortage



         (A)   If a shortage of water in a water supply results
from drought, accident or other cause, the water to be distributed shall be
divided among all customers pro rata, according to the amount each may be
entitled to, so that preference is given to no one and everyone suffers alike.



         (B)   Nothing in subsection (a) of this section
precludes the person, association of persons or corporation owning or
controlling the water from supplying water to a person who has a prior vested
right to the water under the laws of this state."



(Ord. 2001-3, passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2009-4, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord.
2014-1, passed 3-17-14)



CHAPTER 53:  GARBAGE AND REFUSE



Section



General Provisions



   53.01   Definitions



   53.02   Accumulation, collection generally



   53.03   Duty of persons



   53.04   Duty of owner, occupants of real property



   53.05   Accumulation at business establishments



Containers



   53.20   Containers required; specifications



   53.21   Placement for collection



   53.22   Maintenance



   53.23   Replacement upon notice



Regulations



   53.35   Liquid garbage, trash to be drained



   53.36   Disposition of material unsuitable for containers



   53.37   Disposition of heavy accumulations



   53.38   Disposition of wholesale accumulations



   53.39   Disposition of certain wastes



   53.40   Collection by contractor



   53.41   Disposal in streets prohibited



   53.42   Meddling, tampering with garbage prohibited



   53.43   Littering prohibited



   53.44   Dumping on city property



   53.45   Hunting, possessing or discharging firearms on dump grounds



   53.46   Disposition of refuse at dump ground



   53.47   Removal of refuse from dump ground



   53.48   Burning of trash at dump ground prohibited



   53.49   Disposition of leaves, yard waste or other material
unsuitable for containers



Charges



   53.60   Charges by city for solid waste collection



   53.61   Surcharges for uncovered vehicles



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 53.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVED THROWAWAY-TYPE CONTAINERS. For disposal of solid waste,
plastic refuse sacks having a minimum thickness of two mils and two-ply paper
refuse sacks (50 pound wet strength natural kraft paper or equivalent).



   BRUSH. Brush, tree trimmings, weeds, large hedge trimmings and trees
not exceeding eight-inches in diameter and cut into lengths not exceeding
four feet and tied in bundles for collection.



   GARBAGE. Any and all waste food, swill, carrion, slop and all wastes
from the preparation, cooking and consumption of food and from the handling,
storage and sale of farm produce and the carcasses of all dead animals.



   LARGE RUBBISH. All rubbish that cannot because of its size be stored in
metal containers and shall include, but not be limited to, such items as tree
branches, discarded furniture, old magazines, yard trimmings, tree trunks,
roots and building material.



   REFUSE. Both garbage and rubbish.



   RUBBISH. All waste paper, paper cartons, tree branches, yard trimmings,
discarded furniture, tin cans, dirt, ashes, bottles and all other refuse not
included in the term “garbage.”



   SMALL RUBBISH. All rubbish other than large rubbish.



(`87 Code, § 12-51) (Ord. passed 5-16-67; Am. Ord. 1981-7, passed 6-2-81)



§ 53.02  ACCUMULATION, COLLECTION GENERALLY.



   The emptying or disposing of any garbage, trash, refuse or rubbish or
the accumulation of such matter in any place within the city is prohibited,
and no one except the duly authorized agents and employees of the city shall
collect garbage and refuse or shall empty cans containing garbage or refuse
substances or convey or transport garbage or refuse substance on the streets,
alleys and public thoroughfares of the city, except a person who may be
transporting his or her own garbage or rubbish to a proper and authorized
place of disposition for the same.



(`87 Code, § 12-52)



§ 53.03  DUTY OF PERSONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to permit
garbage, trash, refuse or rubbish to accumulate on any premises in the city
without suitable provisions being made to keep the same collected in
receptacles or containers and without collecting the same to be removed and
disposed of as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any garbage,
trash, refuse or rubbish in any receptacle or commercial container belonging
to or leased by another person without the permission of the owner or lessee
of the receptacle or commercial container.



(`87 Code, § 12-53) (Ord. 1984-9, passed 8-21-84) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Accumulation and removal of garbage and trash, see Tex. Rev. Civ.
Stat., Art. 4477-1, § 4



§ 53.04  DUTY OF OWNER, OCCUPANTS OF REAL PROPERTY.



   Every person owning, leasing, managing, operating, using or occupying
any building, apartment, house, structure, grounds or premises within the
city shall keep each building, apartment, house, structure, grounds or
premises clean, free and clear of all garbage, refuse, trash, rubbish; manure
from lots, stables and poultry yards; all wastes, oils and greases of garages
and filling stations; and all other articles and accumulations that may cause
such premises to become unsanitary or unsightly.



(`87 Code, § 12-54)



§ 53.05  ACCUMULATION AT BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any property owner, occupant or agent or
lessee of any business establishment that abuts or adjoins any paved street
in the city to allow any trash, rubbish, loose paper or boxes or containers
for such to accumulate or remain on any part of the sidewalk abutting or
adjacent to the premises between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.



(`87 Code, § 12-55) (Ord. passed 8-18-59) Penalty, see § 10.99



CONTAINERS



§ 53.20  CONTAINERS REQUIRED; SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   All residents and commercial establishments that are not
provided with commercial container service shall hereafter use only approved,
throwaway-type containers for disposal of solid waste.



   (B)   No permanent structures or unapproved containers may be built
or placed at collection site for the purpose of disposal of waste or use as
temporary placement or storage of throwaway-type containers.



   (C)   Plastic refuse sacks having a minimum thickness of two mils
and two-ply paper refuse sacks (50-pound wet strength natural kraft paper or
equivalent) are declared to be "approved, throwaway-type containers" for
disposal of solid waste.



   (D)   Commercial establishments shall use commercial container
service in lieu of hand collection in the event said commercial establishment
shall generate in excess of 1-1/2 cubic yards of solid waste weekly. In the
event space is not available for commercial container service, then hand
collection shall be allowed for said commercial establishment.



   (E)   Brush and tree limbs shall not be placed in containers but
shall be put out for collection after being tied in bundles that do not
exceed four feet in length.



   (F)   The City Manager may make certain special rules and
regulations concerning disposal of waste items other than garbage and trash,
when he or she determines that such approved throwaway-type containers would
be inadequate for such disposal.



(`87 Code, § 12-56) (Ord. 1983-1, passed 6-21-83; Am. Ord. 2008-4, passed
3-4-08)



§ 53.21  PLACEMENT FOR COLLECTION.



   (A)   All residents and commercial establishments that do not use
commercial container service, which are serviced by a paved alley, shall
place their solid waste outside the fence or property line for collection.
Where there is no paved alley, solid waste shall be placed in front of the
property at the side street on the garbage truck route.



      (1)   Residential solid waste or garbage shall not be placed
for collection prior to 6:00 a.m. on the day of the scheduled collection
unless placed in a closed container and then shall not be placed for
collection prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day before the day of the scheduled
collection. When closed containers are used to bring trash to the curb, the
containers shall be moved back to their storage area as soon as possible.
Under no circumstances shall the containers be left at the collection point
later than 8:00 a.m. on the day following collection.



      (2)   Commercial establishments that do not use commercial
container service shall place their approved throwaway-type containers at the
appropriate collection point on the scheduled collection day.



      (3)   After receiving notification that an item placed for
collection cannot be handled by the collection crews, residents shall remove
and dispose of such items at their own expense.



   (B)   Any person, by reason of age or infirmity, who may be unable
to carry the garbage container to the street side shall communicate with the
City Manager, and he or she shall make arrangements to pick up the garbage at
some convenient place on the premises where such person resides.



   (C)   All brush to be collected shall be placed between the curb
line and the sidewalk of the premises from which the same is to be collected
and removed or in alleys. As stated in § 53.36, refuse which cannot be put
into garbage containers as required by this chapter, such as metal, wood, old
furniture, scrap lumber and other debris, shall be placed ready for disposal
beside such containers, shall be securely fastened and shall not be longer
than four feet nor heavier than 75 pounds.



(`87 Code, § 12-57) (Ord. 1974-3, passed 7-16-74; Am. Ord. 1981-7, passed
6-2-81; Am. Ord. 1983-1, passed 6-21-83; Am. Ord. 2008-4, passed 3-4-08; Am.
Ord. 2011-1, passed 4-5-11)



§ 53.22  MAINTENANCE.



   Every garbage container required by this subchapter shall be maintained
in as sanitary condition as possible in view of the use to which it is put
and shall be thoroughly cleansed as needed by washing, scalding or otherwise.



(`87 Code, § 12-58)



§ 53.23  REPLACEMENT UPON NOTICE.



   It shall be the duty of every person owning, controlling, managing,
operating, policing, renting or occupying any premises where garbage and/or
trash accumulates to replace within ten days after receipt of condemnation
notice issued by the city acting through its duly designated officials any
containers that have deteriorated or that have jagged edges capable of
causing injuries to those whose duty it is to handle the containers or that
have been damaged to such an extent.



(`87 Code, § 12-59)



REGULATIONS



§ 53.35  LIQUID GARBAGE, TRASH TO BE DRAINED.



   Garbage and trash must be drained of liquid substances and sacked or
wrapped in paper before the parcel is placed in a container.



(`87 Code, § 12-60)



§ 53.36  DISPOSITION OF MATERIAL UNSUITABLE FOR CONTAINERS.



   Refuse which cannot be put in the garbage containers required by this
subchapter, such as metal, wood, old furniture, scrap lumber and other
debris, shall be placed, ready for disposal, beside such container, shall be
securely fastened and not be longer than four feet.



(`87 Code, § 12-61)



§ 53.37  DISPOSITION OF HEAVY ACCUMULATIONS.



   Heavy accumulations, such as brick, broken concrete, lumber, ashes,
dirt and plaster, sand or gravel, automobile frames and parts, dead trees and
other bulky, heavy material, shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner
or person controlling same, under the direction of the designated official.



(`87 Code, § 12-62)



§ 53.38  DISPOSITION OF WHOLESOME ACCUMULATIONS.



   The places of wholesale accumulations, such as killing and dressing
plants for fowl and wholesale fruit and vegetable houses, where the daily
accumulation of kitchen garbage, trash and rubbish is more than the ordinary
quantities, shall make special arrangements with the city or its duly
authorized agents for the daily pickup of such garbage, trash and rubbish.



(`87 Code, § 12-63)



§ 53.39  DISPOSITION OF CERTAIN WASTES.



   Manure from cow lots, horse stables, poultry yards, pigeon lofts and
waste oils from garages or filling stations shall be disposed of at the
expense of the party responsible for same under the direction of the
designated official.



(`87 Code, § 12-64)



§ 53.40  COLLECTION BY CONTRACTOR.



   The city will contract for daily collections for the removal of trash
and rubbish from all premises in the business district of the city at least
two times per week, except on Sundays and legal holidays. In residential
districts, garbage, trash and rubbish shall be collected and removed at least
twice each week. The times of such collection shall be announced by the
proper officials of the city.



(`87 Code, § 12-65) (Ord. 1983-1, passed 6-21-83)



§ 53.41  DISPOSAL IN STREETS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or dispose of any kitchen
garbage, dry kitchen refuse, trash or rubbish in or upon any street, alley or
sidewalk within the city. Every owner or operator of any premises shall keep
the alleys, street and sidewalks abutting on such premises free and clear of
all such garbage, trash and rubbish.



(`87 Code, § 12-66) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.42  MEDDLING, TAMPERING WITH GARBAGE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to meddle or tamper with any
garbage can or receptacle, any trash or rubbish receptacle or with any
garbage, trash or rubbish or to in any manner pilfer such cans or receptacles
or such garbage, trash or rubbish or to scatter the contents thereof in any
street, alley, sidewalk or premiss in the city.



(`87 Code, § 12-67) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.43  LITTERING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   General. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop,
cast or deposit upon any street, alley, sidewalk or any yard or premises,
public or private, any filth of any kind or cans, paper, trash, paper
containers, rubbish, bottles, wood shavings, brush, tree trimmings or any
other form of litter or waste matter.



(`87 Code, § 12-68)



   (B)   Duty of business owners, occupants.



      (1)   Generally. The owner or occupant of any store or other
place of business situated within the city shall exercise reasonable
diligence at all times to keep his or her premises clean of wastepaper,
wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers and other used or
waste materials thrown or left on said premises by its customers and to take
reasonable measures to prevent same drifting or blowing to adjoining premises.



      (2)   Receptacles. Receptacles of sufficient size and number
shall be placed on the premises accessible to the customers of such business
where the above referred to articles of waste may be disposed of.



      (3)   Signs. Each and every business establishment shall place
upon its premises in a conspicuous place or places in close proximity to the
receptacle or receptacles above referred to a sign or signs which shall in
essence convey to its customers a request that they use such receptacles for
the disposal of waste material.



(`87 Code, § 12-69)



   (C)   Duty of customer. It shall be unlawful for any customer going
upon the premises of another to in any manner dispose of wastepaper, wrapping
paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers and other used or waste
materials except in receptacles provided for such purposes.



(`87 Code, § 12-70) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.44  DUMPING ON CITY PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit any garbage,
rubbish or refuse at any place inside the city limits or upon any lands
outside of the city limits that may be owned by the city, except at the city
dump.



(`87 Code, § 12-71) (Ord. passed 5-16-67) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.45  HUNTING, POSSESSING OR DISCHARGING FIREARMS ON DUMP GROUNDS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, to carry a gun, firearms
or hunting equipment or to shoot or discharge a gun or firearms upon or
across the city dumping grounds. Provided, however, that the provisions of
this section shall not apply to a bona fide employee of the city in the scope
of his or her employment, nor to any city police officer or other officer
using and discharging firearms on any practice range or targets prepared and
used by officers.



(`87 Code, § 12-72) (Ord. passed 11-17-53; Am. Ord. 1969-5, passed 3-4-69)
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.46  DISPOSITION OF REFUSE AT DUMP GROUND.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any refuse at the city
dump in any location other than directed by the custodian of the city dump
ground.



(`87 Code, § 12-73) (Ord. 1971-3, passed 4-6-71) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.47  REMOVAL OF REFUSE FROM DUMP GROUND.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any refuse from the dump
ground, except as may be authorized by the City Council.



(`87 Code, § 12-74) (Ord. 1971-3, passed 4-6-71) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.48  BURNING OF TRASH AT DUMP GROUND PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, except as directed by the
custodian of the city dump ground, to burn any trash or refuse at the city
dump.



(`87 Code, § 12-76) (Ord. 1971-11, passed 9-21-71) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.49  DISPOSITION OF LEAVES, YARD WASTE OR OTHER MATERIAL UNSUITABLE FOR
CONTAINERS.



   Bags of leaves, yard waste or bundles of refuse (as described in §
53.36) shall be limited to ten bags or bundles per household for each
scheduled solid waste collection period.



(Ord. 1995-23, passed 12-5-95)



CHARGES



§ 53.60  CHARGES BY CITY FOR SOLID WASTE COLLECTION.



   Charges for solid waste collection services shall be as follows:



   (A)   Residential, per month:         $16.41



   (B)   Commercial, hand collection:      $34.76



   (C)   Commercial cart service:         $41.06



   (D)   Commercial, containers:



 



 

Number of Collections Per Week




Cubic Yards

 

1

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

5




2

 
$56.20
 
$97.24
 
$154.89
 
$197.21
 
$233.07



3

 
$80.71
 
$140.26
 
$199.96
 
$267.32
 
$327.57



4

 
$103.84
 
$180.54
 
$255.86
 
$340.88
 
$415.59



6

 
$143.95
 
$248.47
 
$350.32
 
$454.75
 
$570.47



8

 
$178.04
 
$301.64
 
$425.05
 
$548.39
 
$679.21



 



   (E)   Unscheduled pick-ups:



 


Cubic Yards

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

6

 

8



 
$48.98
 
$50.50
 
$51.97
 
$53.44
 
$54.93



 



   (F)   Roll-off containers:



 


Cubic Yards

 

20

 

30

 

40

 

42



 
$505.55
 
$631.87
 
$758.39
 
$784.20


Monthly rental
 
$64.12
 
$64.12
 
$64.12
 
$64.13



 



(`87 Code, § 12-78) (Ord. 1973-4, passed 4-17-73; Am. Ord. 1999-14, passed
9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-17, passed 9-5-00; Am. Ord. 2001-13, passed 9-18-01;
Am. Ord. 2002-47, passed 9-17-02; Am. Ord. 2003-12, passed 9-2-03; Am. Ord.
2005-9, passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 2006-15, passed 9-5-06; Am. Ord. 2007-10,
passed 9-18-07; Am. Ord. 2009-12, passed 11-15-09; Am. Ord. 2010-14, passed
9-21-10; Am. Ord. 2011-8, passed 9-6-11; Am. Ord. 2014-14, passed 9-15-14;
Am. Ord. 2017-13, passed 9-5-17; Am. Ord. 2018-11, passed 9-18-18)



§ 53.61  SURCHARGES FOR UNCOVERED VEHICLES.



   (A)   In accordance with the Texas Department of Health rules and
regulations, all vehicles arriving at the Mount Pleasant Landfill that do not
have waste material enclosed, covered or properly secured to prevent the
escape of any part of the load on to public roads shall be required to pay a
surcharge as follows:



      (1)   Cars, pickups and small trailers (up to 3 cu.
yds.)   $5.00



      (2)   Trucks and large trailers (over 3 cu. yds.)   $10.00



   (B)   This surcharge shall be in addition to the charges elsewhere
in of this chapter.



(`87 Code, § 12-79) (Ord. 1991-4, passed 9-17-91)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS





         72.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING





         73.   BICYCLES





         74.   RAILROADS





         75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Purpose



   70.03   Authority of police officers to direct traffic



   70.04   Authority of officers of Fire Department to direct traffic



   70.05   Obedience to traffic officers



   70.06   Application of provisions to person propelling pushcarts,
riding animals and the like



   70.07   Application of provisions to drivers of government vehicles



   70.08   Application of provisions to authorized emergency vehicles



   70.09   Application of provisions to workers, equipment



Accidents



   70.25   Accidents involving damage to vehicle



   70.26   Duty to give information and render aid



   70.27   Duty upon striking unattended vehicle



   70.28   Duty upon striking fixtures on public thoroughfare



   70.29   Accident reports required



   70.30   When driver unable to report accident



   70.31   Garages to report damaged vehicle



   70.32   Removing vehicle from scene



   70.33   Moving, removal of wrecked vehicles by wrecker trucks



Traffic-Control Devices



   70.45   Conformity with manual and specifications of State Highway
Department; uniformity



   70.46   General powers and duties of City Engineer relative to
devices



   70.47   Procedure generally



   70.48   Obedience to devices



   70.49   Necessity of signs



   70.50   Ratification of existing devices



   70.51   Prima facie evidence



   70.52   Unauthorized signs, signals and the like



   70.53   Altering, injuring devices



   70.54   Installation of traffic lights



   70.55   Traffic-control signal legend



   70.56   Flashing signals



   70.57   Stop intersections



   70.58   Yield right-of-way signs



   70.59   Designation of crosswalks, zones and marking traffic lanes



   70.60   Reserved



   70.61   Turning markers



   70.62   No passing zone



 



   70.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALL TERRAIN VEHICLE. A motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the
rider, designed to propel itself with three or more tires in contact with the
ground, designed by the manufacturer for off-highway use.



   ALLEY. A public way in the city extending either partly or through any
city block in the rear of city lots and in a direction generally from avenue
to avenue not more than 20 feet in width and capable of being traversed by a
vehicle.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department (fire
patrol), police vehicles, public and private ambulances for which permits
have been issued by the State Board of Health, emergency vehicles of city
departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by
the City Council and private vehicles operated by volunteer firefighters
while answering a fire alarm.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a roadway
when, within any 600 feet along such roadway, there are buildings in use for
business or industrial purposes which occupy 300 feet of frontage on one side
or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the roadway.



   BUS. A commercial vehicle carrying passengers for hire and operating
over and along a fixed route.



   BUS STOP. A section of the roadway along the edge thereof, authorized
by order of the City Council, marked by signs reading “bus stop” as a
place for the sole use and convenience of the general public to board and
depart from any bus.



   CROSSWALK. That part of a roadway at any intersection included within
the connection of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
street, whether marked or not, measured from the curbs or in the absence of
curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. The word CROSSWALK also
includes any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.



   DRIVEWAY, PRIVATE. Any entrance or exit over the sidewalk or sidewalk
area of any street affording a means of ingress or egress for vehicles to or
from any private property or the entrance or exit of any private garage into
or from any alley.



   DRIVEWAY, PUBLIC. Any entrance or exit over the sidewalk or sidewalk
area of any street affording a means of ingress or egress for vehicles to or
from any public property.



   DRIVER. That person who drives or is in actual physical control of the
movements of a vehicle.



   DIGGING OUT. The practice of starting any motor vehicle from a standing
position by applying a sudden burst of power, recognized by spinning rear
wheels and noise of tires on the surface of the roadway.



   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection
of the lateral curb lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets
joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a street includes two
roadways, 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such
divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate
intersection. In the event such intersecting street also includes two
roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such
streets shall be regarded as a separate intersection.



   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly
marked lanes for vehicular traffic.



   LIMITED-ACCESS OR CONTROL-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street or
roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands
and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at
such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public
authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway.



   LOADING ZONE. That portion of any roadway set apart, marked and
numbered for the sole use of the public as a place for loading or unloading
passengers, merchandise or other cargo.



   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with
the ground but excluding a tractor.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires but
not operated upon rails.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of
a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.



   NO PARKING ZONE. A space on the roadway adjacent to the curb, whether
marked by official signs or not, in which no vehicle may be parked.



   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than a temporary stopping of such vehicle for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, merchandise or
other cargo, except an involuntary stopping of such vehicle by reason of
mechanical failure or direction of a police officer.



   PARKING STALL or PARKING SPACE. That portion or section of a roadway
adjacent to the curbing or edge, set apart, marked and bounded by lines
painted or marked upon the surface of the roadway and extending into the
roadway for the use of parking vehicles; or that portion of any alley marked
by official signs showing such space to be a parking zone.



   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.



   POLICE OFFICER. Any member of the Police Department of the city
authorized by law to make arrests in traffic offenses.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Property owned or leased by the city or political
subdivision of the city.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a street
not comprising a business district, when the property on such street for a
distance of 300 feet or more is, in the main, improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of immediate use of the roadway.



   ROADWAY. That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel. In the event a street includes two or more separate
roadways, the term ROADWAY shall refer to any such roadway separately but not
to all such roadways collectively.



   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while
set apart as a safety zone.



   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use of pedestrians.



   STOP. When required, means complete cessation of movement.



   STOP, STOPPING or STANDING. When prohibited, means any stopping or
standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.



   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.



   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes
of travel.



   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed.



   TRUCK. A motor vehicle designed primarily for the transportation of
cargo.



   U-TURN. The turning or causing the turning of a vehicle, so that when
such turn is completed that such vehicle will be headed in the opposite
direction from that in which it was headed before such turning was begun,
whether or not such vehicle is pulled into a driveway or any space beyond the
curb line of the street.



   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property may be
or is transported upon any street within the corporate limits of the city,
except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracks.



(`87 Code, § 17-151)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, §§ 1-20;



   Uniform Traffic Act, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d



§ 70.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the regulations prescribed by this title is to insure to
the people the maximum use and benefit of the public streets of the city and
yet retain the maximum degree of safety to prevent injury to person and
property.



(`87 Code, § 17-152)



§ 70.03  AUTHORITY OF POLICE OFFICERS TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.



   Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by
the Chief of Police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or
signal in conformance with this chapter and other traffic laws. In the event
of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter and
other traffic laws.



(`87 Code, § 17-153)



Cross-reference:



   Police department, see Ch. 32



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of police officers, see
Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 27(a)(2)



§ 70.04  AUTHORITY OF OFFICERS OF FIRE DEPARTMENT TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.



   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.



(`87 Code, § 17-154)



§ 70.05  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC OFFICERS.



   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of a police officer or Fire Department official given to
direct or control traffic as authorized in this chapter.



(`87 Code, § 17-155)



§ 70.06  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS TO PERSON PROPELLING PUSHCARTS, RIDING
ANIMALS AND THE LIKE.



   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding any animal upon a
roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject
to the provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any vehicle,
except those provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application.



(`87 Code, § 17-156)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 25



§ 70.07  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.



   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state,
county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any
of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted herein or by
state statute.



(`87 Code, § 17-157)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 27(a)



§ 70.08  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   (A)   The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking
and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles, except
that a driver, when operating any such vehicle in an emergency or in the
immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer, may:



      (1)   Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this
title;



      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only
after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;



      (3)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions so long as he or she does not endanger life
or property;



      (4)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits established by this
title so long as life and property is not endangered; provided however, that
this exception shall not apply to ambulances.



   (B)   The exemption granted above shall apply only when the driver
of the vehicle sounds a siren, bell or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably
necessary, and the vehicle displays emergency lighting equipment in
accordance with state law.



(`87 Code, § 17-158) (Am. Ord. 2002-4, passed 2-5-02)



Statutory reference:



   Exemption of authorized emergency vehicles from certain traffic
regulations, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 24



§ 70.09  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS TO WORKERS, EQUIPMENT.



   The provisions of this title shall not apply to persons, teams, motor
vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged to work upon the surface
of a highway or street but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when
traveling to or from such work.



(`87 Code, § 17-159)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 24(d)



ACCIDENTS



§ 70.25  ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE.



   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in
damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall
immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close
thereto as possible and shall forthwith return to said damaged vehicle and
remain at the scene of such accident until he or she has fulfilled the
requirements of § 70.26. Every such stop shall be made in such a way as not
to obstruct traffic.



(`87 Code, § 17-181)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 39



§ 70.26  DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID.



   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident, resulting in injury
to or death of any person, or damage to any vehicle which is driven or
attended by any person, shall give his or her name, address and the
registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving and shall, upon
request, exhibit his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license to the
person struck or to the driver or occupants of or persons attending any
vehicle collided with, or any peace officer, and shall render to any person
injured in such accident, assistance, including the carrying or the making of
arrangements for the carrying of such person to a physician, surgeon or
hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such
treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person.



(`87 Code, § 17-182)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 40



§ 70.27  DUTY UPON STRIKING UNATTENDED VEHICLE.



   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is
unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and
notify the owner of such vehicle of the information required by state law, or
shall leave the required information fastened to the vehicle being struck in
a manner consistent with state law.



(`87 Code, § 17-183) (Am. Ord. 2002-4, passed 2-5-02)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 41



§ 70.28  DUTY UPON STRIKING FIXTURES ON PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE.



   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in
damages of fixtures legally upon or adjacent to a street, roadway or highway
shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in
charge of such property of such fact and of his or her name and address and
of the registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving and shall upon
request and, if available, exhibit his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s
license and shall make report of such accident when and as required in §
70.29.



(`87 Code, § 17-184)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 42



§ 70.29  ACCIDENT REPORTS REQUIRED.



   (A)   The drivers of all vehicles involved in an accident within the
city resulting in an injury or death  of any person or damage to any
property to an apparent extent consistent with state law or more shall
immediately by the quickest means of communication give notice of such
accident to the Police Department.



   (B)   The Police Department may require any driver of a vehicle
involved in an accident of which a report must be made as provided herein, to
file a supplemental report whenever the original report is insufficient, and
it is made the duty of all persons witnessing any accident or collision of a
vehicle of any kind to report the same to the Police Department.



(`87 Code, § 17-185) (Am. Ord. 2002-4, passed 2-5-02)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, §§ 43, 44(b)



§ 70.30  WHEN DRIVER UNABLE TO REPORT ACCIDENT.



   When the driver or operator of a vehicle is unable physically to make
the required accident report immediately following an accident, he or she
shall make such report within ten days thereafter or at such other time as he
or she is able.



(`87 Code, § 17-187)



Statutory reference:



   Driver to file accident report within ten days, see Tex. Transportation
Code, § 550.061



§ 70.31  GARAGES TO REPORT DAMAGED VEHICLES.



   The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought
any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in an accident
of which report must be made as provided by state law or struck by any bullet
shall report to the Police Department within 24 hours after such motor
vehicle is received, giving the engine number, registration number and the
name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle.



(`87 Code, § 17-188)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions authorized, see Tex. Transportation Code, §
550.067(c)



§ 70.32  REMOVING VEHICLE FROM SCENE.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver or any other person to remove any
vehicle involved in an accident from the scene of the accident until
authorized to do so by a police officer of the Police Department of this
city; provided however, that this section shall not apply if there exists or
arises a duty on the part of such driver or other person in control of such
vehicle to use said vehicle in carrying any person injured in said accident
to a physician or surgeon for medical or surgical treatment.



(`87 Code, § 17-189) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.33  MOVING, REMOVAL OF WRECKED VEHICLES BY WRECKER TRUCKS.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle equipped with a
crane, hoist, winch or towing device who has answered a call to or is
attending the scene of any collision or accident of one or more vehicles on
any highway or street in the city to remove or attempt to remove any vehicle
involved in such collision or accident or in any way to interfere with or
change the position of any such vehicle, except upon authority or direction
and in the presence of a police officer of the city, unless such change is
made or attempted for the purpose of releasing a person or persons imprisoned
within or under such vehicle; provided however, that it shall be unlawful for
such operator of any such vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist, winch or
towing device to remove any vehicle from the scene of accident or collision
without the consent of the owner of the vehicle so removed, unless directed
by a police officer to remove such vehicle as a public safety measure or for
the protection of private property.



(`87 Code, § 17-190) Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Automobile wreckers generally, see §§ 117.01 et seq.



TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.45  CONFORMITY WITH MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS OF STATE HIGHWAY
DEPARTMENT; UNIFORMITY.



   All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the
manual and specifications approved by the Texas Department of Transportation.
All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose
shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout
the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with
the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control
devices.



(`87 Code, § 17-241)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 544.002



§ 70.46  GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY ENGINEER RELATIVE TO DEVICES.



   The City Engineer, with the approval of the City Manager, shall place
and maintain traffic-control signs, signals, and devices when and as required
under this chapter to make effective the provisions of this chapter and may
place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he or she may
deem necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter or under state law or
to guide or warn traffic.  It shall be the duty of the City Engineer and the
City Manager to supervise the installation and proper timing and maintenance
of the traffic control devices.



(`87 Code, § 17-242) (Ord. passed 9-21-65; Am. Ord. 2002-4, passed 2-5-02)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of traffic-control
devices and signals, see Tex. Transportation Code, §§ 542.202(a)(2) and
544.002



§ 70.47  PROCEDURE GENERALLY.



   Every regulation, designation, delineation or determination promulgated
by the City Engineer pursuant to the authority granted by the provisions of
this subchapter shall be described in writing and filed by the City Engineer
with the City Manager who shall approve same. Upon the same being approved by
the City Manager, the City Manager shall take appropriate steps to have the
Street Department erect, make or paint the sign, marker, device, signal or
direction marker as indicated by the report of the City Engineer, and when
this has been done, he or she shall then so certify and file his or her
report with the City Secretary. When such report is filed with the City
Secretary, such report shall constitute a public record, and all persons
shall be charged with notice of the contents of the same. The City Manager
shall monthly advise the City Council of any regulation, designation,
delineation or determination promulgated by the City Engineer and approved by
the City Manager.



(`87 Code, § 17-243) (Ord. passed 9-21-65; Am. Ord. 2002-4, passed 2-5-02)



§ 70.48  OBEDIENCE TO DEVICES.



   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instruction of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this
chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city, unless otherwise directed
by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle.



(`87 Code, § 17-244) (Ord. passed 9-21-65)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 544.004



§ 70.49  NECESSITY OF SIGNS.



   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be
effective even though no signs are erected or in place.



(`87 Code, § 17-245)



§ 70.50  RATIFICATION OF EXISTING DEVICES.



   All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings placed or
erected prior to the adoption of this code and in use for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic are affirmed, ratified and declared to
be official traffic-control devices, provided such traffic-control devices
are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law.



(`87 Code, § 17-246) (Ord. passed 9-21-65)



§ 70.51  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.



   The existence of any traffic sign, marker, mark or device at any place
within the city which may be placed under the provisions of this subchapter
shall be prima facie evidence that such were erected or placed by and at the
direction of the Chief of Police and City Manager and in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.



(`87 Code, § 17-247) (Ord. passed 9-21-65)



§ 70.52  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any road, street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device
which purports to be or is an imitation or resembles an official
traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, which attempts to direct
the movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad signal
or sign, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway or street any traffic signal or sign bearing thereon
any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the
erection, upon private property adjacent to streets or highways, of signs
giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken
for official signals.



   (B)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to
be a public nuisance, and the city is empowered to remove the same or cause
it to be removed without notice.



(`87 Code, § 17-248)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 544.006



§ 70.53  ALTERING, INJURING DEVICES.



   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or
any inscription, shield or insignia thereon or any other part thereof.



(`87 Code, § 17-249)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 544.005



§ 70.54  INSTALLATION OF TRAFFIC LIGHTS.



   The City Council, from time to time, shall designate intersections at
which traffic shall be controlled by electric traffic-control signals or
lights and shall cause such signals or lights to be installed and maintained
at such intersections.



(`87 Code, § 17-250)



§ 70.55  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.



   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
the words “Go,” “Caution” or “Stop,” exhibiting different colored
lights successively one at a time or with arrows, the following colors only
shall be used and such terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers
of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:



   (A)   Green alone or “Go.”



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through or turn right or left, unless a sign at such place prohibits either
such turn.  But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left,
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.



   (B)   Yellow alone or “Caution” when shown following the green
or “Go” signal.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned
that the red or “Stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter
and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection
when the red or “Stop” signal is exhibited.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that
there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then
starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.



   (C)   Red alone or “Stop.”



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then
before entering the intersection and shall remain until green or “Go” is
shown alone; provided that, after stopping and yielding to all pedestrians
and vehicles, the driver of a vehicle may enter the intersection for the
purpose of making a right turn only.



      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway
unless he or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular
traffic.



   (D)   Red with green arrow.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously
enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, but
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and
to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.



      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway
unless he or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular
traffic.



   (E)   Application.  In the event an official traffic-control signal
is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the
provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions
which, by their nature, can have no application. Any stop required shall be
made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be
made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made
at the signal.



(`87 Code, § 17-251)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 544.007



§ 70.56  FLASHING SIGNALS.



   Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:



   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked and
the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.



   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.



(`87 Code, § 17-252)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 544.008



§ 70.57  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Manager, may
designate any street intersection as a stop intersection and designate the
streets upon which vehicles shall stop before entering such intersection.
Whenever any intersection has been so designated, the City Manager shall
cause the same to be identified by the erection of stop signs indicating
which vehicles approaching the intersection shall stop, and it shall be the
duty of the driver of any vehicle approaching such a sign to bring such
vehicle to a complete stop at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line
before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police
officer or a traffic-control signal. After having so stopped, such driver
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the
intersection or which are approaching so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard. Such driver, after having so yielded, may proceed and the
drivers of all other vehicles approaching on the intersecting street shall
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding into or across the
intersection.



(`87 Code, § 17-253) (Ord. passed 9-21-65)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to designate stop intersections, see Tex.
Transportation Code, §§ 542.202(a)(8) and 544.003(b)



   Duty of drivers with respect to stop signs, see Tex. Transportation
Code, §§ 545.153 and 544.010



§ 70.58  YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.



   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Manager, may install
and maintain yield right-of-way signs at intersections where a special hazard
may exist anywhere vehicles shall be required to yield the right-of-way. The
driver of a vehicle approaching a yield right-of-way sign shall, in obedience
to such sign, slow down to a speed not in excess of 15 miles per hour, or
shall stop if necessary, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
crossing the roadway on which he or she  is driving and to any vehicle in
the intersection or approaching on another street so closely as to constitute
an immediate hazard.



(`87 Code, § 17-254) (Ord. passed 9-21-65)



§ 70.59  DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS, ZONES AND MARKING TRAFFIC LANES.



   The Chief of Police is authorized, with the approval of the City
Manager, to:



   (A)   Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at any intersection where, in his
or her opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
roadway and at such other places as he or she may deem necessary;



   (B)   Establish safety zones, quiet, play and other zones of such
kind and character and at such places as he or she may deem necessary for the
protection of the public;



   (C)   Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as
he or she may deem advisable, consistent with this chapter and other traffic
ordinances of this city.



(`87 Code, § 17-255) (Ord. passed 9-21-65)



§ 70.60  RESERVED.



§ 70.61  TURNING MARKERS.



   (A)   The Chief of Police is authorized, with the approval of the
City Manager, to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to
intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at
such intersections and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform
to or be other than as prescribed by any provision of this code, state law or
city ordinance, rule or regulation.



   (B)   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are
placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of such indications.



(`87 Code, § 17-257) (Ord. passed 9-21-65)



§ 70.62  NO PASSING ZONE.



   The Chief of Police is authorized, with the approval of the City
Manager, to determine by resolution those portions of any highway in the city
where overtaking and passing or driving on the left side of the roadway would
be especially hazardous and may put appropriate signs or markings on the
roadway, indicating the beginning and end of such zones, and when such signs
or markings are in place and clearly visible to any ordinarily observant
person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.



(`87 Code, § 17-258)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever in this title an act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in this
title the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is otherwise provided in
this code of ordinances, the violation shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500.00, provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or
less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense of the laws
of the state.



   (B)   Each day a violation of this code or of any ordinance
continues shall constitute a separate offense.



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



General Regulations



   71.001   Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers



   71.002   Manner of riding motorcycles



   71.003   Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles



   71.004   Clinging to moving vehicles



   71.005   Roller skates, coasters, skateboards and the like
prohibited in Central Business District



   71.006   Glass, nails and the like not to be deposited in street;
removal of same



   71.007   Use of all-terrain vehicles



   71.008   Removing or damaging traffic barriers



   71.009   Mufflers; prevention of noise



Operation of Vehicles



   71.025   Duty to drive on right side of street



   71.026   Passing vehicle proceeding in same direction; generally



   71.027   Duty of driver of overtaken vehicle



   71.028   Passing vehicle proceeding in opposite direction



   71.029   Turning movements generally



   71.030   Stopping and turning signals



   71.031   Right-of-way at intersections



   71.032   Limitations on turning around



   71.033   Limitations on backing



   71.034   Driving on divided streets



   71.035   Driving on roadways laned for traffic



   71.036   Procedure upon approach of authorized emergency vehicles



   71.037   Obstructing traffic



   71.038   Following too closely



   71.039   Following emergency vehicles or driving near scene of fire



   71.040   Driving over fire hose



   71.041   Parades



   71.042   Drivers of vehicles in processions



   71.043   Driving on sidewalks



   71.044   Driving through safety zones



   71.045   Driving on fresh pavement



   71.046   Operation of vehicles in parks



   71.047   Digging out prohibited



   71.048   Control of vehicle



   71.049   Opening doors into traffic



   71.050   Corner cutting prohibited



   71.051   Restricted access



   71.052   Overloading, crowding of vehicles




   71.053   Procedure upon passing stopped school bus; sign for school
buses; signs to acquaint motorists with provisions




   71.054   Motor bikes prohibited in parks



   71.055   Prohibiting use of portable electronic while operating a
motor vehicle



Speed Regulations



   71.065   Maximum limits generally



   71.066   Maximum limits on specific streets



   71.067   School zones



   71.068   Minimum limits



   71.069   Exemptions



   71.070   Ambulances



   71.071   Parks



   71.072   Construction areas



Pedestrians



   71.085   Application of provisions



   71.086   Right-of-way in crosswalks



   71.087   When pedestrian shall yield



   71.088   Use of crosswalks required at intersections; crossing
between intersection



   71.089   When crosswalk required for crossings



   71.090   Roadway to be crossed at right angles; exception



   71.091   Walking on roadways



   71.092   Hitchhiking



   71.093   Duty of drivers with regard to pedestrians



   71.094   Use of right half of crosswalk



   71.095   Blind pedestrians



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 71.001  RIDING ON PORTION OF VEHICLE NOT INTENDED FOR PASSENGERS.



   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not
designated or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not
apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to
persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.



(`87 Code, § 17-161)



§ 71.002  MANNER OF RIDING MOTORCYCLES.



   A person operating a motorcycle shall not ride other than upon the
permanent and regular seat attached thereto or carry any other person, nor
shall any other person ride upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly
attached seat to the rear or the side of the operator.



(`87 Code, § 17-162)



§ 71.003  BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM MOVING VEHICLES.



   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is
in motion.



(`87 Code, § 17-163)



§ 71.004  CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.



   No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller
skates or any toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any
moving vehicle upon any roadway.



(`87 Code, § 17-164)



§ 71.005  ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS, SKATEBOARDS AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED IN
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   No person shall ride in, ride upon or in any manner operate any roller
skates, coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle or similar device upon any sidewalk,
roadway and/or street within the Central Business District of the city. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to wheelchairs or other devices
designed to aid handicapped or impaired persons. For the purposes of this
section, the Central Business District shall be defined as that portion of
the city bounded by Fifth Street on the north, Arkansas Street on the south,
Washington Avenue on the east and Van Buren Avenue on the west.



(`87 Code, § 17-165) (Ord. 1990-10, passed 6-19-90)



§ 71.006  GLASS, NAILS AND THE LIKE NOT TO BE DEPOSITED IN STREET; REMOVAL
OF SAME.



   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or alley any
glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely
to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such street or alley.



   (B)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon
any street or alley any destructive or injurious material shall immediately
remove the same or cause it to be removed.



   (C)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from any
street or alley shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped
upon such street or alley from the vehicle.



(`87 Code, § 17-166) Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, see § 600.001



§ 71.007  USE OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.



   (A)   An all-terrain vehicle may not be driven or operated on any
public street, road, highway or public property within the city limits unless
done so in accordance with state law.  All-terrain vehicles may be used for
the purpose of parades or other special events with written permission of the
Police Department specifying the date, event and time to be used.



   (B)   An all-terrain vehicle may be used on private property only
with the express consent of the property owner. It is the responsibility of
the operator of the vehicle to provide proof of consent of the property owner
for use of this type vehicle.



(`87 Code, § 17-167) (Ord. 1994-8, passed 6-21-94; Am. Ord. 2002-5, passed
2-5-02)



§ 71.008  REMOVING OR DAMAGING TRAFFIC BARRIERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a city employee, to
remove or damage any barriers erected under the direction of the Chief of
Police or Director of Public Works, either closing a street or for the
purpose of warning traffic of an obstruction in the street.



(`87 Code, § 17-168) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.009  MUFFLERS; PREVENTION OF NOISE.



   (A)   Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a
muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive
or unusual noise and annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler
cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle in the city.



   (B)   The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be
so equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive fumes or smoke.



(`87 Code, § 17-169)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, §§ 547.604 and
547.605



OPERATION OF VEHICLES



§ 71.025  DUTY TO DRIVE ON RIGHT SIDE OF STREET.



   Upon all roadways, the driver of a vehicle shall drive upon the right
half of the street, except as follows:



   (A)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction under the rules governing such movement;



   (B)   When the right half of the street is closed to traffic while
under construction or repair;



   (C)   Upon a street divided into three marked lanes for traffic
under the rules applicable thereon; or



   (D)   Upon a street designated and signposted for one-way traffic.



(`87 Code, § 17-201)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.051



§ 71.026  PASSING VEHICLE PROCEEDING IN SAME DIRECTION; GENERALLY.



   (A)   Except as provided in § 71.027(B), the driver of a vehicle
overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the
left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side
of the street until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. No vehicle shall
be driven to the left side of the center of the street in overtaking and
passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left
side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from
the opposite direction of any vehicle overtaken. In every event, the
overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the street before
coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.



   (B)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left of the
street for the purpose of passing a vehicle proceeding in the same direction
when approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or
railroad grade crossing or when approaching within 100 feet of any bridge,
viaduct or tunnel.



(`87 Code, § 17-202)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, §§  545.053
through 545.056



§ 71.027  DUTY OF DRIVER OF OVERTAKEN VEHICLE.



   (A)   General. It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle, upon
audible signal that he or she is about to be overtaken on the left, to give
way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle, and he or she shall not
increase the speed of his or her vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.



(`87 Code, § 17-203)



   (B)   On right side.



      (1)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass to the
right of a vehicle proceeding in the same direction only under the following
conditions:



         (a)   When the overtaken vehicle is making or about to
make a left turn;



         (b)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed
pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more
lines of moving traffic in each direction.



      (2)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another
vehicle on the right only under conditions permitting such movement in
safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement
or main-traveled portion of the street.



(`87 Code,  17-204)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, §§  545.053 and
545.057



§ 71.028  PASSING VEHICLE PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTION.



   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each
other to the right and, upon streets having width for not more than one line
of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least ½
of the main-traveled portion of the street, as nearly as possible.



(`87 Code, § 17-205)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.052



§ 71.029  TURNING MOVEMENTS GENERALLY.



   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do
so as follows:



   (A)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be
made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway;



   (B)   The approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a
two-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway
nearest the center line thereof and, after entering the intersection, the
left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the
centerline of the roadway being entered;



   (C)   The approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a
one-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway
nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center
line where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into
a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the center line of
the street being entered upon leaving the intersection;



   (D)   Where both streets or roadways are one-way, both the approach
for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the
left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.



(`87 Code, § 17-206)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to regulate turning at intersections, see Tex.
Transportation Code, § 545.202(a)(8)



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code,§ 545.101



§ 71.030  STOPPING AND TURNING SIGNALS.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   When any other traffic may be affected by such movement,
no person shall turn any vehicle without giving a signal of his or her
intention to turn right or left. Such signal shall be given continuously
during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning.



      (2)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a
vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal to the driver of any
vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to give such
signal.



      (3)   A stop or turn signal required by this section shall be
given by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or mechanical signal
device of a type approved by the State Department of Public Safety; provided
however, that when the body of a vehicle or the body and load of a vehicle
projects 24 inches or more to the left of the center of the steering wheel,
or under any condition when a hand and arm signal would not be visible both
to the front and rear of the vehicle, the vehicle must be equipped with and
the signals must be given by such turn-indicating lamp or device.



      (4)   The signal lamps provided for in this section shall be
used to indicate an intention to turn, change lanes or start from a parked
position and shall not be flashed on a moving vehicle as a courtesy or “do
pass” signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear.



(`87 Code, § 17-207)



   (B)   Manner of giving with hand and arm. All signals required by
division (A) of this section, when given by hand and arm, shall be given from
the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall
indicate as follows:



      (1)   Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally;



      (2)   Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward;



      (3)   Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward.



(`87 Code, § 17-208)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, §§ 545.103 through
545.107



§ 71.031  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   General. The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection
from a different street or highway. When two vehicles enter an intersection
which is not controlled by a traffic sign or device from different streets at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. When two vehicles
approach one another on the same street going in opposite directions and the
driver of one of the vehicles desires to turn off such street, the vehicle
which continues on the street in the original direction has the right-of-way
over the turning vehicle. In the event both drivers desire to turn off, then
the vehicle turning to the right has the right-of-way over the vehicle
turning to the left.



(`87 Code, § 17-209)



   (B)   When turning left. The driver of a vehicle within an
intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the
intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but
such driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required
by this subchapter, may make such left turn, and the drivers of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield
the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn.



(`87 Code, § 17-210)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, §§ 545.151 and
545.152



§ 71.032  LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn
such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement
can be made in safety and without backing or otherwise interfering with other
traffic.



   (B)   A complete turn shall not be made at any intersection of any
two streets or upon any street or alley in the city where the traffic
engineer may determine that it is unsafe to make a complete turn and shall
have caused to be posted at such place in the street or alley a sign showing
that a complete turn is prohibited.



(`87 Code, § 17-211) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.033  LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement
can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.



(`87 Code, § 17-212)



§ 71.034  DRIVING ON DIVIDED STREETS.



   Whenever any street or highway in the city has been divided into two
roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly
indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic,
every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no
vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space,
barrier or section, except through an opening therein or at a crossover or
intersection.



(`87 Code, § 17-213)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.063



§ 71.035  DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.



   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent
herewith, shall apply:



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall drive as nearly as practical
entirely within a single lane and shall not move from such lane until the
driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety;



   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, the driver
of a vehicle shall not drive in the center lane, except when overtaking and
passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center
lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left
turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to
traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is sign-posted
to give notice of such allocation;



   (C)   Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to
use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving
in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers
of vehicles shall obey the direction of every such sign.



(`87 Code, § 17-214)



§ 71.036  PROCEDURE UPON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
such vehicle, and when the driver of such vehicle is giving audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield
the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and
as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway, clear of
any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.



   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of any
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the highway.



(`87 Code, § 17-215)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.156



§ 71.037  OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   General. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, drive or
propel a vehicle in such a manner as to block or obstruct the traffic on any
street or alley of the city.



(`87 Code, § 17-216)



   (B)   Obstructing intersection or crosswalk. No driver shall enter
an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the
other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or
she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or
pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.



(`87 Code, § 17-217) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.038  FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.



   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
such vehicles and the traffic upon and conditions of the street.



(`87 Code, § 17-218)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.062



§ 71.039  FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES OR DRIVING NEAR SCENE OF FIRE.



   No driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall
follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm or any other
emergency vehicle while on an emergency call closer than 500 feet, nor shall
such driver drive into or park such vehicle within the block where the fire
apparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm.



(`87 Code, § 17-219)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.407



§ 71.040  DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.



   No driver of any vehicle shall drive over an unprotected hose of the
Fire Department when such hose has been laid down on any street or private
driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the
Fire Department official in command.



(`87 Code, § 17-220)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.408



§ 71.041  PARADES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any number of persons, delegation or
association of persons, or for any company, circus or group, to parade the
streets within the business district of the city without first having
obtained a written permit from the Chief of Police; provided, that the Chief
of Police shall not issue a permit to any person or persons to start such
parade between the hours of 7:00 a.m and 9:00 a.m. and between the hours of
11:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. and between the hours of 3:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
except Sundays and on days that may be declared legal holidays. Whenever such
permit is granted by the Chief of Police, it shall designate the streets,
avenues, alleys and thoroughfares over which the parade is privileged to
travel and the time that the parade shall be held and completed.



   (B)   Permits for parades outside the business district of the city
may be issued by the Chief of Police upon the applicant or petitioner
obtaining prior approval in writing from the City Manager.



(`87 Code, § 17-221) (Ord. passed 7-20-65)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to regulate parades and processions, Tex.
Transportation Code, § 542.202(a)(3)



§ 71.042  DRIVERS OF VEHICLES IN PROCESSIONS.



   Each driver in a funeral or other authorized procession shall drive as
near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practical and shall follow the
vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.



(`87 Code, § 17-222)



§ 71.043  DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.



   Any driver of any vehicle who shall drive such vehicle upon or across
any sidewalk or sidewalk area of any street within the city, except on a
driveway, public or private, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.



(`87 Code, § 17-223) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.044  DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONES.



   No driver of any vehicle shall, at any time, drive through or within a
safety zone.



(`87 Code, § 17-224)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.403



§ 71.045  DRIVING ON FRESH PAVEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon any
portion of any street in the city that has been freshly paved, unless all
barriers or signal lights have been lawfully removed therefrom indicating
that the street is ready for travel.



(`87 Code, § 17-225) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.046  OPERATION OF VEHICLES IN PARKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle
whatsoever through or upon or to park such vehicle upon any park, hospital
grounds or other public property within the city, except upon official,
designated roadways or parking lots.



(`87 Code, § 17-226) Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Parks and recreation generally, see Ch. 90



§ 71.047  DIGGING OUT PROHIBITED.



   Any driver of any motor vehicle who shall willfully cause such vehicle
to “dig out” or shall cause any such vehicle to make unnecessary noise by
reason of operating such vehicle in such manner as to cause the wheels
thereof to spin or slide on the roadway of any street when starting such
vehicle or while making any turning movement shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(`87 Code, § 17-227) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.048  CONTROL OF VEHICLE.



   It shall be the duty of every person who shall operate any vehicle
within the city to keep the same under control at all times and to avoid
whenever possible colliding with any other vehicle or person.



(`87 Code, § 17-228)



§ 71.049  OPENING DOORS INTO TRAFFIC.



   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall
any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to
traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.



(`87 Code, § 17-229)



§ 71.050  CORNER CUTTING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle over any
sidewalk area and through any driveway, parking lot or any business entrance
at any intersection, in making either a right or left turn, except for the
purpose of coming to a complete stop to obtain or render some service or make
a sale or purchase. It is the intention of this section to prohibit “corner
cutting” by driving a vehicle from one street into another across any
sidewalk and/or driveway and/or through any parking lot.



(`87 Code, § 17-230) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.051  RESTRICTED ACCESS.



   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited-access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.



(`87 Code, § 17-231)



§ 71.052  OVERLOADING, CROWDING OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is loaded with
material or passengers so as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front
or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver’s control over
the driving mechanism of the vehicle.



   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to
interfere with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.



(`87 Code, § 17-232)



§ 71.053  PROCEDURE UPON PASSING STOPPED SCHOOL BUS; SIGN FOR SCHOOL BUSES;
SIGNS TO ACQUAINT MOTORISTS WITH PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Meeting or overtaking school bus. The driver of a vehicle upon
a public street in the city upon meeting or overtaking from either direction
any school bus which has stopped on the street for the purpose of receiving
or discharging any school children shall stop the vehicle immediately before
passing the school bus, but may then proceed past such school bus at a speed
which is prudent, not exceeding ten miles per hour, and with due caution for
the safety of such children.



   (B)   School bus signs. Every bus used for the transportation of
school children shall bear upon the front and rear thereof a plainly visible
sign containing the words “school bus” in letters not less than eight
inches in height. When a school bus is being operated upon a street for
purposes other than the actual transportation of children either to or from
school, all markings thereon indicating “school bus” shall be covered or
concealed.



   (C)   Exceptions to procedure. The driver of a vehicle upon a street
with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus
which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled access highway and
the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to
such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the highway.



   (D)   City Manager to post signs. The City Manager shall cause signs
to be posted at such locations on the city streets as he or she deems
appropriate to acquaint motorists with the provisions of this section.



(`87 Code, § 17-233) (Ord. 1968-8, passed 12-3-68)



§ 71.054  MOTOR BIKES PROHIBITED IN PARKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any motor bike
or motorcycle in either Dellwood Park or Oak Lawn Park, except on Florey
Avenue, South Lide Avenue and White Street in Dellwood Park.



(`87 Code, § 17-234) (Ord. 1971-6, passed 5-4-71) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.055  PROHIBITING USE OF PORTABLE ELECTRONIC WHILE OPERATING A MOTOR
VEHICLE.



   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all persons
operating a motor vehicle on public roadways within the incorporated limits
of the city.



   (B)   In this section, portable electronic device means a hand-held
mobile telephone, personal digital assistant, MP3 or other hand-held music
player, electronic reading device, laptop computer, tablet computer, pager,
broadband personal communication device, global positioning or navigation
system, electronic game device, or portable computer device.



   (C)   A driver of a motor vehicle may not use a portable electronic
device to view, send, or compose an electronic message or engage other
application software while operating a motor vehicle on a public roadway with
the city.



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section
if a portable electronic device is in use:



      (1)   While the vehicle is properly and legally parked;



      (2)   Strictly to engage in a telephone conversation,
including dialing or deactivating the call;



      (3)   As a global positioning or navigation system;



      (4)   For obtaining emergency assistance to report a traffic
accident, medical emergency, or serious traffic hazard, or to prevent a crime
being or about to be committed;



      (5)   In the reasonable belief a person's life or safety is in
immediate danger; or



      (6)   Solely in a voice-activated or other hands-free mode.



   (E)   This section does not apply to an operator of an authorized
emergency vehicle using a portable electronic device while acting in an
official capacity.



   (F)   To the extent this section conflicts with the Tex.
Transportation Code § 545.425, regarding the use of portable electronic
devices while operating a motor vehicle by minors, or Tex. Transportation
Code § 545.425, regarding the use of portable electronic devices in school
crossing zones, this section does not apply.



   (G)   Any person, corporation, or association violating any
provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00.



(Ord. 2016-9, passed 8-15-16)



SPEED REGULATIONS



§ 71.065  MAXIMUM LIMITS GENERALLY.



   (A)   No person shall operate or drive any vehicle on any street
within the city at a greater speed than 30 miles per hour, unless signs are
erected designating another speed in accordance with this subchapter.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, no
person shall drive a vehicle on a street at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual
and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so
controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or
other conveyance on or entering the street in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.



   (C)   The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the
requirements of division (B) of this section, drive at an appropriate reduced
speed when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or
winding roadway and when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians
or other traffic or by reason of weather or street or highway conditions.



(`87 Code, § 17-271)



§ 71.066  MAXIMUM LIMITS ON SPECIFIC STREETS.



   The City Council may alter the maximum speed limit established by this
subchapter on any street or portion thereof within the city in accord with
the provisions of state law. Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the
maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street or portion
thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle
at a rate of speed in excess of such limit.



(`87 Code, § 17-272) (Am. Ord. 2002-5, passed 2-5-02) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.067  SCHOOL ZONES.



   (A)   Definitions.  For purposes of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      SCHOOL.   A public or private educational institution recognized
by the state education authority for one or more grades K through 12 or as
otherwise defined by the state.



      SCHOOL ZONE. A designated roadway segment approaching, adjacent
to, and beyond school buildings or grounds, or along which school related
activities occur.



      SCHOOL ZONE DESIGNATIONS. In this section, the following:



         (a)   Child Development Center;



         (b)   Elementary School;



         (c)   Middle School;



         (d)   Junior High School;



         (e)   High School.



   (B)   The time periods which affect school zones created in this
chapter are described as follows:



      (1)   Regular school days.  As published by the Independent
School District for the current school year.



      (2)   Early dismissal days.  As published by the Independent
School District for the current school year.



      (3)   Additional time periods for school zones. The Chief of
Police or his or her designee shall also have the authority to specify
additional time periods for school zones to be in effect for special
circumstances. The special circumstances may be, but are not limited to,
breakfast programs, special presentations, summer school, evening meetings or
early dismissals. These special circumstance time periods can be in effect
only at one or more of the designated school zones listed herein, and only
when designated by either an official school zone speed limit sign located at
said zones or when school zone signs bearing a flashing amber light at said
zones are in operation.



   (C)   Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation
heretofore made, as authorized by the provisions of the Tex. Transportation
Code, Subchapter H, and specifically § 545.356, the prima facie speed limit
of 20 m.p.h. for vehicles is hereby determined and declared to be prima facie
reasonable and prudent, and the rate of 20 m.p.h. is hereby fixed for
vehicles traveling upon the following named streets and highways, or parts
thereof, during the hereinafter designated hours, either when such hours are
described on official school zone speed limit signs located at said zones, or
when school zone signs bearing a flashing amber light and located at said
zones are in operation. The location of said school zones and the hours
during which said speed zones shall be in effect are as follows.



 


School Name

 

Street Name of School Zone

 

Location of School Zone

 

Hours in Effect





Annie Sims Elementary School
 
East 1st Street
 
Between a point 251 feet west of Carr Drive and a point 203 feet east of
Dessie Avenue
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM
3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Annie Sims Elementary School
 
Carr Drive
 
Between East 1st Street and Happy Street
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Annie Sims Elementary School
 
Emma Drive
 
At a point 162 feet south of East 1st Street
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Annie Sims Elementary School
 
Sunny Lane
 
At a point 92 feet south of East 1st Street
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Annie Sims Elementary School
 
Dessie Avenue
 
Between a point 117 feet south of East 1st Street and a point 92 feet north
of Happy Street
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Annie Sims Elementary School
 
Happy Street
 
Between Carr Drive and a point 191 feet east of Dessie Avenue
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Annie Sims Elementary School
 
Friendly Avenue
 
At a point 189 feet north of Happy Street
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Child Development Center
 
Gibson Avenue
 
Between West Ferguson Road and a point 138 feet north of West 5th Street
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:00 PM - 3:30 PM


Child Development Center
 
West 5th Street
 
At a point 54 feet east of Gibson Avenue
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:00 PM - 3:30 PM


Child Development Center
 
2nd Street
 
At a point 71 feet east of Gibson Avenue
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:00 PM - 3:30 PM


Child Development Center
 
West Ferguson Road
 
Between Clayton Avenue and a point 313 feet west of Gibson Avenue
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:00 PM - 3:30 PM


E.C. Brice Elementary School
 
Cedar Street
 
Between Avenue and a point 269 feet west of Merritt Avenue
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


E.C. Brice Elementary School
 
McMinn Avenue
 
Between Walnut Street and a point 124 feet north of Magnolia Drive
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


E.C. Brice Elementary School
 
Hickory Street
 
At a point 102 feet east of McMinn Avenue
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


E.C. Brice Elementary School
 
Alexander Road
 
At a point 178 feet east of McMinn Avenue
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


E.C. Brice Elementary School
 
Magnolia Drive
 
Between a point 83 feet east of McMinn Avenue and a point 318 feet west of
Merritt Avenue
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


E.C. Brice Elementary School
 
Mimosa Avenue
 
At a point 83 feet north of Magnolia Avenue
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


E.C. Brice Elementary School
 
Merritt Avenue
 
Between Magnolia Avenue and Cedar Street
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


E.C. Brice Elementary School
 
Walnut Street
 
At a point 99 feet of McMinn Avenue
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Frances Corprew Elementary School
 
School Street
 
Between a point 140 feet west of MLK Avenue and Ivory Street
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Frances Corprew Elementary School
 
MLK Avenue
 
Between a point 159 feet north of Ivory Street and a point 224 feet north of
School Street
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Frances Corprew Elementary School
 
Ivory Street
 
Between MLK Avenue and School Street
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Frances Corprew Elementary School
 
Baker Avenue
 
Between a point 175 feet south of Ivory Street and a point 224 feet north of
School Street
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Frances Corprew Elementary School
 
Chambers Street
 
At a point 72 feet north of School Street
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Frances Corprew Elementary School
 
Rhambeau
 
At a point 153 feet west of MLK Avenue
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Mount Pleasant High School
 
North Edwards Avenue
 
Between a point 155 feet north of Joel Drive and a point 115 feet south of
Sanford Road
 
7:30 AM - 8:15 AM

3:50 PM - 4:20 PM


Mount Pleasant High School
 
Old Paris Road
 
Between a point 414 feet north of Brenda Drive and a point 3970 feet south of
McKellar Road
 
7:30 AM - 8:15 AM

3:50 PM - 4:20 PM


Mount Pleasant Junior High School
 
Old Paris Road
 
Between a point 414 feet north of Brenda Drive and a point 3970 feet south of
McKellar Road
 
7:20 AM - 8:05 AM

3:50 PM - 4:20 PM


P.E. Wallace Middle School
 
Quille Avenue
 
At a point 167 feet north of Choctaw
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:25 PM - 3:55 PM


P.E. Wallace Middle School
 
Choctaw Street
 
Between a point 137 feet west of Quille Avenue and a point 210 feet east of
Dunn Avenue
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:25 PM - 3:55 PM


P.E. Wallace Middle School
 
Dunn Avenue
 
Between Choctaw Street and a point 71 feet north of Rikkity Lane
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:25 PM - 3:55 PM


Vivian Fowler Elementary School
 
O'Tyson Avenue
 
Between West 4th Street and West 6th Street
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Vivian Fowler Elementary School
 
West 5th Street
 
Between North Miller and Pounders Avenue
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Vivian Fowler Elementary School
 
West 4th Street
 
Between North Miller and North O'Tyson Avenue
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Vivian Fowler Elementary School
 
Pounders Avenue
 
Between West 5th Street and West 6th Street
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM


Vivian Fowler Elementary School
 
Linda Drive
 
Between West 4th Street and west to the dead end of the street
 
7:15 AM - 8:00 AM

3:15 PM - 3:45 PM




 



   (D)   Any speed in excess of 20 miles per hour at the times
specified shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or
prudent and that it is unlawful.



(`87 Code, § 17-273)  (Am. Ord. 2014-11, passed 8-18-14; Am. Ord. 2015-10,
passed 8-4-15) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.068  MINIMUM LIMITS.



   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede
or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.



(`87 Code, § 17-275)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 170;



   Speed of vehicles in cities and authority of cities to alter prima
facie speed limits established by state law, see Tex. Transportation Code,
§§ 545.363 and 545.351 et seq.



§ 71.069  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter and other ordinances of the city
regulating the speed of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles of the Fire
Department when responding to a call, nor to police patrols, nor to
physicians when actually engaged in responding to emergency calls.



(`87 Code, § 17-276)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.365



§ 71.070  AMBULANCES.



   (A)   The driver or operator of all ambulances being driven on and
over the public streets and highways in the city shall operate the same at
the rate of speed required for the operation of a passenger motor vehicle,
and the driver or operator of such ambulances shall obey all traffic signs or
traffic lights.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable in the
following cases:



      (1)   Where the ambulance is following a police vehicle;



      (2)   Where, prior to the commencement of the trip, the driver
shall call the police office of the city and inform the dispatcher that such
ambulance has an emergency call, stating where the trip will commence and
end. The term EMERGENCY CALL shall be held to mean any and all calls and
requests for ambulance service on account of the circumstances which are such
as come within the general definition of the term of “emergency.”



(`87 Code, § 17-277) (Ord. passed 4-20-65)



§ 71.071  PARKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any vehicle at
a speed greater than ten miles per hour on all streets in Dellwood Park and
Oak Lawn Park, except those portions of Florey Avenue and South Lide Avenue
that are within Dellwood Park.



(`87 Code, § 17-278) (Ord. 1971-6, passed 5-4-71) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.072  CONSTRUCTION AREAS.



   The City Manager is authorized and directed to designate the maximum
speed limit for motor vehicles within construction zones and to post signs at
both ends of the construction zones, which signs shall reflect the speed
limits so established; provided however, that no speed limit so designated
shall exceed the speed limit in effect immediately prior to such designation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within said
construction zones at a rate of speed in excess of this speed limit so
designated and posted. For the purposes of this section the term CONSTRUCTION
ZONE shall mean that portion of any street upon which repair, construction or
reconstruction work is being performed.



(`87 Code, § 17-279) (Ord. 1981-3, passed 4-7-81) Penalty, see § 70.99



PEDESTRIANS



§ 71.085  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.



   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as provided in
this chapter, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those
rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this subchapter.



(`87 Code, § 17-335)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 552.009



§ 71.086  RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in
operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down
or stopping if need be to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway
within a crosswalk, when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon
which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no
pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or
run into the path of a vehicle, which is so close that it is impossible for
the driver to yield.



   (B)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at
any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.



(`87 Code, § 17-336)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 552.003



§ 71.087  WHEN PEDESTRIAN SHALL YIELD.



   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than
within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at any intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a
pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



(`87 Code, § 17-337)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 552.005



§ 71.088  USE OF CROSSWALKS REQUIRED AT INTERSECTIONS; CROSSING BETWEEN
INTERSECTION.



   (A)   All crossings by any pedestrian of any intersection within the
corporate limits of the city shall be made within the crosswalk of such
intersection.



   (B)   It shall be lawful for a pedestrian to cross a street at any
place other than an intersection, but when any such crossing is made or being
made by any pedestrian he or she shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
upon such street approaching such place of crossing and in proximity thereto.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cause any vehicle to stop or for
such pedestrian to cause any interference with the movements of any vehicle
by reason of such crossing at such place.



(`87 Code, § 17-338) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.089  WHEN CROSSWALK REQUIRED FOR CROSSINGS.



   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.



(`87 Code, § 17-339)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 552.009



§ 71.090  ROADWAY TO BE CROSSED AT RIGHT ANGLES; EXCEPTION.



   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route
at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb,
except in crosswalk.



(`87 Code, § 17-340)



§ 71.091  WALKING ON ROADWAYS.



   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any
pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.



   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along
and upon a street or highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left
side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from
the opposite direction.



   (C)   No person shall stand in the roadway or median for the purpose
of soliciting contributions, employment or business from the occupant of any
vehicle.   



(`87 Code, § 17-341) (Am. Ord. 2000-21, passed 11-9-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 552.006



§ 71.092  HITCHHIKING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in any street or other
roadway in the city for the purpose of hitchhiking or otherwise soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.



(`87 Code, § 17-342) Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 552.007



§ 71.093  DUTY OF DRIVERS WITH REGARD TO PEDESTRIANS.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon
any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and
shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.



(`87 Code, § 17-343)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 552.008



§ 71.094  USE OF RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.



   Pedestrians shall move, whenever possible, upon the right half of
crosswalks.



(`87 Code, § 17-344)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 552.094



§ 71.095  BLIND PEDESTRIANS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except persons wholly or
partially blind, to carry or use on the public streets of the city any cane
or walking stick which is white in color or white with a red end.



   (B)   Any driver of a vehicle, operator of a motor driven vehicle or
pedestrian who approaches or comes in contact with a person wholly or
partially blind and carrying a cane or walking stick white in color, or white
with a red end, shall immediately come to a full stop and take such other
precautions before proceeding as may be necessary to avoid accident or injury
to the person carrying such cane or walking stick.



(`87 Code, § 17-345) Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 72:  STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



Section



General Provisions



   72.01   Presumption that owner of vehicle illegally parked same



   72.02   Impoundment of standing or parked vehicles



Regulations



   72.15   Unattended vehicles



   72.16   Prohibited in specified places



   72.17   Parking for certain purposes



   72.18   Ten feet of roadway to be left available for traffic



   72.19   Stop required when emerging from alley, driveway or building



   72.20   Designation and marking of parking stalls and areas where
parking is prohibited or limited



   72.21   Parking in prohibited areas; overtime parking



   72.22   Parallel and angle parking



   72.23   Parking or standing in alleys



   72.24   Parking for more than 72 hours prohibited



   72.25   Starting parked vehicle



   72.26   Loading and unloading



   72.27   Permit to back to curb for loading and unloading



   72.28   Vehicles exceeding 25 feet



   72.29   Parking restrictions in residential area



   72.30   Parking restrictions on city library parking lot



   72.31   Parking restrictions upon civic center parking lot, city
parks; exceptions



   72.32   Parking privileges for disabled persons; state law
provisions adopted



   72.33   Public parking of vehicles for sale



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  PRESUMPTION THAT OWNER OF VEHICLE ILLEGALLY PARKED SAME.



   In any prosecution charging a violation of any ordinance or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such
ordinance or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such
vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the
registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where and for the time during which such violation
occurred.



(`87 Code, § 17-291)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to regulate standing and parking of vehicles, see
Tex. Transportation Code, § 542.202(a)(2)



§ 72.02  IMPOUNDMENT OF STANDING OR PARKED VEHICLE.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   Any vehicle which shall be or remain standing or parked
upon any public street, avenue, way, alley or other public place may be
removed by or upon order of the Chief of Police and placed in storage in a
privately operated garage or other place designated by or maintained by the
city, under the following circumstances:



         (a)   When any vehicle is found upon a street, avenue,
alley, way or public place and a report has been previously made that such
vehicle has been stolen or complaint has been filed and a warrant issued
thereon charging that such vehicle has been stolen or converted in violation
of law;



         (b)   When any police officer of the city has reasonable
grounds to believe that any vehicle has been abandoned;



         (c)   When a police officer arrests any person driving
or in control of a vehicle for an alleged offense and such officer is or may
be required by law to take the one arrested immediately before a magistrate,
or if the arrested one is immediately taken before a magistrate, and when the
arrested one is the sole occupant or the owner of the vehicle and is
immediately placed in custody;



         (d)   When a vehicle is so disabled that its normal
operation is impossible or impractical and the persons in charge of the
vehicle are incapacitated by reason of physical injury or other causes to
such an extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody or
cannot be found or are not in the immediate vicinity of such vehicle;



         (e)   When any vehicle is left standing or parked
unattended for more than 48 hours in violation of any applicable provision of
this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation; provided however,
that in the event such vehicle is parked or standing immediately in front of
or immediately adjacent to property owned by the owner of such vehicle, or
property rented by such owner, before such vehicle shall be removed, the
owner thereof shall be given written notice after the expiration of 48 hours
and shall be given an additional 24 hours to remove or cause to be removed
such vehicle. Such written notice may be given by depositing the same in the
U.S. mail addressed to the owner at the address given on the registration
receipt of the vehicle or his or her last known address.



      (2)   In order to obtain possession of a vehicle stored under
the provisions of this section, the claimant must produce satisfactory
evidence of ownership or right to possession within 30 days from the date of
such storage and, in addition thereto, must pay all charges for storage and
removal of such vehicle, in addition to any fine.



      (3)   If a vehicle removed under this section is not claimed
within 30 days from the date of storage, the same may be sold by the city or
the garage where the same is stored for storage charges, as provided by law.



(`87 Code, § 17-292)



   (B)   Fees. The following fees shall be charged for the impoundment
of any vehicle under the provisions of division (A) of this section, and the
same shall be collected from the owner or driver of any vehicle before the
release of such vehicle. The payment of the fees set out in this section
shall not excuse such owner or driver from the charge of violating any
applicable provision of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or
regulation.



      (1)   For taking and impounding any vehicle plus the actual
cost of towing such vehicle   $25.00



      (2)   If sold, for preparing advertisements of sale for such
vehicle   $5.00



      (3)   For selling such vehicle   $5.00



      (4)   For posting notice of sale of such vehicle   $5.00



(`87 Code, § 17-293)



   (C)   Liability of city. The provisions of division (A) of this
section shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility
of any person who shall leave his or her vehicle parked on the streets of the
city in such a manner that the same may be impounded; nor shall the city be
held as assuming any such liability by reason of impounding or causing to be
impounded such vehicle.



(`87 Code, § 17-294)



Statutory reference:



   Removal of illegally parked vehicles, see Tex. Transportation Code, §
545.305



REGULATIONS



§ 72.15  UNATTENDED VEHICLES.



   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to
stand unattended without first stopping the engine and effectively setting
the brakes thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front
wheels to the curb or side of the roadway.



(`87 Code, § 17-295)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.404



§ 72.16  PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or
the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of the
following places:



      (1)   On a sidewalk or sidewalk area;



      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;



      (3)   Within an intersection;



      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, except within an
officially marked parking stall;



      (5)   On a crosswalk;



      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection, except
within an officially marked parking stall;



      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;



      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30
feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings;



      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or a railroad
crossing;



      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and, on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire
station, within 75 feet of such entrance (when properly signposted);



      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street;



      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a
highway or within a highway tunnel;



      (14)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.



   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her
control into any prohibited area specified above or away from a curb such
distance as is lawful.



(`87 Code, § 17-296)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.302



§ 72.17  PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.



   No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in the city for the
principal purpose of:



   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale;



   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency;



   (C)   Advertising, except by permit issued by the Chief of Police
and under the conditions stipulated therein.



(`87 Code, § 17-297)



§ 72.18  TEN FEET OF ROADWAY TO BE LEFT AVAILABLE FOR TRAFFIC.



   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of
the width of either lane of a roadway for free movement of the vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading
or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic
regulations or traffic signs or signals of a police officer.



(`87 Code, § 17-298)



§ 72.19  STOP REQUIRED WHEN EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING.



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto
a sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, yielding the
right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision and,
upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadway.



(`87 Code, § 17-299)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.256



§ 72.20  DESIGNATION AND MARKING OF PARKING STALLS AND AREAS WHERE PARKING
IS PROHIBITED OR LIMITED.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Manager,
shall cause parking stalls to be maintained and marked off in and on such
streets and parts thereof and he or she shall cause spaces in which parking
is prohibited to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and
parts thereof as may be designated by the Chief of Police and approved by the
City Manager.



   (B)   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Manager,
shall also cause time limit parking areas to be maintained and marked off in
and on such part or parts of streets. All such spaces or areas shall be
clearly indicated by appropriate signs or by markings on the pavement or curb.



   (C)   In areas designated as time limit parking areas, parking may
be limited to any period prescribed by the Chief of Police, and approved by
the City Manager, the same to be designated with clearly distinguished
markings or signs at both ends of the time limit area and at reasonable
intervals between the beginning and ending of such time limit area,
indicating the time allowed for parking in such area.



   (D)   Any prohibition of or time limit on parking established under
this section shall apply on such days and between such hours as prescribed by
the Chief of Police and approved by the City Manager.



(`87 Code, § 17-300) (Ord. passed 9-21-65)



§ 72.21  PARKING IN PROHIBITED AREAS; OVERTIME PARKING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or
suffer any vehicle registered in his or her name or owned or operated by him
or her or in his or her possession or under his or her control to be or
remain in any space or area in which parking is prohibited as provided in §
72.20, or in a time limit parking area for a longer period of time than that
designated by the markings on the street or by signs clearly visible.



   (B)   In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or
leave a vehicle unattended in two or more parking spaces or areas adjacent to
or in the same block during the period prescribed on the appropriate signs
and markings.



(`87 Code, § 17-301) (Ord. 1983-6, passed 11-1-83) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.22  PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING.



   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other
than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18
inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in
this section. On one-way streets, vehicles may be parked on the left side of
the street, with the left-hand wheels within 18 inches of the curb or edge of
the roadway, unless signs prohibit parking.



   (B)   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Manager,
shall determine upon which streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall
mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon
any federal aid or state highway within the city unless the State Highway
Commission has determined by resolution or order entered in its minutes that
the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without
interfering with the free movement of traffic. Angle parking shall not be
indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be
caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street or upon any
railway tracks.



   (C)   Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle
parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to,
and with the hood or front end of such vehicle next to, the curb or edge of
the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.



   (D)   Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement,
whether for parallel or angle parking, a vehicle must be parked entirely
within the lines of the parking space.



(`87 Code, § 17-302)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.303



§ 72.23  PARKING OR STANDING IN ALLEYS.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to block the free passage of other
vehicles in such alley.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this
section, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any alley
within the fire limits of the city, except when such vehicle is actually
being used for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.



(`87 Code, § 17-303) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.24  PARKING FOR MORE THAN 72 HOURS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to allow,
cause or permit such vehicle to remain standing or parked on any street,
alley, avenue or public way within the city for more than 72 hours
continuously.



(`87 Code, § 17-304) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.25  STARTING PARKED VEHICLE.



   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked
unless and until such movement can be made with safety.



(`87 Code, § 17-305)



§ 72.26  LOADING AND UNLOADING.



   (A)   General. All freight trucks shall be, and are required to be,
loaded and unloaded from the alley entrance, if practicable. Where conditions
are such as to make the loading or unloading thereof from an alley
impracticable, such trucks shall be parked on the street in accord with all
applicable provisions of this chapter.



(`87 Code, § 17-306)



   (B)   Loading, unloading zones; designation. The City Council is
authorized to determine and designate the location of passenger and freight
curb loading zones, and the City Manager shall place and maintain appropriate
signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions
therefor are applicable.



(`87 Code, § 17-307) (Ord. passed 9-21-65)



   (C)   Use of passenger zones. No person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb
loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb
loading zones are effective; and then only for a period of time not to exceed
three minutes, except when such spaces are adjacent to and serving a hotel or
bus station, when such period of time may not exceed 15 minutes.



(`87 Code, § 17-308)



   (D)   Use of freight zones.



      (1)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any
length of time in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during the
hours so set aside, except that commercial vehicles may so stop, stand or
park for the expeditious unloading and delivery or loading and pickup of
material. In no case shall the stop for unloading, loading, pickup or
delivery exceed 30 minutes.



      (2)   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily
at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping,
standing or parking does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the
transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter such
zone.



(`87 Code, § 17-309)



§ 72.27  PERMIT TO BACK TO CURB FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING.



   The Chief of Police is authorized to issue special permits for such fee
as may be determined by the City Council from time to time to permit the
backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit.
Such permit may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or
to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as
therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for any
permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions
of any such permit.



(`87 Code, § 17-310) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.28  VEHICLES EXCEEDING 25 FEET.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, trailer or
combination thereof on the streets, alleys or other public ways of the city
which shall exceed 25 feet in length, except commercial vehicles actually
engaged in the loading or unloading of merchandise, freight, furniture,
building supplies or fixtures.



(`87 Code, § 17-311) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.29  PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN RESIDENTIAL AREA.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park or stand any truck
tractor, road tractor, trailer, semitrailer, bus or any commercial motor
vehicle with a rated capacity of 1½ tons or more, according to the
manufacturer’s classification, or the equivalent thereof, upon any public
street, alley, parkway, boulevard or public park within or adjacent to any
area zoned as either one-family dwelling district (SF-1 or SF-2), two-family
dwelling district (TF) or multi-family district (MF) under the zoning
ordinance of the city. This section shall not prevent the parking or standing
of the above described vehicles in such zoned areas for the purpose of
expeditiously loading and unloading of passengers, freight or merchandise;
and provided this section shall not apply to street construction, maintenance
and repair equipment, as well as trucks, rollers and implements; to
equipment, trucks, trailers and vehicles used by public service utility
companies engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities; and to
motor buses when taking on or discharging passengers at customary bus stops.



(`87 Code, § 17-312) (Ord. 1974-5, passed 11-19-74) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.30  PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON CITY LIBRARY PARKING LOT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave any vehicle on the
Mount Pleasant Municipal Library parking lot except employees of the
municipal library or library patrons. Any person who is found in violation of
the provisions of this section shall be fined $5.00.



(`87 Code, § 17-313) (Ord. 1981-8, passed 6-16-81) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.31  PARKING RESTRICTIONS UPON CIVIC CENTER PARKING LOT, CITY PARKS;
EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   A person commits an offense under this section if he or she
stops, parks or stands a truck, tractor, road tractor, trailer, semitrailer,
bus or any other commercial motor vehicle upon the Titus County Civic Center
parking lot or upon the city parks. This section shall not apply to
commercial motor vehicles when actually parked at a designated loading zone
on the Titus County Civic Center parking lot or city park or when
participating at an event being held at the civic center or a city park and
permission is received from the city to so park or a commercial motor vehicle
with a mechanical defect making it unsafe to proceed further, in which event
such vehicle may remain on the parking lot or park for such time as is
reasonably necessary to make emergency repairs. Any camper, mobile home or
recreational vehicle shall have the privilege of using the parks and civic
center parking lot for a period not to exceed 24 hours.



   (B)   If any commercial motor vehicle is found unattended or
unoccupied upon the Titus County Civic Center parking lot or in a city park,
in violation of division (A) of this section, the fact that such vehicle is
unattended or unoccupied shall be prima facie evidence that the owner
unlawfully stopped, placed or parked the vehicle. Proof of the ownership may
be made by a copy of the registration of the vehicle with the Texas
Department of Transportation or County Motor Vehicle License Department
showing the name of the person to whom the state highway license plates were
issued. This proof shall constitute prima facie evidence of the ownership of
the motor vehicle by the person to whom the certificate of registration was
issued. A camper, mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be in violation
of this section if same is left parked, placed or standing on the Titus
County Civic Center parking lot or a city park in excess of the above
designated time period.



(`87 Code, § 17-314) (Ord. 1984-7, passed 6-5-84) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.32  PARKING PRIVILEGES FOR DISABLED PERSONS; STATE LAW PROVISIONS
ADOPTED.



   Tex. Transportation Code, §§ 502.253 and 681.001 et seq., as amended,
is adopted for the city, making provisions for license plate devices and
identification cards, setting fees for such devices and parking privileges
for disabled persons and providing for penalty for violation of said article.



(`87 Code, § 17-315) (Ord. 1984-3, passed 6-21-83)



§ 72.33  PUBLIC PARKING OF VEHICLES FOR SALE.



   (A)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful and declared a public
nuisance for any person to park a vehicle displayed for sale, when parked in
an unauthorized location where it is visible from a public place or public
right-of-way without consent of the property owner.



   (B)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to a vehicle for sale
parked in a lawful manner in the course of its normal use as a means of
transportation:



      (1)   Upon the premises of or immediately adjacent to a
single-family residence if the vehicle is registered to, owned or operated by
the owner or legal occupant of the single-family residence;



      (2)   In a permitted parking space at a multi-family housing
facility if the vehicle is registered to, owned by or operated by the owner
or legal occupant of a unit in the multi-family housing facility; or



      (3)   In the parking area of a commercial establishment or
place of business when the driver is then and there employed and working or
is then and there transacting business at the establishment or business.



   (C)   Penalty. Any person in violating of this section shall be
fined as provided in § 10.99.



      (1)   A person commits an offense when the person maintains a
public nuisance described in division (A):



         (a)   By parking the vehicle for sale at the
unauthorized location; or



         (b)   By having ownership, care, custody or control of
the unauthorized location where the vehicle for sale is parked.



      (2)   An offense under this section is a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00.



         (a)   Each day is considered to be a separate offense
per vehicle.



         (b)   The Court shall order abatement and removal of the
nuisance on conviction.



         (c)   In a prosecution under this section, it is
presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle for sale is the person who
parked the vehicle for sale at the time and place the offense occurred.



(Ord. 2015-3, passed 1-20-15)



CHAPTER 73:  BICYCLES



Section



General Provisions



   73.01   Parental responsibility relative to provisions



Operation Regulations



   73.15   Application of traffic laws to bicycles



   73.16   Obedience to traffic-control devices



   73.17   Riding bicycles; passengers



   73.18   Operation upon roadways



   73.19   Speed restriction



   73.20   Emerging from alley, driveway



   73.21   Clinging to vehicles



   73.22   Carrying articles



   73.23   Parking



   73.24   Riding on sidewalks



   73.25   Brakes



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 73.01  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY RELATIVE TO PROVISIONS.



   The parent of any child or the guardian of any ward shall not authorize
or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions
of this chapter.



(`87 Code, § 17-31) Penalty, see § 70.99



OPERATION REGULATIONS



§ 73.15  APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC LAWS TO BICYCLES.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon any roadway or street in the city
shall be granted all of the rights and privileges and shall be subject to all
of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle.



(`87 Code, § 17-36)



§ 73.16  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable
to vehicles.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right
or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey
the direction of any such sign, except when such person dismounts from the
bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.



(`87 Code, § 17-37)



§ 73.17  RIDING BICYCLES; PASSENGERS.



   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to
carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped.



(`87 Code, § 17-38)



§ 73.18  OPERATION UPON ROADWAYS.



   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway or street
shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the roadway or street as
practical, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one
proceeding in the same direction.



   (B)   Persons riding bicycles on any roadway or street shall not
ride more than two abreast.



(`87 Code, § 17-39)



§ 73.19  SPEED RESTRICTION.



   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing.



(`87 Code, § 17-40)



§ 73.20  EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY.



   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on such
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway or street shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway.



(`87 Code, § 17-41)



§ 73.21  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway or street.



(`87 Code, § 17-42)



§ 73.22  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.



(`87 Code, § 17-43)



§ 73.23  PARKING.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle, or against a building, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



(`87 Code, § 17-44)



§ 73.24  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.



(`87 Code, § 17-45)



§ 73.25  BRAKES.



   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level pavement.



(`87 Code, § 17-46)



CHAPTER 74:  RAILROADS



Section



   74.01   Construction of crossings



   74.02   Maintenance of crossings



   74.03   Warning devices at crossings required



   74.04   Obedience to warning devices



   74.05   Expense of construction, maintenance of warning devices



   74.06   Flying switch provided



   74.07   City drainage not to be obstructed



   74.08   Headlight, signal bells



   74.09   Unnecessary whistle blowing prohibited



   74.10   Boarding, alighting from moving trains



   74.11   Boarding standing boxcars without authority



§ 74.01  CONSTRUCTION OF CROSSINGS.



   It shall be the duty of all railroad companies and managers thereof
owning or controlling railroads within the city and operating trains thereon
to provide crossings easy of access and suitable for the use of street
traffic; such crossings shall be constructed under the direction, supervision
and specifications of the city.



(`87 Code, § 17-352) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.02  MAINTENANCE OF CROSSINGS.



   It shall be the duty of each railroad company whose lines of tracks are
constructed within the city to put in good repair and maintain in good
condition all streets or parts of streets through or over which its line of
tracks may run, and to keep the same free from obstructions of every kind,
which such repair shall be made and constructed under the direction and
supervision of the city.



(`87 Code, § 17-354) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.03  WARNING DEVICES AT CROSSINGS REQUIRED.



   Every railroad company which has railroad tracks which run through the
city or any portion thereof shall be required to erect, place or construct
such barricades or other warning devices as shall be required by the city at
all crossings of such tracks with the streets, alleys or other public ways
within the city. Upon notice by registered mail, return receipt requested,
from the city to any such railroad company directing such railroad company to
so erect, place or construct such warning device, it shall be unlawful for
such railroad company to fail so to do within 60 days after receipt of such
notice.



(`87 Code, § 17-355) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.04  OBEDIENCE TO WARNING DEVICES.



   (A)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the
driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed until he or she
can do so safely.



   (B)   The requirements of division (A) of this section shall apply
when:



      (1)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device
gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;



      (2)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives
or continues to give a signal of the approach of a railroad train;



      (3)   A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500
feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and
such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is
an immediate hazard;



      (4)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is
in hazardous proximity to such crossing.



   (C)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.



(`87 Code, § 17-356) Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.251



§ 74.05  EXPENSE OF CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE OF WARNING DEVICES.



   Every gate, guard or other warning device erected at railroad crossings
and the approaches thereto shall be erected and constructed at the sole cost
and expense of the railroad company under the direction and supervision of
the city; and the same shall thereafter be kept and maintained by the
railroad company in proper repair and condition at its own cost and expense
and without cost or expense to the city.



(`87 Code, § 17-357) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.06  FLYING SWITCH PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or person to switch a
railroad car in the manner commonly known as a “flying,” “running” or
“kicking” switch at any crossing within the city.



(`87 Code, § 17-358) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.07  CITY DRAINAGE NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to obstruct the drainage
of the city in any way or by any means whatsoever.



(`87 Code, § 17-359) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.08  HEADLIGHT, SIGNAL BELLS.



   No railroad engine, train or similar railroad equipment shall be run or
moved in the nighttime without a headlight or shall be run at any time
without the usual signal bells or devices.



(`87 Code, § 17-360) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.09  UNNECESSARY WHISTLE BLOWING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, or its employees,
operating or running trains through the city to blow or have blown the
whistles of the engine of such train, except at each railroad crossing or for
the purpose of blowing for the board of semaphore as required by state law,
the rules of such railroad or in case of emergency as additional warning of
any impending danger to life or property.



(`87 Code, § 17-361) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.10  BOARDING, ALIGHTING FROM MOVING TRAINS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person not an employee of the railroad
company to get on or off a railroad passenger coach, freight car or engine
while such equipment is in motion.



(`87 Code, § 17-362) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.11  BOARDING STANDING BOXCARS WITHOUT AUTHORITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the railroad
company to climb upon any boxcar which may be standing upon any of the
sidetracks or switches located within the city.



(`87 Code, § 17-363) Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 75:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Truck routes



   II.   Through truck traffic prohibited on specific streets



   III.   Weight limits



SCHEDULE I.  TRUCK ROUTES.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Manager,
may designate such truck routes within the city as may be necessary for the
proper flow of traffic through the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any truck to use, travel upon or be
driven over any street, avenue or highway within the city not designated as a
truck route as provided in division (A) of this section; provided however,
that if the point of origin or destination, for commercial purposes only, for
any such truck shall be off such truck route, then such truck may proceed by
the shortest possible route to the nearest truck route.



(`87 Code, § 17-259) (Ord. passed 9-21-65) Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II.  THROUGH TRUCK TRAFFIC PROHIBITED ON SPECIFIED STREETS.



   (A)   No through truck traffic shall be allowed on the following
streets within the city:



      (1)   Jefferson Street, between State Highway 49 and U.S.
Highway 67;



      (2)   Madison Avenue, between its intersection with North
Jefferson Street (at approximately East 9th Street) and extending to State
Highway 49.



   (B)   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Manager,
may designate other routes within the city as may be necessary to limit the
flow of through truck traffic through the city.



(`87 Code, § 17-260) (Ord 1981-13, passed 11-3-81)



SCHEDULE III.  WEIGHT LIMITS.



   (A)   Designation of truck routes.  All Interstate Highway, U.S.
Highway and State Highway routes, as well as routes designated by other
sections of the code of ordinances, within the city are designated as truck
routes.



   (B)   Definitions.  The terms used in this schedule shall have the
meaning which is defined in the Texas Transportation Code as of the date of
this code of ordinances or hereafter amended.



   (C)   Weight limitations of certain vehicles.  No commercial
vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semitrailer, nor combination of such
vehicles shall be operated or caused or permitted to be operated upon any
public street within the city having a weight in excess of any one or more of
the following limitations:



      (1)   In no event shall the total gross weight, with load:



         (a)   Of a two-axle vehicle  exceed 24,000 pounds;



         (b)   Of a three-axle vehicle exceed 36,000 pounds;



         (c)   Of a four-axle vehicle exceed 48,000 pounds; and



         (d)   Of a five-axle vehicle exceed 60,000 pounds.



      (2)   Vehicles used exclusively to transport read-mix concrete
may be operated upon the public streets of the city, but a tandem-axle load
of such vehicle shall not exceed the weight limitations as defined in Tex.
Transportation Code, § 622.014 as hereinafter amended.



   (D)   Issuance of permit and surety bond. 



      (1)   In the event the vehicles described in this schedule
shall exceed the weight limitations described in the above divisions, the
owner of any commercial motor vehicle, truck-trailer, trailer, semitrailer,
or combination of such vehicles, and transport ready-mix vehicles operating
in the city, shall obtain and file a surety bond acceptable to the city in
the amount of $15,000.00 with the city, conditioned that the owner will pay
to the city all damages done to the highways by reason of the operation of
such vehicle with load:



         (a)   Of a two-axle vehicle exceeding 24,000 pounds;



         (b)   Of a three-axle exceeding 36,000 pounds;



         (c)   Of a four-axle exceeding 48,000 pounds;



         (d)   Of a five-axle exceeding 60,000 pounds; or



         (e)   Exceeding those weight limitations prescribed for
vehicles transporting ready-mix concrete described above.



      (2)   In addition to such bond, the City Manager or his or her
designate shall issue a permit, on a form approved by the city, authorizing
such excessive weight limitations and condition of use by those vehicles. 
Failure to abide by the terms and conditions of the permit shall be grounds
for revocation of the permit by the city.



   (E)   Enforcement. 



      (1)   A police officer, having reason to believe that the axle
load or gross weight of a loaded vehicle is unlawful, is authorized to weigh
the vehicle by means of portable or stationary scales, or cause it to be
weighed by a public weigher, and require that the vehicle be driven to the
nearest available scales for the propose of weighing.



      (2)   If the axle load or gross weight of a vehicle exceeds
the axle load or maximum gross weight authorized by this schedule or state
law, the police officer shall demand and require the operator or owner of the
vehicle to unload that portion of the load necessary to decrease the axle
load or gross weight of the vehicle to the maximum axle load or gross weight
authorized by law; provided, however, that if the load consists of livestock,
perishable merchandise, or merchandise that may be damaged or destroyed by
the weather, then the operator shall be permitted to proceed to the nearest
practical unloading point before discharging the excess cargo.



   (F)   Exceptions to weight limitations.  The provisions of this
schedule regarding weight limitations for certain vehicles shall not apply to:



      (1)   Any person operating, or causing to be operated, a motor
vehicle under a valid and subsisting permit for the operation of overweight
or oversize equipment for the transportation of such commodities as cannot be
reasonably dismantled issued by the State Highway Department under the
provision of V.T.C.A., Tex. Transportation Code, §§ 623.071 et seq., as
said article now exists or might  from time to time be amended.



      (2)   Emergency vehicles operating in response to any
emergency call.



      (3)   Vehicles operated either by any governmental entity or
private entity operating at the direction of the city, for the purpose of
constructing, maintaining, or repairing any public utility in the city.



   (G)   Violation; penalty.  Any person, firm, or corporation
violating any of the provisions of terms of this schedule shall be subject to
a penalty as provided for in § 70.99 of this code of ordinances.



(Ord. 2001-23, passed 12-18-01)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   PARKS AND RECREATION





         91.   CEMETERIES





         92.   LIBRARIES





         93.   FAIR HOUSING





         94.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION





         95.   HEALTH AND SANITATION





         96.   FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS





         97.   ANIMALS





         98.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         99.   ABANDONED AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES





         100.   ALARM SYSTEMS




CHAPTER 90:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



General Provisions



   90.01   Parks closed during certain hours



   90.02   Requirements for organizations using facilities



   90.03   Requirements for leagues using facilities



   90.04   Requirements for tournaments using facilities



   90.05   Inclement weather



   90.06   User fees



   90.07   Facility maintenance and modifications



   90.08   Mining and drilling prohibited



City Reservoir



   90.20   Definition



   90.21   Enforcement officers



   90.22   Liability of city



   90.23   Exclusion of offenders



   90.24   Use of adjacent property



   90.25   Restricted area



   90.26   Materials not to be discharged



   90.27   Compliance with Texas Water Safety Act



   90.28   Discharge or possession of firearms



   90.29   Violations



   90.30   Air-drive boats



Construction of Fences, Docks and Piers



   90.40   Permit required



   90.41   Application for permit



   90.42   Permit fee



   90.43   Action of City Manager



   90.44   Issuance



   90.45   Revocation of permit



   90.46   Boat houses prohibited



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  PARKS CLOSED DURING CERTAIN HOURS.



   All city owned parks shall be closed from the hours of 12:00 midnight
until 5:30 a.m., with the exception of Keith Park and Jurney Park, which
shall be closed from dusk until dawn, and it shall be unlawful for any
pedestrian or vehicular traffic to be in or upon the property during such
time period. However, if anyone applies for permission to carry out an
activity during such hours, written authorization shall be obtained from the
City Manager or Director of Public Works.



(Am. Ord. 1997-3, passed 4-1-97; Am. Ord. 2002-40, passed 5-7-02; Am. Ord.
2007-17, passed 12-18-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Parks and recreation board, see §§ 31.45 et seq.



§ 90.02  REQUIREMENTS FOR ORGANIZATIONS USING FACILITIES.



   All groups or organizations desirous of establishing leagues and
utilizing facilities owned, leased or controlled by the city for competitive
league play must comply with the following requirements:



   (A)   Be a non-profit organization, organized and operated for
amateur sports competition;



   (B)   If requested, file a yearly financial report with the City
Parks Department by January 31 of each year. Such report to include a
breakdown of expenses and income;



   (C)   Have a Board of Directors with a President or Chairperson,
Vice-President or Co-Chairperson,



Secretary and Treasurer;



   (D)   Have on file with the City Parks Department a copy of the
organization’s constitution, and/or bylaws, which must be in harmony with
city policies, ordinances, rules and/or regulations. In addition, a current
listing of the organization’s Board of Directors and any approved
individuals who have authority to speak on behalf of the organization;



   (E)   The organization’s constitution or bylaws must contain a
policy by which participants may be granted an exemption from payment of any
registration fees imposed by the organization, due to economic hardships;



   (F)   In consideration for the city granting use of said facilities,
the user organization, league team or individual shall indemnify and save
harmless the city against any and all damages to property or injuries to or
death of any person or persons and save harmless the city from any and all
claims, demands, suits, actions or proceedings of any kind or nature.



(Am. Ord. 1998-5, passed 2-3-98)



§ 90.03  REQUIREMENTS FOR LEAGUES USING FACILITIES.



   (A)   Each league organization shall submit to the City Parks
Department, at least 30 days prior to the beginning date of proposed usage
dates, the following:



      (1)   The proposed initial usage dates. This to include the
beginning and ending dates and proposed playing time blocks and shall include
all pre-season and post-season use of the facility;



      (2)   Anticipated number of teams and participants;



      (3)   List of current officers.



   (B)   Each league organization shall comply with and notify each
participating commissioner, coach and/or official of the leagues intent to
comply with the following:



      (1)   All league games shall be ended by 11:15 p.m. and no
inning shall begin after 11:00 p.m. All lights will be turned off by 11:30
p.m.;



      (2)   Practice sessions on all city facilities will be
scheduled by the league organization through the City Parks Department;



      (3)   Use of the facilities after the ending date scheduled
will be considered an extension of league play. Such extensions shall be
submitted to the City Parks Department for approval and scheduling;



      (4)   The City Parks Department will act as coordinator for
the use and reservation of all fields. In this capacity, the city realizes
the property is public and therefore will make the use of facilities open to
all parties without discrimination. In addition, the city will allow
reasonable access for the use of facilities during periods not directly
associated with an activity planned by the leagues;



      (5)   Each organization shall be responsible for the purchase,
supervision and maintenance of all equipment used during league play. This
includes, but is not limited to, bases, P.A. system and pitching machines.
Approval of alterations in design or type of equipment may be required by the
city to ensure safety. All bases used at city facilities must be approved by
the City Parks Department prior to installation;



      (6)   The league organization is responsible for removal of
trash and equipment from the playing fields (inside the fences of each field)
and dugouts after each game or practice. The City Parks Department will be
responsible for cleanup of remaining areas;



      (7)   The league organization is responsible for supervision
and control of persons attending athletic events. Unsportsmanlike conduct
will not be allowed by players, coaches or spectators, and no alcoholic
beverages will be allowed on park property. The organization will notify the
Mount Pleasant Police Department should a disturbance or violation occur;



      (8)   All materials stored by the organization for use on the
fields (dirt, lime and the like) shall be placed only in areas approved by
the city;



      (9)   Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter
may result in loss of facility use privilege by the organization.



(Am. Ord. 1998-5, passed 2-3-98)



§ 90.04  REQUIREMENTS FOR TOURNAMENTS USING FACILITIES.



   (A)   Sports tournaments requests which involve out-of-town teams or
non-league play will be considered based on the following condition. Requests
for tournament play will be considered if the request is made in writing no
less than 30 days prior to the scheduled tournament. Upon approval, a
facility use fee or tournament fee must be paid to the city to cover direct
costs incurred by the city for lights, personnel, equipment and materials
incurred in preparation for, operation of and cleanup after the tournament.
Approval of tournament play does not guarantee field condition or
availability of parks personnel or equipment.



   (B)   Churches, civic organizations and individual teams based in
Mount Pleasant and/or Titus County may reserve the fields during a specific
sports season for the purpose of conducting tournaments, subject to the
following conditions:



      (1)   A facility use fee or tournament fee will be assessed
for each field used and must be paid within three working days to the
tournament;



      (2)   Tournament use of facilities is subject to availability;



      (3)   All tournaments must be sanctioned by the Amateur
Softball Association, United States Slow-Pitch Softball Association, Dixie
League, Mount Pleasant Youth Baseball Association or other approved
sanctioning organizations. Umpires must be certified by appropriate
sanctioning body;



      (4)   If field space allows, more than one tournament may be
scheduled on any given date by the City Parks Department;



      (5)   Saturday games may not be scheduled to begin prior to
8:00 a.m., and all games must be complete by 12:00 midnight. Sunday may not
be scheduled to start before 8:00 a.m. and must be complete by 8:00 p.m. or
dark, whichever occurs first. There will be no use of lights on Sunday. This
provision may be altered by the City Parks Department after receiving a
request from the tournament organizer;



      (6)   No special maintenance will be done to the fields before
or during the tournaments; however, tournament sponsors may level and mark
the fields prior to and during the tournament;



      (7)   The city and the City Parks Department name may not
appear on any advertisement or promotion for any tournament;



      (8)   Any individual or team involved in conducting the
tournament shall not participate in the tournament as a manager, coach,
player or umpire if prize money is awarded or if any single award exceeds
$75.00 in value;



      (9)   No tournament reservation will be confirmed unless the
above conditions are followed. Failure to comply with provisions of this
chapter may result in loss of facility use privilege by the organization.



(Am. Ord. 1998-5, passed 2-3-98)



§ 90.05  INCLEMENT WEATHER.



   In case of inclement weather, the following provisions will be followed:



   (A)   The City Parks Department may cancel, delay or postpone
tournament or league play at any time in the interest of insuring the quality
of the fields.



   (B)   The decision to cancel, delay or postpone the tournament or
league play shall be made by authorized members of the City Parks Department.
Authorized representatives from the tournament or appropriate leagues may be
contacted for their input in making the decision.



   (C)   Failure to comply with this policy may be considered when
future tournaments are scheduled.



(Am. Ord. 1998-5, passed 2-3-98)



§ 90.06  USER FEES.



   (A)   The City Council has determined that it is necessary and
proper to establish and levy user fees to be charged for the use of the
city's public parks and recreation facilities.



   (B)   All teams who are members of any city adult or youth athletic
league will pay prescribed user fees of $5 per player as established by the
City Council. User fees will be deposited by the City Parks Department into
the city's General Fund.



   (C)   Non-resident teams (teams whose members live outside the City
of Mount Pleasant, Titus County) and teams participating in tournaments
(consisting of both resident and non-resident teams) may use Mount Pleasant
facilities if available. Tournament holders and resident or non-resident
teams using facilities shall remit refundable damage deposits of $100 per
tournament for usage plus $50 per concession building. Tournament-sponsoring
group will provide appropriate Health Department Permit if concessions are to
be used. The appropriate user fees as established by the City Council will be
paid by the sponsoring organization, as follows:



      (1)   Seventy-five dollars per field per day, including
lights; or



      (2)   Twenty-five dollars per field for day games; and



      (3)   One hundred dollars for concessions, if used.



      (4)   A $25 non-refundable fee is due upon request of
reservation. In the event tournament is cancelled for reasons other than
inclement weather, fee will be forfeited. Otherwise, it will be deducted from
the user fees due seven days in advance of tournament.



   (D)   To reserve city pavilions a user fee is established as follows
with a regular set fee and a non-profit rate as long as non-profit
organization provides a tax exemption number:



      (1)   Small pavilions. Dellwood (West End and Redfearn),
Oaklawn, Town Lake and Caldwell:



                        Set Rate   Non-Profit Rate



         (a)   Per hour:         $15.00      $10.00



         (b)   Per half
day:         $30.00      $25.00



         (c)   Per day:         $60.00      $50.00



      (2)   Large pavilions. Dellwood Danny Drive and Heritage:



                        Set Rate   Non-Profit Rate



         (a)   Minimum (two hours):   $25.00      $20.00



         (b)   Per half
day:         $50.00      $40.00



         (c)   Per day:         $75.00      $60.00



   (E)   Appropriate fees for other park uses are as follows:



      (1)   Twenty-five dollars per basketball court for usage, no
lights;



      (2)   Seventy-five dollars per basketball court for all day
usage, including lights;



      (3)   Ten dollars per tennis court usage.



(Am. Ord. 1998-5, passed 2-3-98; Am. Ord. 2002-33, passed 3-5-02; Am. Ord.
2003-2, passed 3-18-03; Am. Ord. 2003-13, passed 9-2-03; Am. Ord. 2008-14,
passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 2009-16, passed 12-15-09)



§ 90.07  FACILITY MAINTENANCE AND MODIFICATIONS.



   Maintenance and modifications of all facilities owned by the city will
be performed only by the City Parks Department. No modifications,
alterations, additions, changes or deletions, temporary or otherwise, may be
made to any facility owned by the city unless written approval is obtained
from the Parks Department and/or City Engineer. All permanent alterations,
after approved and completed, will become property of the city.



(Am. Ord. 1998-5, passed 2-3-98)



§ 90.08  MINING AND DRILLING PROHIBITED.



   All forms of drilling and mining are permanently prohibited within, on,
or beneath any public park located within the city limits.



(Ord. 2018-14, passed 12-18-18)



CITY RESERVOIR



§ 90.20  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the phrase CITY RESERVOIR shall
mean and include the Old City Lake, Town Lake, Lake Tankersley or any other
lake owned or controlled by the city.



(`87 Code, § 15-21) (Ord. 1994-12, passed 9-6-94)



§ 90.21  ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.



   (A)   All peace officers of this state and its political
subdivisions and game management officers are enforcement officers for the
purposes of this subchapter.



   (B)   The enforcement officers may enforce the provisions of this
subchapter by arresting and taking into custody any person who commits any
act or offense prohibited by this chapter or who violates any provision of
this subchapter.



(`87 Code, § 15-22) (Ord. 1994-12, passed 9-6-94) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.22  LIABILITY OF CITY.



   The city shall in no event be liable to any person due to the loss of
or damage to any property that may be placed in or upon a city reservoir, nor
shall the city be liable in any event to any person due to personal injuries
or loss of life that may be sustained by any person in or upon any city
reservoir. Any person entering in or upon a city reservoir shall do so at his
or her sole risk and shall not be privileged to enter or remain in or upon a
city reservoir, save and except under the terms and provisions of this code
of ordinances.



(`87 Code, § 15-23) (Ord. 1994-12, passed 9-6-94)



§ 90.23  EXCLUSION OF OFFENDERS.



   Any peace officer or game management officer shall have the right and
authority to exclude from any city reservoir any person found violating the
terms and provisions of this subchapter.



(`87 Code, § 15-24) (Ord. 1994-12, passed 9-6-94)



§ 90.24  USE OF ADJACENT PROPERTY.



   It is prohibited for any person, group or organization to use
city-owned land adjacent to or upon the water of any city reservoir for any
commercial purposes except for use by the city upon consent of the Parks
Board and City Council.



(`87 Code, § 15-25) (Ord. 1994-12, passed 9-6-94) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.25  RESTRICTED AREA.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or boat to occupy any of the area
within a 200-foot radius of a water intake tower upon any city reservoir.



(`87 Code, § 15-26) (Ord. 1994-12, passed 9-6-94) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.26  MATERIALS NOT TO BE DISCHARGED.



   The following materials shall not be discharged in a city reservoir,
any water course that flows into a city reservoir or deposited any where on
the ground where any part of such materials may be washed in a city reservoir
or into any water course that flows into a city reservoir and whether water
flows intermittently or constantly:



   (A)   Human urine or excrement;



   (B)   Treated sewage;



   (C)   Untreated sewage;



   (D)   Discharge from any privy, cesspool, septic tank or septic
field;



   (E)   Water that has been used for washing or cooking;



   (F)   Garbage, manure or putrescible material;



   (G)   Poisonous substances;



   (H)   Any hazardous substance;



   (I)   Industrial waste;



   (J)   Paint or paint remover;



   (K)   Soap, detergent or cleaner;



   (L)   Any substance which may render water harmful to humans;



   (M)   Any substance that may render water harmful to animals;



   (N)   Any substance that may impart an objectionable odor, color,
appearance or taste to the water.



(`87 Code, § 15-27) (Ord. 1994-12, passed 9-6-94) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.27  COMPLIANCE WITH TEXAS WATER SAFETY ACT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be
operated, any boat upon a city reservoir unless such vessel has first met all
requirements of Texas Water Safety Act, Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code, §§
31.001, et seq.



   (B)   Operation of all craft shall be subject to all provisions of
the Texas Water Safety Act, Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code, §§ 31.001, et
seq. as it now exists or hereafter may be amended, and to all state acts,
statutes and regulations applicable to the operation and control of a vessel.



   (C)   Violations of the Texas Water Safety Act, Tex. Parks and
Wildlife Code, §§ 31.001, et seq. shall be enforced by the Texas Parks and
Wildlife Enforcement Division.



(`87 Code, § 15-28) (Ord. 1994-12, passed 9-6-94) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.28  DISCHARGE OR POSSESSION OF FIREARMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in possession or discharge
any firearm upon any city reservoir or upon adjacent property under the
control of the city; provided, however, this section shall not apply to a
peace officer or game management officer in the performance of his or her
duties.



(`87 Code, § 15-29) (Ord. 1994-12, passed 9-6-94) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.29  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this
subchapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in § 10.99.



(`87 Code, § 15-30) (Ord. 1985-1, passed 1-15-85; Am. Ord. 1994-12, passed
9-6-94)



§ 90.30  AIR-DRIVE BOATS.



   No person shall operate an air-drive boat on any city reservoir, except
in the performance of official duties by city personnel or operated by law
enforcement personnel in the performance of their official duties.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 4-18-17)



CONSTRUCTION OF FENCES, DOCKS AND PIERS



§ 90.40  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Any person desiring to erect or build upon any city lake, or upon the
lands owned by the city immediately surrounding the same, any fence, boat
dock, boat pier or other structure shall, prior to building the same, file
application with the Building Official for a permit authorizing the
construction of the same.



(`87 Code, § 15-61) (Ord. passed 4-16-57)



§ 90.41  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   The application for a permit required by the provisions of this
subchapter shall give the approximate location where the fence or other
structure shall be built, the purposes for which the same shall be built, the
approximate size of the same and the material out of which it shall be
constructed.



(`87 Code, § 15-62) (Ord. passed 4-16-57)



§ 90.42  PERMIT FEE.



   At the same time an application for a permit required by the provisions
of this subchapter is filed, the applicant therefor shall pay to the city a
permit fee of $50.00. The city shall not be obligated to make any refund of
such fee or any portion thereof for any reason whatsoever.



(`87 Code, § 15-63) (Ord. passed 4-16-57)



§ 90.43  ACTION OF CITY MANAGER.



   After the application for a permit required by the provisions of this
subchapter has been filed, the same shall be delivered to the City Manager.
The City Manager shall, after studying the same, have the authority to make
such changes in either the location, size or type of construction as he or
she may deem necessary to protect the sanitation of the lake and to eliminate
any hazard to the public.



(`87 Code, § 15-64) (Ord. passed 4-16-57)



§ 90.44  ISSUANCE.



   Upon the approval of the application for a permit required by the
provision of this subchapter by the City Manager, the permit shall be issued.



(`87 Code, § 15-65) (Ord. passed 4-16-57)



§ 90.45  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   Any permit issued by the city under the provisions of this subchapter
shall not, in any manner, be construed as a perpetual easement, right or
privilege, but the same shall be revocable at any time by the City Council if
the applicant does not construct the fence or other structure in accordance
with the permit, keep the same in good repair after being constructed, keep
the same in a sanitary condition or permit trash, rubbish or garbage to be
thrown into the waters of the lake from the structure. Upon such permit being
revoked, the holder of the same shall remove the fence or other structure,
and upon his  or her failure to do so, the same may be removed upon orders
of the City Manager at the cost of such holder.



(`87 Code, § 15-66) (Ord. passed 4-16-57)



§ 90.46  BOAT HOUSES PROHIBITED.



   No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this subchapter
authorizing the construction of any character of boat houses, but all
structures shall be of open boat dock or boat pier construction.



(`87 Code, § 15-67) (Ord. passed 4-16-57) Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 91:  CEMETERIES



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Operation of trucks; exceptions



   91.02   Cemeteries closed during certain hours



Cemetery Board



   91.15   Board created



   91.16   Composition



   91.17   Appointment of members



   91.18   Members to be citizens



   91.19   Terms of members



   91.20   Compensation of members



   91.21   Removal of members from office



   91.22   Filling of vacancies



   91.23   Organization



   91.24   Meetings



   91.25   Rules of procedure; record of proceedings



   91.26   Quorum



   91.27   Powers and duties



   91.28   Recommendations subject to City Council



Regulations for Burials in City Cemeteries



   91.40   Control of city over cemeteries



   91.41   Authorized cemeteries



   91.42   Extension of cemeteries



   91.43   Burial outside authorized cemetery



   91.44   Lots in Edwards Cemetery



   91.45   Burials in Edwards Cemetery



   91.46   Purchase and transfer of lots in Edwards Cemetery



   91.47   Interment of other than lot purchaser’s family



   91.48   Report of burials to city



   91.49   Masonic and Cortenez Cemeteries



   91.50   Lot enclosures prohibited in portion of cemeteries platted
by city



   91.51   Graves to be level



   91.52   Prohibited items



   91.53   Opening and closing graves



   91.54   Monuments



   91.55   Trees, shrubs, flowers in areas platted by city



   91.56   Unlawful acts in cemeteries



 



   91.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  OPERATION OF TRUCKS; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Operation of trucks. It shall be unlawful for any person to
drive and operate any truck or truck tractor upon any public passageway,
street or alley through a public cemetery in the city.



(`87 Code, § 6-1)



   (B)   Exceptions. The provisions of division (A) of this section
shall not apply to any such vehicle used in conducting funerals, erecting
monuments, working in such cemetery or visiting some grave in such cemetery.



(`87 Code, § 6-2) (Ord. passed 9-19-50; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)
Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.02  CEMETERIES CLOSED DURING CERTAIN HOURS.



   The Masonic, Edwards and Cortenez Cemeteries shall be closed from the
hours of 10:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m., and it shall be unlawful for any
pedestrian or vehicular traffic to be in or upon said property during such
time period. However, if any one applies for permission to carry out an
activity during such hours, written authorization shall be obtained from the
City Manager or designee.



(Am. Ord. 1997-3, passed 4-1-97; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



CEMETERY BOARD



§ 91.15  BOARD CREATED.



   There is created in and for the city an administrative department to be
designated as the "Cemetery Board."



(`87 Code, § 6-13) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.16  COMPOSITION.



   The Cemetery Board shall consist of five members.



(`87 Code, § 6-14) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.17  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.



   The members of the Cemetery Board shall be appointed by a majority vote
of the City Council.



(`87 Code, § 6-15) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.18  MEMBERS TO BE CITIZENS.



   Each member of the Cemetery Board shall be a resident citizen of the
city, unless such citizenship shall be waived by a majority vote of the City
Council.



(`87 Code, § 6-16) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.19  TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   The term of office of the members of the Cemetery Board shall commence
on February 1, except for the filling of vacancies. The members shall be
appointed for a term of two years, with the exception of three members whose
terms shall expire on January 31,1968. Thereafter, all members shall be
appointed for terms of two years.



(`87 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.20  COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.



   The members of the Cemetery Board shall serve without compensation.



(`87 Code, § 6-18) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



2016 S-10



§ 91.21  REMOVAL OF MEMBERS FROM OFFICE.



   Any member of the Cemetery Board shall be subject to removal from
office by the City Council for any cause deemed by the Council sufficient
therefor in the interest of public service.



(`87 Code, § 6-19) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.22  FILLING OF VACANCIES.



   All vacancies occurring in the membership of the Cemetery Board shall
be filled by appointment by a majority vote of the City Council and for the
unexpired term of the vacancy.



(`87 Code, § 6-20) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.23  ORGANIZATION.



   The members of the Cemetery Board shall organize and select officers of
such Board from its members.



(`87 Code, § 6-22) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.24  MEETINGS.



   The members of the Cemetery Board shall hold such meetings as the Board
may determine or shall meet at the request of the City Council or City
Manager.



(`87 Code, § 6-23) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.25  RULES OF PROCEDURE; RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS.



   The Cemetery Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a
record of its proceedings. A copy of such record shall be filed with the City
Secretary.



(`87 Code, § 6-24) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.26  QUORUM.



   A simple majority of the members of the Cemetery Board shall constitute
a quorum of the Board for the transaction of all business.



(`87 Code, § 6-25) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.27  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the Cemetery Board shall be as follows:



   (A)   Act in an advisory capacity in all matters pertaining to the
cemeteries in the city;



   (B)   Make such recommendations as it deems proper in the planning,
designing and upkeep of the cemeteries in the city.



(`87 Code, § 6-26) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.28  RECOMMENDATIONS SUBJECT TO CITY COUNCIL.



   All recommendations of the Cemetery Board shall be subject to
modification or veto by the City Council.



(`87 Code, § 6-27) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



REGULATIONS FOR BURIALS IN CITY CEMETERIES



§ 91.40  CONTROL OF CITY OVER CEMETERIES.



   As a result of a city-wide election held on April 6,1948, the city
government was authorized to establish and maintain cemeteries, and
thereafter an ad valorem tax has been levied and collected and used in
maintaining the cemeteries in the city. The City Council, through this
subchapter, sets policies, rules and regulations relating to the cemeteries
in the city and declares the city to be the successor trustee to A. P. Smart,
W. A. Dillard and A. C. Lewellen, Trustees, in the deed from Mrs. A. B.
Edwards and others, dated August 11,1903, recorded in Vol. 16, page 595, Deed
Records, Titus County, Texas. This deed conveys to the three trustees certain
lands to be used as a burial ground.



(`87 Code, § 6-28) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed
8-2-16)



§ 91.41  AUTHORIZED CEMETERIES.



   The Masonic Cemetery, Edwards Cemetery and Cortenez Cemetery, as now
established within the limits of the city, are recognized and authorized as
legal and proper places for the interment of persons who may die in the city
or may be brought to the city for burial.



(`87 Code, § 6-29) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed
8-2-16)



§ 91.42  EXTENSION OF CEMETERIES.



   The limits of the cemeteries listed in § 91.41, as the same now exist,
shall never be extended unless authority has been granted by the governing
body of the city.



(`87 Code, § 6-30) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed
8-2-16)



§ 91.43  BURIAL OUTSIDE AUTHORIZED CEMETERY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the body of any deceased
person anywhere within the limits of the city other than in a duly authorized
cemetery which is recognized as a public buying ground under the terms of
this chapter.



(`87 Code, § 6-31) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed
8-2-16) Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.44  LOTS IN EDWARDS CEMETERY.



   (A)   Where space will permit, the unused portion of Edwards
Cemetery will be divided into square blocks of 20 feet. There shall be eight
graves in each block with four on the east and four on the west. Each grave
space shall be five feet by ten feet. Grave spaces shall be limited to one
body per space. Any exceptions must be presented to the City Manager in
writing. Such exceptions will be approved at the discretion of the City
Manager. The corners of each block shall be marked with concrete markers six
inches in diameter set flush with the ground and have on the top the block
numbers. Driveways of six feet in width running from north to south shall be
provided.



   (B)   Where space will not permit for the laying out of a block, the
area may be cut into individual grave spaces.



   (C)   The Cemetery Board is authorized to have the unused portion of
Edwards Cemetery platted, have the block markers prepared and the city's
cemetery personnel will set the markers.



   (D)   Each block shall be numbered and grave spaces in each block
numbered.



(`87 Code, § 6-32) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed
8-2-16)



§ 91.45  BURIALS IN EDWARDS CEMETERY.



   (A)   Hereafter, there shall be no burials in Edwards Cemetery,
except on a lot duly purchased from the city, in a family plot already
established in the old part of the cemetery or in the old part at a place
designated by the City Manager.



   (B)   The Cemetery Board shall provide a place for the burial of
paupers and marking of the graves.



   (C)   Exhumations shall be completed by a licensed Funeral Home.



(`87 Code, § 6-33) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed
8-2-16)



§ 91.46  PURCHASE AND TRANSFER OF LOTS IN EDWARDS CEMETERY.



   The price of lots in Edwards Cemetery shall be $400.00 for each grave
space, and on the purchase of a lot, the city will issue a deed. The city
shall keep in a well-bound book a record of all sales and subsequent
transfers. A fee of $5.00 shall be paid to the city for a transfer of a lot,
and all transfers shall be duly recorded by the city.



(`87 Code, § 6-34) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 1981-9, passed
6-16-81; Am. Ord. 1987-2, passed 1-20-87; Am. Ord. 1989-2, passed 2-7-89; Am.
Ord. 2009-7, passed 6-16-09; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.47  INTERMENT OF OTHER THAN LOT PURCHASER’S FAMILY.



   A lot purchased from the city in any cemetery is intended as a family
burial place, whether this be on a purchased lot or on a family established
lot in the cemetery, and while the owner of a lot may permit the interment in
his or her lot of one not of his or her family, an heir of the owner cannot,
except by unanimous consent of all the owners to the burial of one not a
member of the family.



(`87 Code, § 6-35) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed
8-2-16)



§ 91.48  REPORT OF BURIALS TO CITY.



   All persons in charge of a burial in any cemetery on a lot purchased
from the city shall secure authorization for interment from the city on a
form furnished by the city. The city shall keep a record of such burials in a
well-bound book.



(`87 Code, § 6-36) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed
8-2-16)



§ 91.49  MASONIC AND CORTENEZ CEMETERIES.



   Lots in the Masonic Cemetery are sold by Temple Lodge No. 70, A.F. and
A.M., Mount Pleasant, and lots in Cortenez Cemetery are sold by various
persons. The city exercises no jurisdiction over the sale or the platting of
lots in these cemeteries.



(`87 Code, § 6-37) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed
8-2-16)



§ 91.50  LOT ENCLOSURES PROHIBITED IN PORTION OF CEMETERIES PLATTED BY CITY.



   In that portion of any cemetery platted by the city, enclosures of all
kinds around lots are prohibited, including curbs, fences, hedges and the
like.



(`87 Code, § 6-38) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed
8-2-16)



§ 91.51  GRAVES TO BE LEVEL.



   All graves in the cemeteries shall be level with the ground, except
mausoleums or vaults in which a body might be buried. The funeral home
performing the burial shall be responsible for keeping graves level for a
period of six weeks after interment.



(`87 Code, § 6-39) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2009-7, passed
6-16-09; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.52  PROHIBITED ITEMS.



   No slabs, slats, cradles, boxes, glass jars, shells or trinkets or
similar items shall be permitted on any grave.



(`87 Code, § 6-40) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed
8-2-16)



§ 91.53  OPENING AND CLOSING GRAVES.



   The funeral home or mortuary in charge of the funeral in any cemetery
within the city shall be responsible for opening and closing the graves, and
the same funeral home or mortuary shall be responsible for the removal and
disposition of surplus dirt within 48 hours after the funeral.



(`87 Code, § 6-41) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 1982-3, passed
8-3-82; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.54  MONUMENTS.



   All interments shall be promptly marked with a permanent marker.
Monuments and markers shall be designed in harmony with the lot and its
environment. The city and Cemetery Board reserve the right to approve the
design and construction of all memorials, monuments and markers. Only one
monument shall be erected on a lot. All upright markers/monuments and
memorials are to be constructed in such a manner as to permit mowing,
trimming and other care of lawn and foliage in the cemetery.



(`87 Code, § 6-42) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2002-32, passed
3-5-02; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 8-2-16)



§ 91.55  TREES, SHRUBS, FLOWERS IN AREAS PLATTED BY CITY.



   In all cemetery areas platted by the city, all trees, shrubs and
flowers will be planted by the city and no other person. The city shall have
the right to remove from any cemetery any structure, object, tree, shrub or
other installation that may be deemed objectionable, detrimental, dangerous,
inconvenient or interfering with the care, use and maintenance of the
cemetery.



(`87 Code, § 6-43) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed
8-2-16)



§ 91.56  UNLAWFUL ACTS IN CEMETERIES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or throw any rubbish in
any cemetery, disturb or remove any flowers or shrubs or break, destroy or
remove any monument in any cemetery.



(`87 Code, § 6-44) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed
8-2-16) Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   The violation by any person of any act prohibited by this chapter or
the failure to do any act required by this chapter shall be a misdemeanor
punishable as provided in § 10.99.



(`87 Code, § 6-45) (Ord. 1977-3, passed 5-3-77; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed
8-2-16)



CHAPTER 92:  LIBRARIES



Section



   92.01   Violating library rules



   92.02   Neglect to return books or other property



   92.03   Defacing library property



   92.04   Designating library as a community library



Cross-reference:



   Library Board, see §§ 31.20 et seq.



§ 92.01  VIOLATING LIBRARY RULES.



   Every person who shall take from the Mount Pleasant Public Library any
book, pamphlet, periodical, paper or other property, except in accordance
with the rules of such library, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
on conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in § 10.99.



(`87 Code, § 2-51) (Ord. 1969-1, passed 1-23-69) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.02  NEGLECT TO RETURN BOOKS OR OTHER PROPERTY.



   Every person who shall take or borrow from the Mount Pleasant Public
Library any book, pamphlet, periodical, paper or other property and neglect
to return the same within two weeks from the date of mailing a notice to his
or her address shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in § 10.99.



(`87 Code, § 2-52) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.03  DEFACING LIBRARY PROPERTY.



   Every person who shall willfully or wantonly cut, mutilate, mark, tear,
write upon, deface or otherwise destroy or injure in whole or in part any
book, pamphlet, periodical, map or document, picture or written or engraved
or printed paper belonging to the Mount Pleasant Public Library or shall
suffer any such injury to be inflicted while such property is in his or her
custody or shall willfully or wantonly injure any of the furniture or
property in the building of the public library or any part thereof or any
fixtures therein or appertaining thereto shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as
provided in § 10.99.



(`87 Code, § 2-53) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.04  DESIGNATING LIBRARY AS A COMMUNITY LIBRARY.



   (A)   The Texas State Library and Archives Commission, having
authorized the designation of the Mount Pleasant Public Library as a
community library, as a part of the state library system under House Bill
260, 61st Legislature, 1969 (Tex. Government Code, §§  441.121 et seq.,
V.A.C.S.), such designation is accepted and hereafter the Mount Pleasant
Public Library shall be a community library, as defined by such act, and a
member of the Northeast Texas Library System.



   (B)   The Library Board shall recommend to the City Council the
person or persons to be appointed representative for the purpose of electing
advisory Council members.



(`87 Code, § 2-54) (Ord. 1971-13, passed 12-17-71; Am. Ord. 2001-20, passed
11-20-01)



CHAPTER 93:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing



   93.03   Discrimination in the financing of housing



   93.04   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services



   93.05   Exemptions and exclusions



   93.06   Fair Housing Administrator



   93.07   Complaints



   93.08   Investigation



   93.09   Cumulative legal effect



   93.10   Unlawful intimidation



   93.11   Cooperation with Secretary of Housing and Urban Development



   93.12   Education and public information



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
93.02 through 93.04 of this chapter.



   DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied
as or designed and intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more
families or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion
thereof.



   FAMILY. Includes a single individual.



   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
fiduciaries and any other organization or entity of whatever character.



   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant
for a consideration the right to occupy the premises not owned by the
occupant.



(`87 Code, § 2-131) (Ord. 1986-21, passed 10-21-86)



§ 93.02  DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.



   Except as exempted by § 93.05, it shall be unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bonafide offer,
or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, sex,
religion, handicap, national origin or familial status;



   (B)   Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, religion,
handicap, national origin or familial status;



   (C)   Make, print, publish or cause to be made, printed or published
any notice, statement or advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on
race, color, sex, religion, handicap, national origin or familial status;



   (D)   Represent to any person because of race, color, sex, religion,
handicap, national origin or familial status that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available;



   (E)   For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce
or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by
representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the
neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, sex,
religion, handicap, national origin or familial status;



   (F)   For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit to
influence or attempt to influence, by any words, acts or failure to act, any
seller, purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote the
maintenance of racially segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct or
discourage racially integrated housing.



(`87 Code, § 2-132) (Ord. 1986-21, passed 10-21-86; Am. Ord. 2007-16, passed
12-18-07) Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.03  DISCRIMINATION IN THE FINANCING OF HOUSING.



   It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association,
insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose
business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial or
residential real estate loans to deny a loan or other financing assistance to
a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing,
improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against any
such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points,
duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial
assistance because of:



   (A)   The race, color, sex, religion, handicap, national origin or
familial status of such person or any person associated with him or her in
connection with such loan or other financial assistance;



   (B)   The race, color, sex, religion, handicap, national origin or
familial status of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or
occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or other financial
assistance is being made or given.



(`87 Code, § 2-133) (Ord. 1986-21, passed 10-21-86; Am. Ord. 2007-16, passed
12-18-07) Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.04  DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings or to participate on account of
race, color, sex, religion, handicap, national origin, or familial status.



(`87 Code, § 2-134) (Ord. 1986-21, passed 10-21-86;  Am. Ord. 2007-16,
passed 12-18-07) Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.05  EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.



   (A)   There shall be exempted from the application of sections §§
93.02 through 93.04 all transactions involving:



      (1)   The rental of units in dwellings containing living
quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families
living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one of such units as his or her residence;



      (2)   The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing
living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than one
family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and
occupies the remainder of such dwelling as his or her residence and not more
than four such rooms are offered;



      (3)   The sale or rental of any single house by a private
individual who owns such house, provided that:



         (a)   The sale or rental is made without the use in any
manner of the sale or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of
any real estate broker, agent or salesperson or of such facilities or
services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of
any person or agent of any such broker, agent or salesperson; and



         (b)   The sale is made without the publication, posting
or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of § 93.02(C)
(this shall not prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors,
title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to
perfect or transfer the title);



         (c)   The owner does not own more than three
single-family houses at the time of the sale;



         (d)   The owner does not own any interest in, nor is
there owned or reserved on his or her behalf under any express or voluntary
agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from
the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one
time; and



         (e)   If the owner does not reside in the house at the
time of sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the
sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect
to one such sale within any 24-month period.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious
organization, association or society or any non- profit institution or
organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy
of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes to
persons of the same religion or giving preference to such persons unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex,
religion, handicap, national origin or familial status.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a bona fide private
club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary
purpose provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to
its members or from giving preference to its members.



   (D)   Nothing in this subchapter shall bar any person from owning
and operating a housing accommodation in which a room or rooms are leased,
subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex when such housing
accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities
available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation.



(`87 Code, § 2-135) (Ord. 1986-21, passed 10-21-86; Am. Ord. 2007-16, passed
12-18-07)



§ 93.06  FAIR HOUSING ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Mayor shall appoint and Council shall confirm a Fair Housing
Administrator (hereinafter referred to as “Administrator”) who shall have
the responsibility for implementing this chapter. The Administrator may
delegate his or her authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to
other city employees under his or her direction.



(`87 Code, § 2-136) (Ord. 1986-21, passed 10-21-86)



§ 93.07  COMPLAINTS.



   (A)   Only the person who claims to have been injured by a
discriminatory housing practice or who believes he or she will be irrevocably
injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is
occurring (hereafter referred to as “person aggrieved”) may file a
complaint with the Administrator. Such complaints shall be in writing and
shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be
committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon
which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The
Administrator shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge
to any person, upon request.



   (B)   If at any time the Administrator shall receive or discover
credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person or
persons have committed or are committing a discriminatory housing practice as
to which no complaint has been filed, the Administrator may prepare and file
a complaint upon his or her own notion and in his or her own name, and such
complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed
by a person aggrieved.



   (C)   The Administrator shall receive and accept notification and
referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of
Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair
Housing Act of 1968, Pub. L. 90-284, being 42 USC 3601 et seq., and shall
treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed
pursuant to division (A) of this section.



   (D)   All complaints shall be filed within 60 days following the
occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or
referral of any complaint, the Administrator shall provide notice of the
complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the person or persons
named therein who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an
alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to
the complaint within 15 days of receipt of the written complaint.



   (E)   All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to
before an officer authorized to administer oaths.



(`87 Code, § 2-137) (Ord. 1986-21, passed 10-21-86)



§ 93.08  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided,
the Administrator shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of
the matter stated in the complaint.



   (B)   During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the
mailing of the notice of complaint, the Administrator shall, if it appears
that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to
occur, attempt informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary
discontinuation of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate assurance
of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Nothing
said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by
the Administrator, by the complainant or by any other party to the
proceedings without the written consent of all persons concerned.



   (C)   Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at
conciliation by the Administrator, but within 30 days of the filing of the
complaint with the Administrator, if the efforts of the Administrator to
secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the Administrator
has made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact
occurred, the Administrator shall recommend to the City Attorney that such
violation be prosecuted in the Municipal Court of the city. With such
recommendation, the Administrator shall refer his or her entire file to the
City Attorney. The City Attorney shall within 30 days after such referral
make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such
complaint in Municipal Court. If the City Attorney determines to prosecute,
he or she shall institute a complaint and prosecute same to conclusion within
30 days after such determination or as soon thereafter as practicable.



(`87 Code, § 2-138) (Ord. 1986-21, passed 10-21-86)



§ 93.09  CUMULATIVE LEGAL EFFECT.



   This chapter is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of
any and all other legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue.



(`87 Code, § 2-139) (Ord. 1986-21, passed 10-21-86)



§ 93.10  UNLAWFUL INTIMIDATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage
or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because he, she or
they have complied with the provisions of this chapter, because he, she or
they exercised his, her or their rights under this chapter or enjoyed the
benefits of this chapter or because he, she or they have made a charge,
testified or assisted in any manner in any investigation or in any
proceedings hereunder or have made any report to the Administrator.



(`87 Code, § 2-140) (Ord. 1986-21, passed 10-21-86) Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.11  COOPERATION WITH SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT.



   The Administrator and the City Attorney are authorized to cooperate
with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the U.S. Attorney
General pursuant to the provisions of the Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of
1968, Pub. L. 90-284 and may render such service to the Secretary as they
shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this chapter.



(`87 Code, § 2-141) (Ord. 1986-21, passed 10-21-86)



§ 93.12  EDUCATION AND PUBLIC INFORMATION.



   In order to further the objectives of this chapter, the Administrator
may conduct educational and public information programs.



(`87 Code, § 2-142) (Ord. 1986-21, passed 10-21-86)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined a sum
not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. Each day the violation continues
after passage of 75 days from date of the filing of the initial complaint
with the Administrator shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Any
person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter may be
enjoined by a suit filed in the city in a court of competent jurisdiction,
and this remedy is in addition to any other penalty provision.



(`87 Code, § 2-143) (Ord. 1986-21, passed 10-21-86; Am. Ord. 2002-24, passed
2-19-02)



CHAPTER 94:  FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   94.01   Outdoor burning



   94.02   Fire limits



   94.03   Fire lanes



   94.04   Fees and cost recovery



Fire Marshal



   94.20   Office of Fire Marshal



   94.21   Appointment and qualifications



   94.22   Duty to investigate fires



   94.23   Taking of testimony generally



   94.24   Authority to summon witnesses, require production of
evidence and administer oaths



   94.25   Investigations may be private; separation of witnesses



   94.26   Duty when evidence indicates crime in connection with fire



   94.27   Misconduct of witnesses summoned by Fire Marshal



   94.28   Right of entry



   94.29   Record of fires to be kept



Fire Prevention Code



   94.40   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code



   94.41   Enforcement of Code



   94.42   Appeals



   94.43   Amendments



Fireworks



   94.55   Definition



   94.56   Declaration of public nuisance



   94.57   Prohibitions



   94.58   Exceptions



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  OUTDOOR BURNING.



   Outdoor burning will be consistent with Texas Natural Resource and
Conservation Commission regulations, Title 30, Chapter 111, subchapter B,
“Outdoor Burning,” currently set forth as 30 Tex. Administrative Code,
11.201 et seq., as promulgated pursuant to Tex. Health and Safety Code, §§
382.001 et seq.



(Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97)



§ 94.02  FIRE LIMITS.



   The fire limits shall be that zoning district known as the “Central
Business District,” as is designated on the Official Zoning Map of the city
or as it may be modified in the future.



(Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97)



§ 94.03  FIRE LANES.



   The fire lane referred to in Section 503 of the International Fire Code
shall be marked by painting the curb red and placing upon curb, at no more
than 25-foot intervals, the words “Fire Lane No Parking Tow Away Zone” in
four-inch white letters. If a curb does not exist then a red stripe at least
eight inches in width shall be painted on the paved surface with the words
“Fire Lane No Parking Tow Away Zone” in four-inch white letters
positioned at no more than 25-foot intervals. In addition, a red stripe at
least eight inches in width shall be painted at a distance of at least 20
feet from said curb, with the words “Fire Lane No Parking Tow Away Zone,”
in four-inch white letters positioned at no more than 25-foot intervals, with
an eight inch stripe.



(Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97; Am. Ord. 2002-28, passed 2-19-02)



§ 94.04  FEES AND COST RECOVERY.



   (A)   The City Council authorizes the City Manager to establish and
adopt fees to be billed against the insurance coverage of parties involved in
motor vehicle accidents, vehicle fires, hazardous waste or chemical spills,
or other non-fire suppression activities to which the city responds with Fire
Department equipment and/or personnel.



   (B)   Those charges will be assessed as a debt to the party causing
the event, the landowner, the party controlling the premises in the event of
a spill or dumping and/or the party transporting said hazardous, dangerous
and/or injurious product.



   (C)   Fire suppression activities resulting from third party
negligence may be billed against that third party. Fire suppression
activities resulting from arson may be billed against the arsonist.



   (D)   The City Manager is authorized to contract with a third party
entity to collect said fees.



   (E)   The city may enforce the provisions of this section by any
action allowed by law for the collection of any amounts due hereafter,
including reasonable and necessary attorney fees, costs, and expenses in a
court of competent jurisdiction.



   (F)   There shall be established within the City of Mount Pleasant
General Fund a special fund into which proceeds from this section will be
deposited for the purchase of emergency response and prevention equipment,
materials, services and training.



(Ord. 2012-6, passed 11-6-12)



FIRE MARSHAL



§ 94.20  OFFICE OF FIRE MARSHAL.



   The office of Fire Marshal is created, and such office shall report to
the City Manager or his or her designated representative.



(Ord. 1992-5, passed 6-16-92; Am. Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97)



§ 94.21  APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS.



   The Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall be
properly qualified for the duties of his or her office.



(Ord. 1992-5, passed 6-16-92; Am. Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97)



§ 94.22  DUTY TO INVESTIGATE FIRES.



   The Fire Marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances
of every fire occurring within the city by which property has been destroyed
or damaged and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire
was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be
commenced within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such
fire.



(Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97)



§ 94.23  TAKING OF TESTIMONY GENERALLY.



   The Fire Marshal, when in his or her opinion further investigation is
necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all
persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge
in relation to the matter under investigation and shall cause the same to be
reduced to writing.



(Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97)



§ 94.24  AUTHORITY TO SUMMON WITNESSES, REQUIRE PRODUCTION OF EVIDENCE AND
ADMINISTER OATHS.



   The Fire Marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him or
her to testify in relation to any matter which is, by the provisions of this
subchapter, a subject of inquiry and investigation and may require the
production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The Fire
Marshal is authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to
any persons appearing before him or her as witnesses.



(Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97)



§ 94.25  INVESTIGATIONS MAY BE PRIVATE; SEPARATION OF WITNESSES.



   All investigations held by or under direction of the Fire Marshal may,
in his or her discretion, be private, and persons other than those required
to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is
held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not
allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined.



(Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97)



§ 94.26  DUTY WHEN EVIDENCE INDICATES CRIME IN CONNECTION WITH FIRE.



   If the Fire Marshal shall be of the opinion that there is evidence to
charge any person with the crime of arson, with the attempt to commit the
crime of arson, of conspiracy to defraud or criminal conduct in connection
with any fire, he or she shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and
charged with such offense or either of them and shall furnish to the proper
prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of the
witnesses and all the information obtained by him or her, including a copy of
all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case.



(Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97)



§ 94.27  MISCONDUCT OF WITNESSES SUMMONED BY FIRE MARSHAL.



   Any witness who refuses to be sworn, who refuses to appear or testify
or who disobeys any lawful order of the Fire Marshal or who fails or refuses
to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination
or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of
the Fire Marshal in the matter of such investigation or inquiry, after being
summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the Fire
Marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted.



(Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.28  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Fire Marshal shall have the authority, at all times of the day or
night, when necessary in the performance of the duties imposed upon him or
her by the provisions of this subchapter, to enter upon and examine any
building or premises where any fire has occurred and other buildings and
premises adjoining or near the same which authority shall be exercised only
with reason and good discretion.



(Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97)



§ 94.29  RECORD OF FIRES TO BE KEPT.



   The Fire Marshal shall keep in his or her office a record of all fires,
together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin
of the fires and the amounts of the loss, which may be determined by the
investigation required by this subchapter.



(Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97)



FIRE PREVENTION CODE



§ 94.40  ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.



   There is adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion
that certain code known as the International Fire Code 2009 Edition, as the
same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The same is adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions of
such code shall be controlling within the limits of the city, provided,
however, that in the event of any conflict between the provisions of this
code of ordinances, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation with the
provisions of the code adopted by this section, the provisions of this code
of ordinances, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation shall prevail
and be controlling.



(Ord. 1979-4, passed 8-7-79; Am. Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97; Am. Ord.
2002-28, passed 3-19-02; Am. Ord. 2004-6, passed 2-3-04; Am. Ord. 2011-14,
passed 10-18-11)



§ 94.41  ENFORCEMENT OF CODE.



   The International Fire Code shall be enforced by the Fire Marshal. The
Fire Marshal may appoint such inspectors as shall from time to time be
necessary to enforce the provisions of such code and the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97)



§ 94.42  APPEALS.



   Whenever the Fire Marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to
grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the
code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the Fire Marshal to the City Manager within 15 days from the date
of the decision by the Fire Marshal.



(Ord. 1997-12, passed 12-2-97; Am. Ord. 2002-28, passed 2-19-02)



§ 94.43  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Section 108 of the International Fire Code 2009 Edition is
amended so that any reference to a Board of Appeals shall hereafter mean the
City Council.



   (B)   Section 3301.1.3 EXCEPTION (4) of the International Fire Code
2009 Edition is hereby deleted.



(Ord. 2004-6, passed 2-3-04; Am. Ord. 2011-14, passed 10-18-11)



FIREWORKS



§ 94.55  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIREWORKS. A composition or device.



      (1)   Designed for entertainment to produce visible or audible
effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation; and



      (2)   Defined by 49 C.F.R. § 172.101.



(Ord. 2014-19, passed 12-15-14)



§ 94.56  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   The presence of any fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city in
violation of this subchapter is hereby declared to be a common and public
nuisance.



(Ord. 2014-19, passed 12-15-14)



§ 94.57  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Except as provided in § 94.58, it shall be unlawful for any
person to manufacture, assemble, store, transport, receive, keep, sell, offer
or have in his or her possession with intent to sell, use, discharge, cause
to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any
fireworks of any description within the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of any minor
child below the age of 16 to permit or allow such minor child to discharge,
cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any
fireworks of any description.



(Ord. 2014-19, passed 12-15-14)



§ 94.58  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   This subchapter shall not prevent any public or private
demonstration or display of fireworks of any kind under the supervision of
the fire marshal, after application is made and a written permit is issued by
the fire marshal for such demonstration or display. No permit shall be
granted unless such demonstration or display shall be of such character, and
so located, discharged or fired, as in the opinion of the fire marshal shall
not be hazardous to property or endanger the public safety.



   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to the sale or possession for
sale of fireworks at a state licensed location that was in the business of
selling fireworks before the final passage of this subchapter and which is
now subject to the prohibitions in this subchapter merely as a result of
their involuntary annexation into the city. Each such licensed location shall
obtain a permit, at no cost, from the city indicating their right to continue
selling fireworks as an exception to this subchapter. Each permitted location
must be open to the public at least once per year at its current location to
maintain its permitted status, unless an emergency order or disaster
declaration is issued preventing the sale of fireworks due to drought or
other emergency.



   (C)   This subchapter shall not apply to the private possession of
factory sealed packages of fireworks purchased for later private use and
being transported from the point of sale to a point of storage in a private
home or location, or from the point of storage to the point of legal
discharge outside of the city limits.



(Ord. 2014-19, passed 12-15-14)



CHAPTER 95:  HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section



General Provisions



   95.01   Smoking



Local Regulation of Sanitation



   95.20   Definitions



   95.21   Correction of conditions generally



   95.22   Regulation concerning sewers and privies



   95.23   Work or improvements by municipality; notice



   95.24   Assessment of expenses; lien



   95.25   Unlawful to dump trash, refuse and the like onto public
places



   95.26   Violations



Rat Control



   95.35   Definitions



   95.36   Ratproofing of business buildings required



   95.37   Where foodstuffs stored, kept



   95.38   Storage of food, feed



   95.39   Inspections



   95.40   Restoration of ratproofing following repair, reconstruction
and the like



   95.41   Storage of lumber, boxes and the like



Public Swimming Pools and Spas



   95.50   Standards adopted; permit and inspection



   95.51   Public pools and spas; general provisions



   95.52   Amendments



   95.53   Inspections



   95.54   Suspension, denial or revocation of operational permit



   95.55   Fee standards for public swimming pool and spa adopted;
permit and inspection



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.01  SMOKING.



   (A)   General.  Because the smoking of tobacco or any other weed or
plant is a cause of material annoyance and discomfort to those who are
present in confined places and is a danger to their health, the city declares
that the purpose of this section is designed to protect the public health and
welfare by regulating smoking within a vehicle, an enclosed facility or upon
any premises owned by or leased to the city.



(`87 Code, § 12-2)



   (B)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or
carry any lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe within a vehicle, an enclosed
facility or upon any premises owned by or leased to the city to which signs
have been posted indicating that smoking is not permitted or allowed.



(`87 Code, § 12-3)



   (C)   Signs. Signs prohibiting smoking shall be posted at locations
visible to the public, with letters of such size and color as to be clearly
readable and placed upon the interior of a vehicle at the entrance(s) of each
facility and/or upon the premises where smoking is prohibited.



(`87 Code, § 12-4)



   (D)   Designated employee smoking areas. The person in charge of a
city-owned or leased facility may, but is not required to, designate one or
more areas as smoking areas for the use of the employees as part of this
smoking policy. A designated employee smoking area may include private
enclosed offices and other areas of the workplace which are not accessible by
members of the general public but may be occupied by members of the public at
specific invitation. Designated employee smoking areas shall be located in
administrative areas only. In no event shall an employee restroom or an area
containing food or dispensing drink facilities be designated as an employee
smoking area.



(`87 Code, § 12-5)



   (E)   Offense.



      (1)   A person commits an offense if in a facility or vehicle
controlled by the city if he or she smokes and fails or refuses to extinguish
smoking materials or move outside the building upon request by any person to
do so.



      (2)   Any person convicted of violating this provision shall
be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than
$1.00, nor more than $1,000.00 as set by a judge or jury.



(`87 Code, § 12-6)



   (F)   Exceptions. Nothing herein shall preclude the designation of
the following premises as non- smoking areas, but the restrictions contained
herein shall not apply:



      (1)   To an individual participating in an authorized
theatrical performance;



      (2)   In the course of a police interview with a witness,
victim or suspect, it may be advantageous to allow that person to smoke for
the purpose of relaxing. In such an event, the police officer conducting the
interview may allow the individual to smoke in their office or work area
during the interview only. This should not be construed as a method to
circumvent the purpose of this section, but to allow the Police Department
the freedom to conduct criminal investigations in the most efficient and
practical means possible.



(`87 Code, § 12-7) (Am. Ord. 1994-1, passed 3-1-94)



LOCAL REGULATION OF SANITATION



§ 95.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BRUSH.  Tree trimmings, weeds, hedge trimmings, trees not exceeding
eight inches in diameter, brush, or brush piles.



   GARBAGE.  Any and all waste food, waste from the handling,
preparation, cooking, or consumption of foods, including waste material from
markets, storage facilities, handling and sale of produce and other food
products. The term GARBAGE also means mixtures of animal or vegetable wastes
with rubbish.



   LITTER.  See RUBBISH/LITTER.



   OCCUPANT.  The individual, person, partnership, or corporation that
uses or occupies any building or part or fraction thereof, whether the actual
owner or tenant. In the case of vacant buildings or vacant portions thereof,
the owner, agent, or custodian shall have the responsibility as occupant.



   OUTDOOR FURNITURE.  A type of furniture specifically designed for
outdoor use, typically made of weather resistant materials such as weather
resistant fabrics, wood, and aluminum which does not rust.



   OWNER.  The actual owner, agent, or custodian of a building or
property, whether individual, partnership, or corporation. The lessee may be
construed as the owner for the purposes of this subchapter when building
agreements hold the lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs.



   PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.



   REFUSE.  All decayable and non-decayable solid waste (except body
waste), including garbage, rubbish, and trash.



   RUBBISH/LITTER.  Garbage, refuse, and rubbish as defined herein, and
any other material which, if thrown, deposited, or discarded as prohibited,
tends to be unsightly, creates a nuisance or danger to public health, safety,
or welfare. Decayable, non-decayable, combustible, and non-combustible waste
that may consist of, but is not limited to, animal or vegetable waste, waste
paper, magazines, paper, rags, cartons, tree branches, tree trunks, roots,
wood, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, glass, mattresses,
crockery, tin or aluminum cans, metal, discarded or worn-out manufactured
materials or machinery, inoperable motor vehicles or parts of motor vehicles,
tires, building or construction materials, discarded furniture, appliances,
scrap metals, or similar items.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 4-3-18)



§ 95.21  CORRECTION OF CONDITIONS GENERALLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or occupies any real
property in the city, or owns, rents, or occupies any house, building, or
structure in the city to:



   (A)   Permit or allow holes or places where water may accumulate and
become stagnant or to be or remain on such lot, or to permit or allow the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or to permit the same to remain
thereon. It shall be the duty of such person to keep the area from the line
of his or her property to the curb line or street adjacent to it free and
clear of accumulations of stagnant water;



   (B)   Permit or allow any trash, rubbish, carrion, filth, or other
impure or unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain thereon or therein. It
shall be the duty of such person to keep the area from the line of his or her
property to the curb line or street adjacent to it free and clear of the
matter referred to above;



   (C)   (1)   Permit weeds, brush, or any objectionable or
unsightly vegetation to grow to a height of more than 12 inches upon any real
property (except as defined in division (C)(2)), within 100 feet of any
adjacent property line, under different ownership, and/or within 50 feet of
any inhabitable dwelling or commercial structure;



      (2)   For undeveloped vacant property two acres or more in
size, vegetation of more than 12 inches shall not be allowed within 25 feet
of any adjacent property line under different ownership. Undeveloped vacant
property shall mean any property that has not been improved by the
installation of an inhabitable dwelling or commercial structure;



      (3)   It shall be the duty of any owner, occupant, or agent in
charge of any real property in the municipality to keep the area from his or
her property line to the curb line or street pavement free and clear of
weeds, brush, or any objectionable or unsightly vegetation, where curbing is
provided it shall be kept free and clear of unsightly vegetation;



   (D)   Permit or allow the open storage or accumulation, on any
premises improved or unimproved, of any lumber, barrels, bottles, cans,
containers, appliances, furniture other than outdoor furniture, mattresses,
building materials, metal pipe, tin, tires, automotive parts, or similar
items in an objectionable and unsightly manner; or



   (E)   Permit trees, shrubs, bushes, plants, grass, or weeds growing
at or near intersections, in such manner as to obstruct the view of
approaching traffic from the right or left.



(`87 Code, § 12-11) (Ord. passed 5-16-67; Ord. 1981-4, passed 4-21-81; Am.
Ord. 1995-7, passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. 1997-1, passed 2-4-97; Am. Ord. 2018-3,
passed 4-3-18)



§ 95.22  REGULATION CONCERNING SEWERS AND PRIVIES.



   The city shall regulate the making, filling, altering, or repairing of
sewers and/or privies. The City Engineer shall direct the inspections, mode,
and materials for constructing sewers and/or privies.



(`87 Code, § 12-12) (Am. Ord. 1995-7, passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. 2018-3, passed
4-3-18)



§ 95.23  WORK OR IMPROVEMENTS BY MUNICIPALITY; NOTICE.



   (A)   If the owner of property in the city does not comply with the
requirements of this subchapter within ten days of notice of a violation, the
city may:



      (1)   Do the work or make the improvements required; and



      (2)   Pay for the work done or improvements made and charge
the expenses to the owner of the property.



   (B)   The notice must be given:



      (1)   Personally to the owner in writing;



      (2)   By letter addressed to the owner at the owner’s post
office address; or



      (3)   If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner’s
post office address is unknown:



         (a)   By publication at least once;



         (b)   By posting the notice on or near the front door of
each building on the property to which the violation relates; or



         (c)   By posting the notice on a placard attached to a
stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates,
if the property contains no buildings.



   (C)   If a notice is mailed in accordance with division (B), and the
United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or
“unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and considered
delivered.



   (D)   The city in the notice of a violation may inform the owner by
certified mail, return receipt requested, that if the owner commits another
violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health
and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the
city, without further notice, may correct the violation at the owner’s
expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered
by a notice under this division occurs within the one-year period, and the
city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change,
then the city, without notice, may take any action permitted in divisions
(A)(1) and (A)(2), and assess its expenses as provided by § 95.24, or as
provided for in § 10.99.



(`87 Code, § 12-13) (Am. Ord. 1995-7, passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. 2018-3, passed
4-3-18)



§ 95.24  ASSESSMENT OF EXPENSES; LIEN.



   (A)   The city may assess expenses incurred under § 95.23 against
the real estate on which the work is done or improvements made.



   (B)   To obtain a lien against the property, the City Manager, or
municipal official designated by the City Manager, must file a statement of
expenses with the Titus County Clerk. The lien statement must state the name
of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The lien
attaches upon the filing of the lien statement with the County Clerk.



   (C)   The lien is inferior only to:



      (1)   Tax liens; and



      (2)   Liens for street improvements.



   (D)   The city may bring a suit for foreclosure to recover the
expenditures and interest due. Interest shall be 10% per annum from the date
the lien was filed.



   (E)   The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement
is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city in doing the work
or making the improvements.



   (F)   The violation of any part of §§ 95.21 through 95.25 is
declared to be a nuisance and the city may, in addition to the remedies
provided here, institute actions, both civil and criminal, for abatement of
same or prosecution for violation thereof. Each and every act done in
violation hereof and each day that such violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense and be punishable as such.



(`87 Code, § 12-14) (Am. Ord. 1995-7, passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. 2018-3, passed
4-3-18) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.25  UNLAWFUL TO DUMP TRASH, REFUSE AND THE LIKE ONTO PUBLIC PLACES.



   It shall unlawful and an offense for any person or persons to discard
or place, or to cause to be dumped or placed, any trash/litter, slops,
wastewater, sewage, garbage, yard trimmings, brush, leaves, or other refuse
onto any public place, street, alleyway, or gutter within the limits of the
city, and the same is declared to be a public nuisance.



(`87 Code, § 12-15) (Ord. 1985-14, passed 6-4-85; Am. Ord. 1995-7, passed
4-4-95; Am. Ord. 2018-3, passed 4-3-18) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.26  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 95.21 through 95.25 shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as
provided in § 10.99, and each and every act done in violation hereof and
each day that such violation or violations continue shall constitute a
separate offense and be punishable as such.



(`87 Code, § 12-16) (Ord. 1985-14, passed 6-4-85; Am. Ord. 1995-7, passed
4-4-95; Am. Ord. 2018-3, passed 4-3-18) Penalty, see § 10.99



RAT CONTROL



§ 95.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS BUILDINGS. Any structure, whether public or private, that is
adapted for occupancy for transaction of business, for rendering of
professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of
goods, wares or merchandise or for the performance of work or labor,
including hotels, apartment buildings, tenement houses, rooming houses,
office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants,
grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories and all
outhouses, sheds, barns and other structures on premises used for business
purposes.



   HEALTH OFFICER. The Chief Code Enforcement Officer or duly authorized
representative.



   OCCUPANT. The individual, partnership or corporation that uses or
occupies any business building or part or fraction thereof, whether the
actual owner or tenant. In the case of vacant business buildings or vacant
portions thereof, the owner, agent or custodian shall have the responsibility
as occupant.



   OWNER. The actual owner, agent or custodian of the business building,
whether individual, partnership or corporation. The lessee shall be construed
as the OWNER for the purposes of this subchapter when business buildings
agreements hold the lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs.



   RAT ERADICATION. The elimination or extermination of rats within
buildings by any or all of the accepted measures, such as poisoning,
fumigation, trapping, clubbing and the like.



   RAT HARBORAGE. Any condition which provides shelter or protection for
rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or
outside of any structure.



   RATPROOFING. A form of construction to prevent the ingress of rats into
business buildings from the exterior or from one business building or
establishment to another. It consists essentially of treatment with material
impervious to rat gnawing all actual or potential openings in exterior walls,
ground or first floors, basements, roofs and foundations that may be reached
by rats from the ground by climbing or burrowing.



(`87 Code, § 12-28) (Am. Ord. 2002-11, passed 2-5-02)



§ 95.36  RATPROOFING OF BUSINESS BUILDINGS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Ratproofing required. All business buildings in the city shall
be ratproofed, freed of rats and maintained in a ratproof and ratfree
condition to the satisfaction of the health officer.



(`87 Code, § 12-29)



   (B)   Notice; compliance by owner. Upon receipt of written notice
and/or order from the health officer, the owner of any business building
specified therein shall take immediate measures for ratproofing the building;
and unless said work and improvements have been completed by the owner in the
time specified in the written notice, in no event to be less than 15 days, or
within the time to which a written extension may have been granted by the
health officer, then the owner shall be deemed guilty of an offense under the
provisions of this subchapter.



(`87 Code, § 12-30)



   (C)   Notice; compliance by occupant. Whenever the health officer
notifies the occupant or occupants of a business building in writing that
there is evidence of rat infestation of the building, said occupant or
occupants shall immediately institute rat eradication measures and shall
continuously maintain such measures in a satisfactory manner until the
premises is declared by the health officer to be free of rat infestation.
Unless said measures are undertaken within five days after receipt of notice,
it shall be construed as a violation of the provisions of this subchapter and
occupant shall be held responsible therefor.



(`87 Code, § 12-31)



   (D)   Maintenance. The owners of all ratproofed business buildings
are required to maintain the premises in a ratproofed condition and to repair
all breaks or leaks that may occur in the ratproofing without a specific
order of the health officer.



(`87 Code, § 12-32)



   (E)   Closure of occupied buildings. Whenever conditions inside or
under any occupied business buildings within the city provide extensive
harborage for rats in the opinion of the health officer, the health officer
is empowered, after due notification in accordance with division (B) of this
section, to close such business buildings until such time as the conditions
are abated by ratproofing and harborage removal, including, if necessary, the
installation of suitable concrete floors in basements or replacement of
wooden first or ground floors with concrete or other major repairs necessary
to facilitate rat eradication.



(`87 Code, § 12-33)



   (F)   Condemnation of unoccupied buildings. Whenever conditions
inside or under any unoccupied business buildings provide extensive harborage
for rats in the opinion of the health officer, the health officer is
empowered to require compliance with the provisions of division (B) of this
section, and in the event that said conditions are not corrected in the
period of 60 days, or within the time to which a written extension may have
been granted by the health officer, the health officer is empowered to
institute condemnation and destruction proceedings.



(`87 Code, § 12-34) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.37  WHERE FOODSTUFFS STORED, KEPT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any new or existing
business buildings wherein foodstuffs are to be stored, kept, handled, sold,
held or offered for sale without complying with the provisions of this
subchapter; unless the provisions of this section are complied with, no city
license or permit to conduct or carry on any business mentioned above will be
issued.



(`87 Code, § 12-35) Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Food and food esstablishments, see Ch. 96



§ 95.38  STORAGE OF FOOD, FEED.



   All food and feed within the city for feeding chickens, cows, pigs,
horses and other animals shall be stored in ratfree and ratproof containers,
compartments or rooms unless stored in a ratproof building.



(`87 Code, § 12-36)



§ 95.39  INSPECTIONS.



   The health officer is empowered to make unannounced inspections of the
interior and exterior of business buildings to determine full compliance with
this subchapter, and the health officer shall make periodic inspections at
intervals of not more than 45 days of all ratproofed buildings to determine
evidence of rat infestation and the existence of new breaks or leaks in their
ratproofing, and, when any evidence of it is found indicating the presence of
rats or openings through which rats may again enter business buildings, the
health officer shall serve the owners or occupants with notice and/or orders
to abate the conditions found.



(`87 Code, § 12-37)



§ 95.40  RESTORATION OF RATPROOFING FOLLOWING REPAIR, RECONSTRUCTION AND
THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful under the provisions of this subchapter for the
occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber or any other
person to remove and fail to restore in like condition the ratproofing from
any business building for any purpose. It shall further be unlawful for any
person or agent to make any new openings that are not closed or sealed
against the entrance of rats.



(`87 Code, § 12-38) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.41  STORAGE OF LUMBER, BOXES AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any
premises, improved or vacant, or on any open lot or alley in the city any
lumber, boxes, barrels, bottles, cans, containers or similar materials that
may be permitted to remain thereon unless same shall be placed on open racks
that are elevated not less than 18 inches above the ground and evenly piled
or stacked.



(`87 Code, § 12-39) Penalty, see § 10.99



PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS



§ 95.50  STANDARDS ADOPTED; PERMIT AND INSPECTION.



   The City Council hereby adopts the Department of State Health Services,
Standards for Public Swimming Pool and Spa by reference as the same now
exists or may hereafter be amended and requires each public pool or spa to be
permitted on an annual basis with a permit fee as set forth in the following
sections. Each pool or spa shall be inspected at least once annually to
ensure that it meets the above-referenced requirements.



(Ord. 2015-2, passed 1-20-15)



§ 95.51  PUBLIC POOLS AND SPAS; GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   Any person who operates a public swimming pool or spa within the city
shall first obtain a permit from the Code Enforcement office and shall comply
with the requirements of this subchapter. This subchapter shall be liberally
construed and applied to promote its underlying purpose of protecting public
health.



(Ord. 2015-2, passed 1-20-15)



§ 95.52  AMENDMENTS.



   The standards for public swimming pool and spa are amended as follows:



   (A)   Permit required. A permit shall be required to operate a
public swimming pool within the limits of the city. Inspections of such
swimming pool shall be made at least one time annually to confirm compliance
with all local, state, and federal laws. The fee for such permit shall be:



      (1)   Public pool/spa - seasonal: $50.00.



      (2)   Public pool/spa - year round: $100.00.



   (B)   General requirements.



      (1)   All public pools shall be equipped with a filtration
system large enough to completely circulate the water at least once every six
hours (eight hours for pools built before October 1, 1999);



      (2)   All pools shall be equipped with a chlorine, bromine, or
approved disinfection system;



      (3)   Adequate provision for drainage shall be made to drain
the pool into the sanitary sewer system of the city.



(Ord. 2015-2, passed 1-20-15)t



§ 95.53  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Inspector shall inspect all public pools and spas located
in the city and shall make as many inspections and re-inspections as are
necessary for enforcement of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Inspector, after proper identification, shall be permitted
at any reasonable time to enter the property upon which any public pool or
spa exists, for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance
with this subchapter. Such agents shall be permitted to examine any records
pertinent to the operation of said pool or spa, including information about
persons employed in the operation, and shall be permitted to obtain water
samples, as necessary for the purpose of determining water quality.



   (C)   Application for and operation of a public pool or spa within
the city constitutes consent for the Inspector to enter the premises upon
which said pool or spa exists and perform inspections to determine compliance
with this subchapter. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to
physically prevent or otherwise obstruct the lawful inspection of a public
pool or spa by the Inspector. In addition, it shall be unlawful and an
offense for any person to willfully provide false information to the
Inspector as it relates to enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter.



   (D)   Whenever an inspection is made of a public pool or spa, the
findings shall be recorded on an inspection report form provided by the
Inspector. The original of the inspection report form shall be furnished to
the owner or person in charge of said pool or spa, and shall constitute
written notice of any violations of this subchapter present at the time of
inspection.



(Ord. 2015-2, passed 1-20-15)



§ 95.54  SUSPENSION, DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF OPERATIONAL PERMIT.



   (A)   Suspension or denial of permit.



      (1)   The Inspector shall have the right to temporarily
suspend or deny a permit to operate a public pool or spa for the following
reasons:



         (a)   The annual permit fee is not paid;



         (b)   The permit holder or applicant fails to keep all
pool and spa equipment properly maintained as to comply with the requirements
of this division;



         (c)   The condition of the pool or spa, due to poor
water quality, lack of safety equipment, structural deficiencies or hazards,
and/or improper wastewater disposal, is deemed by the Inspector to be
hazardous to the health or safety of swimmers, the environment, or to the
general public;



         (d)   The permit holder or applicant, after receiving
notification of violation from the Inspector, fails to correct the violation
within a time frame specified by the Inspector;



         (e)   The permit holder or applicant prohibits the
Inspector from conducting a lawful inspection; or



         (f)   The permit holder or applicant, or the pool
operator in his or her employment, provides false information or falsified
documentation to the Inspector as it relates to the provisions of this
subchapter.



      (2)   The permit shall remain suspended or denied until all
causes of suspension or denial have been corrected. The Inspector shall post
signs at the pool or spa entrance stating: “The pool/spa is closed by
authority of the Inspector for the City of Mount Pleasant.” Said signs
shall remain posted until removed by the Inspector.



      (3)   Upon denial or suspension of a permit, the applicant or
permit holder shall be notified in writing of the decision to deny or suspend
said permit, of the reasons of such denial or suspension and of the applicant
or permit holder's right to appeal.



   (B)   Permanent revocation of permit.



      (1)   For violations of any of the provisions of this
subchapter, which the permit holder fails to correct after having received
notice of such violation from the Inspector, the permit may be permanently
revoked.



      (2)   Prior to such action, the Inspector shall notify the
permit holder in writing stating the reasons for which the permit is subject
to revocation and advising that the permit shall be permanently revoked at
the end of ten business days following service of such notice.



(Ord. 2015-2, passed 1-20-15)



§ 95.55  FEE STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL AND SPA ADOPTED; PERMIT AND
INSPECTION.



   (A)   Annual permit fee for year-round public pools or spas, per
pool or spa is $100.00. Annual permit fee for a seasonal swimming pool or spa
is $50.00.



   (B)   A fee of $100.00 shall be assessed for a permit to operate a
year round public swimming pool or spa. Where a person operates more than one
pool or spa on the same premises, a fee of $100.00 shall be assessed for a
permit to operate the first, and a fee of $50.00 shall be assessed for a
permit to operate each additional pool or spa on the premises.



   (C)   A fee of $50.00 shall be assessed for a permit to operate a
seasonal public swimming pool or spa. Where a person operates more than one
pool or spa on the same premises, a fee of $50.00 shall be assessed for a
permit to operate the first, and a fee of $35.00 shall be assessed for a
permit to operate each additional pool or spa on the premises.



(Ord. 2015-2, passed 1-20-15)



CHAPTER 96:  FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   96.01   Definitions



   96.02   Adoption of Texas Food Establishment Rules



   96.03   Personnel



   96.031   Certified food manager required on staff



   96.04   Permits



   96.05   Application for a permit



   96.06   Review of plans



   96.07   Inspections



   96.08   Examination, detention, and condemnation of food



   96.09   Fees



   96.10   Suspension of permit



   96.11   Revocation of permit



   96.12   Administrative process



 



   96.99   Penalty and enforcement



Cross-reference:



   Where foodstuffs stored and kept, see § 95.37



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   When used in this chapter the following words and terms, unless the
context indicates a different meaning, will be interpreted as follows:



   APPROVED SOURCE. Shall mean suppliers should be approved under state
law and comply with all local, state, and federal food laws.



   CATEGORY I. Food establishments that may require a high frequency of
inspections under the Texas Food Establishment Rules may be classified by the
regulatory authority as CATEGORY I. The term includes a food establishment
that prepares, serves, and sells food from raw meats or seafood, extensively
handles foods, serves a highly susceptible population, or is subject to one
or more other factors that require more frequent inspections. Without
limiting the types of food establishments that may be included in this
category, examples of CATEGORY I food establishments include full service
restaurants, fast food restaurants, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, meat
markets, seafood markets, sandwich shops, delicatessens, and supermarkets.



   CATEGORY II. Food establishments that may require a lower frequency of
inspection under the Texas Food Establishment Rules may be classified by the
regulatory authority as CATEGORY II. The term includes, without limitation, a
food establishment that, with limited food handling, sells only prepackaged
foods or prepares, serves, or sells food from pre-cooked ingredients or from
ingredients with a low potential for creating a food-borne hazard. Without
limiting the types of food establishments that may be included in this
category, examples of CATEGORY II food establishments include packaged
grocery stores, convenience stores, produce markets, commissaries, ice cream
shops, bakeries, day care facilities, adult care facilities, nursing homes,
and lounges.



   CATEGORY III. Food establishments that may require a low frequency of
inspection, or that may be temporary or seasonal, may be classified by the
regulatory authority as CATEGORY III. Without limiting the types of food
establishments that may be included in this category, examples of CATEGORY
III food establishments include concession stands, seasonal food service,
mobile food units, and produce stands.



   FOOD HANDLER. A food handler is a person with any job that requires
them to handle unpackaged foods or beverages. Food handlers may be involved
in preparing, inspecting or even packaging food and beverage items. All food
handlers are required to use proper hygiene and sanitation methods when
working with food.



   FOOD HANDLER TRAINING. A certification course of study that has been
approved by the Texas Department of State Health Services that identifies
knowledge a food handler should possess in order to work in a food service
establishment.



   FOOD MANAGER. A food manager arranges and organizes specific activities
for a restaurant by making accurate decisions, resolving problems with
employees and customers and making sure the restaurant is being run in an
efficient, proper and safe manner.



   FOOD MANAGER TRAINING. A certification course of study which has been
approved by the Texas Department of State Health Services that include the
training over all content a person must be able to apply in order to be the
person in charge of a food service establishment.



   FRP WALLBOARD. Fiberglass reinforced polyester wallboard with a
thickness of 3/32-inch or greater.



   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. A vehicle mounted food establishment which is readily
moveable, and with pre-authorization from site owners, is allowed to move
from one designated location to another designated location for the purpose
of food sales intended for persons or employees at that specific location
only. Mobile food establishments are required to meet all applicable codes as
required by the city or other regulatory agencies.



   PUSHCART. A non self-propelled mobile food unit limited to serving
non-potentially hazardous food products of ice cream, popsicles, or other
such items as authorized by the local regulatory authority.



   REGULATORY AUTHORITY. The Mount Pleasant Code Enforcement Department,
or as otherwise designated by the City Manager.



   REGULATORY AUTHORITY INSPECTOR (INSPECTOR). A designee of the City
Manager who has authority to conduct food establishment and public health
inspections.



   SAFE HOLDING TEMPERATURES. As applied to potentially hazardous food
shall mean temperatures of 41°F or below, or temperatures of 135°F or above.



   TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. A food establishment that
operates for a period of no more than seven consecutive days in conjunction
with an event or celebration such as: fair, grand opening, carnival, public
exhibition, or similar gathering.



(Ord. 2002-12, passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 2005-15, passed 12-6-05; Am. Ord.
2015-1, passed 1-20-15)



§ 96.02  ADOPTION OF TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES.



   (A)   Texas Food Establishment Rules adopted. The city by reference
the provisions of the rules found in 25 Tex. Administrative Code, §§
229.161 through 229.171 and §§ 229.173 through 229.175 regarding the
regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction, as said rules
currently exist and as they may hereafter be amended by the Texas Board of
Health. Said rules are incorporated into this chapter and for all purposes
made a part hereof.



   (B)   Conflicts. In the event of any conflict between the provisions
adopted in division (A) of this section and the other provisions of this
chapter, the other provisions of this chapter shall prevail.



(Ord. 2002-12, passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 1-20-15)



§ 96.03  PERSONNEL.



   (A)   Food handler certificate. All food handlers shall obtain and
maintain a food handler certificate from a state and local approved source.
The certificate earned in this course is valid for two years from the course
completion date and must be available for inspection by regulatory authority.
This certificate is required to work in a food service establishment.



   (B)   Health card. A health card will be issued to individuals who
meet the criteria in division (B)(1) or (2) of this section. This card will
be provided to individuals who are required to present a certificate
verifying that a negative TB result or a statement of good health has been
provided by clinic or medical facility. This card does not authorize
individuals to work in food establishments. This health card will be valid
for one year at which time a new health card may be obtained. The
requirements for obtaining a health card will be the following:



      (1)   A statement from a physician or agent that the applicant
has had a complete physical examination and appears to be in good health; or



      (2)   A statement from a physician or agent that the applicant
has had a negative reaction to a PPD/Mantoux tuberculin test (TB test).



   (C)   Statement and fee. The applicant shall bring to the office of
the regulatory authority a statement of the foregoing requirement and upon
paying a fee of $2.00 will receive a health card valid for one year.



(Ord. 2002-12, passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 1-20-15)



§ 96.031  CERTIFIED FOOD MANAGER REQUIRED ON STAFF.



   (A)   Each permitted food service establishment shall have at least
one certified food manager on site during food service operations.
Certification is obtained through successful completion of a Food Protection
Management Certification course, as approved and required by the Department
of State Health Services.



   (B)   Responsibility, assignment. The owner/manager of the food
establishment shall be, or select a designated person to be, in charge of
food service operations who must hold a current valid Certified Food Manager
certificate. The Certified Food Manager shall be present at the food
establishment during all hours of operation.



      (1)   Certified food service managers required. A food
establishment shall employ at least one person who is a full-time, on-site
supervisory employee who is responsible for food preparation and service and
holds a current food service manager certification approved by the state of
Texas.



         (a)   A food establishment is in compliance with the
provisions of this section if there is one full-time certified food service
manager "person in charge" on duty during all times of operation.



         (b)   Food establishments that serve, sell, or
distribute only prepackaged foods and non-potentially hazardous beverages,
and temporary food establishments are exempt from the provisions of this
section.



         (c)   Compliance may be required of establishments
having exemption if they have repeated or serious or critical food code
violations, or if the establishment is judged by the Inspector to be capable
of causing food borne illness.



         (d)   The Inspector may require additional certified
operators in sufficient number to ensure that all areas of food preparation
and service, during times of operation, are under the direction of certified
supervisory personnel. It shall be unlawful for any person, under these
conditions, owning, operating or managing a food establishment to allow said
establishment to be operated with less than the required number of certified
supervisory personnel.



      (2)   Certified food service manager replacement. If a food
establishment cannot meet the requirements of this section because of the
termination or permanent transfer of a registered food service manager, the
food establishment shall:



         (a)   Notify the regulatory authority within seven days
of the effective date of termination or permanent transfer of the registered
food service manager;



         (b)   Employ another registered food service manager
within 30 days of the effective date of termination or permanent transfer of
the previous registered food service manager; and



         (c)   During said 30-day compliance period, a certified
owner, operator or manager shall be present at said establishment no less
than 50% of the normal weekly operating hours of the establishment.



      (3)   Employee responsibilities. Required employees must
possess a valid Mount Pleasant Food Handler certificate or satisfactory
completion of an approved course of study in sanitary food handling within 30
days after employment in a food establishment. Every certificate issued
hereunder shall remain effective for a period of two years. Persons
possessing valid Certified Food Service Manager certificates shall be exempt
from this requirement.



         (a)   Current food handler's cards and/or current food
service manager certification for each employee shall be available for review
by the Inspector.



         (b)   The Inspector may revoke food handler cards
without appeal if the food handler is observed violating personal hygiene
practices or is found to be incompetent in preventing food borne illness
through safe food handling and preparation practices. Upon revocation, the
food handler will have 30 days to attend the food handler orientation program
and be issued a new food handler's card.



(Ord. 2005-15, passed 12-6-05; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 1-20-15)



§ 96.04  PERMITS.



   (A)   Permits authorized and required. The regulatory authority is
hereby authorized to issue permits for the operation of food establishments,
provided that only a person or firm that complies with the requirements of
this chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit.



      (1)   A person may not operate a food establishment in the
city without a valid permit issued by the regulatory authority.



      (2)   A valid permit must be posted in public view on or in
every food establishment.



      (3)   A permit that has been revoked, that has expired, or
that has lapsed for any reason is not valid.



      (4)   A suspended permit is not valid during the period of
suspension.



   (B)   Permits not transferable. Permits are not transferable from
one person to another or from one location to another location, except as
otherwise permitted by this chapter.



   (C)   Multiple operations in single location. If more than one food
establishment is conducted in a single building or at the same address, then
a separate permit shall be required for each such food establishment,
regardless of whether each such food establishment is owned by the same
person or by different persons.



(Ord. 2002-12, passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 1-20-15)



§ 96.05  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Written application. Any person desiring to operate a food
establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided
by the regulatory authority. The application must contain:



      (1)   The name and address of each applicant; and



      (2)   The location and type of the proposed food establishment
and the applicable fee.



   (B)   Denial or revocation of permit. Failure to provide all
information requested on the application form, or falsifying information
required may result in denial or revocation of the permit.



   (C)   Renewal of permit. Renewals of permits are required on an
annual basis and the same information is required for renewal permits as for
an initial permit.



(Ord. 2002-12, passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 1-20-15)



§ 96.06  REVIEW OF PLANS.



   (A)   Review of plans. Whenever a food establishment is established,
constructed or extensively remodeled, and whenever an existing structure is
converted to use a food establishment, properly prepared plans and
specification for such establishment, construction, remodeling or conversion
shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review before work is
begun.



      (1)   A food establishment is EXTENSIVELY REMODELED when:



         (a)   Fifty percent or greater of the square footage
within the food preparation area is to be remodeled; or



         (b)   A building permit is required for work done within
the food preparation area.



      (2)   The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed
layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials
of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and
facilities.



      (3)   The plans and specifications will be approved by the
regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of this chapter. The
establishment, construction, remodeling or conversion must be according to
the plans and specifications.



   (B)   Inspection. Whenever plans and specifications are required to
be submitted to the regulatory authority, the regulatory authority shall
inspect the food establishment to determine compliance with the approved
plans and specifications and with the requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   Effect of noncompliance.



      (1)   Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications
or to obtain the necessary approval will result in permit denial, suspension,
or revocation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   The regulatory authority may also suspend or revoke a
permit in accordance with this chapter if a food establishment that is
required to be inspected under this section begins operations before passing
said inspection.



      (3)   Suspension, revocation, or denial of a permit renewal
shall not preclude the regulatory authority from taking any other enforcement
action authorized by this chapter or by other law.



(Ord. 2002-12, passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 1-20-15) Penalty, see
§ 96.99



§ 96.07  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Permit inspections. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the
regulatory authority shall inspect the food establishment or proposed food
establishment to determine compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   Additional inspections. Additional inspections shall be
performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. The
regulatory authority shall determine the frequency of inspections to be made
under this chapter in accordance with the criteria set forth in the Texas
Food Establishment Rules.



   (C)   Inspection based on complaint. In addition to any other
authority granted by this chapter, the regulatory authority shall have the
authority to inspect a food establishment based on complaints or other
credible information indicating the possibility of a violation of this
chapter.



   (D)   Access. The authority of the regulatory authority to inspect a
food establishment includes, without limitation, the right to access any and
all parts of the food establishment and the right to view and copy any or all
of the records relating to the purchase, sale, or handling of food.



   (E)   Posting. The results of the most recent inspection by the
regulatory authority (including without limitation the letter grade, score,
or ranking assigned to the food establishment by the regulatory authority)
must be posted in public view on or in every food establishment.



   (F)   Maintaining inspections reports. Copies of all food service
inspection reports including any and all notices of violations issued within
the previous 12 months must be maintained on premises and be made available
for review by the regulatory authority upon request.



   (G)   Effect of noncompliance. A food establishment that does not
comply with this chapter will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit
or may have its permit revoked or suspended in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. Suspension, revocation, or denial of a permit or of permit
renewal shall not preclude the regulatory authority from taking any other
enforcement action authorized by this chapter or by other law.



(Ord. 2002-12, passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 1-20-15)



§ 96.08  EXAMINATION, DETENTION, AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD.



   (A)   Examination of food. Food may be examined, collected, or
sampled by the regulatory authority as often as necessary for the enforcement
of this chapter.



   (B)   Issuance of detention order. The regulatory authority may
place a detention order on any food which the regulatory authority believes
is in violation of any provision of this chapter. The detention order is
effective upon the service of written notice to the permit holder for the
food establishment at which the food is located or to the person in charge of
the food.



   (C)   Notice. The written notice of a detention order must specify
the reasons for the detention order. The notice must also state that a
request for hearing may be filed within ten days and that if no hearing is
requested, the food shall be destroyed. The regulatory authority shall tag,
label or otherwise identify any food subject to the detention order. The tag,
label, or other identification placed on the food by the regulatory authority
must not be removed until and unless the detention order is lifted or vacated
or the food is destroyed as directed by the regulatory authority.



   (D)   Effect of detention order. No food subject to a detention
order shall be used, served or removed from the food establishment unless the
regulatory authority gives permission to destroy the food and the food is
destroyed as directed by the regulatory authority. The regulatory authority
shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in the detention
order, unless storage is not possible without risk to public health, in which
case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished.



   (E)   Hearing. A hearing shall be held if the hearing is requested
within ten days from the date on which the required notice of detention order
is served. On the basis of evidence produced at the hearing, the detention
order may be vacated or the permit holder or person in charge of the food may
be directed by written order to destroy such food or to bring it into
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2002-12, passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 1-20-15)



§ 96.09  FEES.



   (A)   Annual permit fee. Any person operating a food service
establishment within the corporate limits of the city shall pay a permit fee,
which shall extend to December 31 of the year issued. Said permit fee may be
prorated. If a permit for a permanent food service establishment is not
renewed on or prior to December 31 each year, a late penalty shall be paid
before the permit is reinstated.



   (B)   Health department permit fees.



      Category I                  $150.00



      Category II                  $100.00



      Category III                  $50.00



      Late Penalty                  $30.00



      Copy of Texas Food Establishment Rules   $10.00



   (C)   Fee exemptions. A food establishment operated solely by a
nonprofit charity shall be exempt from the fees imposed by this section;
provided, however, that such an establishment shall in all other respects be
subject to the regulations and permit requirements relating to food service
establishments. The regulatory authority may require any information
necessary to determine whether an organization is a nonprofit charity for
purposes of this exemption.



(Ord. 2002-12, passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 1-20-15; Am. Ord.
2018-4, passed 4-3-18)



§ 96.10  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Suspension of permit. The regulatory authority may, without
warning, advance notice, or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food
establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an
imminent hazard to public health or if any required fee has not been paid by
the appropriate deadline. Suspension is effective immediately upon service of
the notice required. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall cease
immediately. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall
be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within ten days of receipt of a
request for a hearing.



   (B)   Notice. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the
permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit
is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity
for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed
with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten days. If
no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is
sustained.



   (C)   Duration. Suspension of a food permit shall continue until the
regulatory authority determines, after an inspection, that the reasons for
suspension no longer exist or until all required fees have been paid, as
applicable.



   (D)   Other remedies reserved. Suspension of a food permit shall not
preclude the regulatory authority from taking any other enforcement action
authorized by law, including without limitation the revocation of the
suspended food permit.



   (E)   Posting. During the period of any permit suspension under this
section, the food service establishment subject to the suspension shall post
a sign clearly visible to the public outside of the establishment, which sign
shall state "Closed by the Environmental Services, Food Safety Division of
the City of Mount Pleasant." The regulatory authority shall have the
authority to reasonably regulate the size and location of the sign and the
size of the lettering thereon.



(Ord. 2002-12, passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 1-20-15)



§ 96.11  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Revocation of permit. The regulatory authority may, after
providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for repeated or serious
violations of any of the requirements of this chapter including failure to
pay any required fees, or for interference with the regulatory authority in
the performance of its duties.



   (B)   Notice and hearing. Prior to revocation, the regulatory
authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in
writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that
the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of
such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the
regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within the ten-day period,
the revocation of the permit becomes final.



   (C)   Other remedies reserved. Revocation of a food permit shall not
preclude the regulatory authority from taking any other enforcement action
authorized by law, including without limitation the enforcement of an any
criminal penalty authorized by this code.



(Ord. 2002-12, passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 1-20-15) Penalty, see
§ 96.99



§ 96.12  ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS.



   (A)   Service of notice. A notice as required in this chapter is
properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the
person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A
copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority.



   (B)   Conduct of hearings. The hearings provided for in this chapter
shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated
by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory
authority shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any
notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing
decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory
authority.



(Ord. 2002-12, passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 1-20-15)



§ 96.99  PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Penalty. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter
and any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise operates a food
service establishment that does not comply with the requirements of this
chapter and any responsible officer of that permit holder or those persons
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine as
provided in § 10.99 of this code. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Interference with posting. A person commits an offense if the
person removes, defaces, or makes illegible a posting or any part of a
posting required by the regulatory authority and shall be subject to a fine
as provided in § 10.99 of this code.



   (C)   Other remedies reserved. The imposition of penalty or
injunction in accordance with this section shall not preclude the regulatory
authority from taking any other enforcement action authorized by law,
including without limitation, the revocation or suspension of a food permit
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 2002-12, passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 1-20-15)



CHAPTER 97:  ANIMALS



Section




General Provisions




   97.01   Definitions



   97.02   Enforcement



   97.03   Animals at-large



   97.04   Disposal of dead animals



   97.05   Keeping of livestock



   97.06   Keeping of swine prohibited



   97.07   Keeping of fowl



   97.08   Keeping of rabbits



   97.09   Noises



   97.10   Number of dogs and cats limited



   97.11   Sanitation



   97.12   Hunting and/or trapping



   97.13   Damage or destruction of property



   97.14   Cruelty to animals



   97.15   Unlawful restraint of an animal




Dangerous Wild Animals




   97.20   Definitions




Dangerous Dogs




   97.25   Definitions



   97.26   Dangerous dogs prohibited



   97.27   Determination that a dog is dangerous



   97.28   Requirements for owner of dangerous dog



   97.29   Registration



   97.30   Attack by dangerous dog



   97.31   Officer safety



   97.32   Guard dogs




Dogs Dangerous to Persons




   97.35   Definitions



   97.36   Reserved



   97.37   Reserved



   97.38   Destruction of a dog



   97.39   Provocation or location of attack irrelevant




Impoundment




   97.45   Animal shelter



   97.46   Impoundment



   97.47   Authority to individuals to impound



   97.48   Notice of impoundment



   97.49   Redemption or adoption



   97.50   Euthanization of animals



   97.51   Fees



   97.52   Liability of owners




Rabies




   97.60   Designation of local rabies control authority



   97.61   Vaccination of domestic animals



   97.62   Vaccination tag



   97.63   Confidentiality



   97.64   Domestic animals exposed to rabies



   97.65   Animal bites to humans




Dog and Cat Sterilization




   97.70   Definitions



   97.71   Requirements for adoption



   97.72   Sterilization agreement



   97.73   Sterilization required



   97.74   Confirmation of sterilization



   97.75   Letter confirming animal’s death



   97.76   Letter concerning lost or stolen animal



   97.77   Reclamation



   97.78   Criminal penalty



   97.79   Surgery and other veterinary services



   97.80   Exemptions



 



   97.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.01  DEFINITIONS.



    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDON.  Fail to adequately provide an ANIMAL with one or more of the
necessities of life, including, but not limited to, air, food, potable water,
sanitary conditions, shelter, protection from the heat, cold, or other
environmental conditions, or under other circumstances that may cause bodily
injury, serious bodily injury, or death of the ANIMAL, for 24 or more hours,
or to leave an ANIMAL in the care, custody, or control of another person
without his or her consent.



   ANIMAL.  Any vertebrae creature, excluding human beings.



   ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY.  The Mount Pleasant Chief of Police or his
or her authorized designee.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  Any person designated by the City Manager to
represent and act for the city in the capture, care, and confinement of
ANIMALS.



   ANIMAL SHELTER.  Any facility designated by the City Manager to
temporarily contain, house, and care for DOMESTIC ANIMALS held under
authority of this chapter.



   AT-LARGE.  An ANIMAL not confined within a building, wall, or fence of
sufficient strength and construction to restrain the ANIMAL except when the
ANIMAL is on a leash, cord, rope, or chain of sufficient length and strength
to control the actions of the ANIMAL. An ANIMAL held within the arms of the
OWNER or HARBORER, or contained within the cabin of a vehicle of its OWNER or
HARBORER shall not be deemed AT-LARGE.



   CAT.  Any member of the animal species felis catus.



   DOG.  Any member of the animal species canis familiaris.



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL.  CAT, DOG, or ferret.



   FOWL.  Any chicken, turkey, goose, duck, guinea, emu, ostrich, or
pigeon.



   HARBORER/HARBORING.  The person or act of keeping and caring for an
ANIMAL for 72 consecutive hours or of providing a premises to which the
animal returns regularly (more than three occasions).



   LIVESTOCK.  Any cow, horse, mule, jack, jennet, goat, sheep, swine, or
any other form of LIVESTOCK.



   MICROCHIP.  A passive electronic device that is injected into an
ANIMAL by means of a hypodermic-type syringe device. Each MICROCHIP shall
contain a unique and original number that is read by an electronic scanning
device for purposes of ANIMAL identification and recovery by the animal’s
owners.



   OWNER/HARBORER.  Any person, firm, or corporation having right of
property to any ANIMAL, or who harbors, or who causes or permits to be
harbored, any ANIMAL on or about their property.



   RESCUE ORGANIZATION.  A group that has filed a certificate of
formation with the Texas Secretary of State, and are deemed tax exempt by the
Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts and the Federal Internal Revenue
Service; and provides such documented proof for review and holding.



   RESCUE ORGANIZATION MEMBER.  An authorized member representing a
RESCUE ORGANIZATION.



   QUARANTINE FACILITY.  Facility approved by the Texas Department of
Health for the strict confinement of an ANIMAL for rabies observation.



   VACCINATED.  Injection of a rabies vaccine approved by the United
States Department of Agriculture and administered in accordance with Tex.
Administrative Code, §§ 169.21 et seq. by a licensed veterinarian.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2008-3, passed 2-5-08; Am. Ord.
2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.02  ENFORCEMENT.



    (A)   The animal control officer shall have police powers in the
enforcement of this chapter and no person shall interfere with, hinder,
molest, or abuse this officer in the exercise of such powers.



   (B)   The animal control officer or any police officer shall have
the authority to issue citations for any violation of this chapter. If the
person is not present, the animal control officer or police officer may mail
the citation to the alleged violator by certified mail, return receipt
requested.



   (C)   The animal control officer or any police officer shall have
the privilege to enter upon any premises where any violation or suspicion of
a violation of this chapter occurs, and use such reasonable means as may be
necessary to abate violation.



   (D)   In addition to imposing a monetary penalty against a person
convicted of an offense under this section, a court or City Council may do
one or more of the following:



      (1)   Order the impoundment of any animal owned by a person,
forfeit the person's ownership of the animal, and award the animal to the
city; and/or



      (2)   Suspend the person's right to own an animal in the city
for a period of time specified by the court.



   (E)   Declaring a nuisance. It is unlawful and declared a nuisance
for any animal owner or keeper to allow an animal to unreasonably disturb the
peace of other people on the same, adjoining, or nearby property.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2008-25, passed 11-18-08; Am. Ord.
2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 2017-21, passed 12-19-17) Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.03  ANIMALS AT-LARGE.



    (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who own or
harbor any animal to permit any animal to run at-large, as defined in this
chapter, within the corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   The animal control officer or police officer is authorized to
impound any animal running at-large and to enter upon private property for
that purpose.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17) Penalty, see § 97.99



Statutory reference:



   Animals at-large, see Tex. Local Gov't Code, § 215.026



   Registration and restraint of dogs and cats, see Tex. Health and Safety
Code, § 826.033 and Tex. Agricultural Code, § 143.102



§ 97.04  DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.



    The carcass of any dead animal shall be removed and disposed of by the
owner or the owner of premises where such animal is found, at the expense of
the owner of said animal or owner of the property within 24 hours after such
death.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.05  KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK.



    (A)   No person or persons shall keep or pen any livestock, except
swine provided for in § 97.06, in any enclosure of less than two acres in
total area, and within 200 feet of any building or structure used as a
residence, meeting place, public property, or business, except of the owner
of such livestock; and



   (B)   Provided that said enclosure be restricted to no more than one
such animal for each half acre of land contained in the enclosure and owned
or leased by person or persons.



   (C)   This section does not apply to the temporary possession of
livestock at packing houses, veterinary clinics, or duly authorized stock
show, rodeo, fair, circus, carnival, or livestock auction barn. Temporary
possession shall not exceed 72 hours.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.06  KEEPING OF SWINE PROHIBITED.



    No person or persons shall keep any swine, including Asian potbellied
pigs, within the corporate city limits. This section does not apply to the
temporary possession of swine at a packing house, veterinary clinic, or duly
authorized stock show, rodeo, fair, or livestock auction barn. Temporary
possession shall not exceed 72 hours.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.07  KEEPING OF FOWL.



    No person shall keep any fowl within the corporate city limits. This
section does not apply to commercial poultry operations duly authorized by
the city to conduct such business.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.08  KEEPING OF RABBITS.



    (A)   No person or persons may keep more than four rabbits within
the corporate city limits except for pet shops, veterinary clinics, or animal
kennels. Rabbits must be kept within an enclosure upon the owner’s or
harborer's property.



   (B)   ENCLOSURE shall mean a structure with four secure sides, a
secure bottom, and secure top. The structure shall provide protection from
the weather.



   (C)   The enclosure shall not be located within 200 feet of any
building or structure used as a residence, meeting place, public property, or
business, other than that of the owner or harborer.



   (D)   This section does not apply to veterinary clinics, animal
kennels, or pet shops.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.09  NOISES.



    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep or harbor an
animal upon their premises that causes the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood, or the occupants of adjacent premises, to be disturbed at any
time of the day or night.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.10  NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS LIMITED.



   (A)   Limitations. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to
keep or harbor more than four dogs, cats, or ferrets, of any combination,
over the age of two months. This section shall not apply to veterinary
clinics, animal kennels, pet shops, or rescue organizations.



   (B)   Rescue organization permit required to house rescue animals.



      (1)   Any rescue organization designated person approved by
the Animal Control Authority, desiring to keep more animals than allowed by
this section, may apply with the Department for a multiple pet permit not to
exceed eight total animals at any one location.



      (2)   The Department shall issue the permit if the following
conditions are met:



         (a)   Inspection required. Applicants shall submit to an
in-home and property inspection by the city animal control officer prior to
the issuance of a multiple pet permit. A permit shall not be issued or can be
immediately revoked, if a permit has been given by the Chief of Police or
designee if an inspection determines:



            1.   That the requested number of animals cannot
be maintained without creating noise or odor nuisances;



            2.   That the requested number of animals cannot
be maintained in a healthy and sanitary environment;



            3.   The number of dogs and cats exceeds eight
animals being harbored;



            4.   Animals are not kept secured by a fence or
kennel or are found to be tethered;



            5.   Animals are not receiving adequate shelter,
food, water, or medical treatment; or



            6.   Animals housed by rescue organization members
for another rescue organization are kept longer than 90 days, counting the
day of release from the Mount Pleasant Animal Shelter.



         (b)   No inspection required. Applicants who provide
proof of having a current multiple pet permit, and who have not obtained
additional animals since their last inspection, and have had no enforcement
actions for violating this chapter during the preceding 12 months, may be
issued a permit without inspection. The Department may require an inspection
during reasonable hours at its discretion regardless of the applicant's
history.



      (3)   All multiple pet permits issued under this section shall
be valid for one year from the date of issuance, and shall be valid only as
to the applicant and location for which it was originally issued.



      (4)   A person commits an offense if the person is a holder of
a multiple pet permit and he refuses, upon request by an animal control
officer during reasonable hours, to make his animals, premises, facilities,
equipment, and any necessary registrations or permits available for
inspection.



      (5)   A person commits an offense if the person is a holder of
a multiple pet permit and he refuses to show his permit upon request by an
animal control officer.



      (6)   A person commits an offense if he is the holder of a
multiple pet permit and harbors more animals than authorized in his permit.



      (7)   A person commits an offense if the person is a holder of
a multiple pet permit and is found in violation of this section and fails to
return an assigned rescue animal to the shelter upon receiving verbal or
written notice from an animal control officer.



      (8)   A person commits an offense each day he is in violation
of this section.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.11  SANITATION.



    It is unlawful for any person or persons in possession of any animal
to maintain any structure, barn, stable, pen, enclosure, yard, or place in
which animals are confined, in a manner that causes odors offensive to
persons of ordinary sensibilities residing in the vicinity, to breed or
attract flies, mosquitoes, or other insects, to provide, convenient food for
rodents or wildlife, or that is unclean, unsanitary, unpleasant, or obnoxious.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.12  HUNTING AND/OR TRAPPING.



    (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, trap, or pursue
any animal inside the corporate city limits. No person shall use firearms,
including an air gun, or other weapon potentially harmful to wildlife or
humans to pursue or hunt any animal within the corporate limits of the city.
This section does not apply to live trapping authorized by the Police
Department or animal control officer, or the trapping of rats, mice, gophers,
or moles.



   (B)   This section is not to be construed to prevent the Police
Department, animal control officer, duly authorized agent of the city, or a
citizen from killing or trapping animals in order to protect life or
property, or to comply with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.13  DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



    It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer to allow any animal to
damage or destroy public or private property, not their own, while restrained
or at-large.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.14  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.



    It is unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly:



   (A)   Torture an animal;



   (B)   Fail unreasonably to provide necessary food, clean water,
care, and shelter for an animal in the person's custody;



   (C)   Abandon unreasonably an animal in person's custody;



   (D)   Transport or confine an animal in a cruel manner;



   (E)   Kill, seriously injure, or administer poison to an animal
belonging to another without legal authority or the owner's effective
consent, except when an animal is discovered on the person's property in the
act of or immediately after injuring or killing livestock or fowl;



   (F)   Cause one animal or fowl to fight with another;



   (G)   Use a live animal as a lure in dog race training or in a dog
coursing on a racetrack;



   (H)   Trip a horse;



   (I)   Seriously overwork an animal; or



   (J)   Leave an animal in or on a motor vehicle in which any motor
vehicle is moving, standing, or parked in such a way to endanger the animal's
health, safety, or welfare. An animal services officer or police officer is
authorized to use reasonable force to remove the animal from the vehicle
whenever it appears that the animal's health, safety, or welfare is or will
be endangered. The animal shall be taken to the shelter or to a veterinarian
if the animal is in distress. A written notice bearing the name of the
officer removing the animal, a telephone number where he can be contacted,
and the location where the animal may be claimed by the owner shall be
attached to the vehicle if the owner is not present. Any person violating
this section shall bear the full cost and expense incurred by the city in the
care, medical treatment, impoundment cost, and disposal of said animal,
including removal from and damage done to the vehicle.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



Statutory reference:



   Disorderly conduct and related offenses, see Tex. Penal Code, §§
42.01 et seq.



§ 97.15  UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT OF AN ANIMAL.



    (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      COLLAR.  Any collar constructed of nylon, leather, or other
similar material, specifically designed to be used for a dog.



      PROPERLY FITTED.  With respect to a collar, a collar that
measures the circumference of a dog or cat's neck plus at least one inch.



      RESTRAIN/TETHER.  A rope, leash, cable, chain, pulley system, or
other similar tethering device.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if he uses a chain, rope, tether,
leash, cable, or other device to attach a dog to a stationary object or
trolley system. This section does not prohibit a person from walking a dog
with a hand-held leash.



   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that:



      (1)   The dog is being tethered during a lawful animal event,
veterinary treatment, grooming, training, or law enforcement activity;



      (2)   The dog tethering is required to protect the safety or
welfare of a person or the dog, and the dog's owner maintains direct physical
control of the dog;



      (3)   The dog tethering is due to force majeure and the dog is
tethered for less than one hour within a 24 hour period; or



      (4)   The dog tethering:



         (a)   Occurs while the dog is within the owners direct
physical control; and



         (b)   Prevents the dog from advancing to the edge of any
public right-of-way.



   (D)   Outdoor kennels used to house and contain an animal must be at
a minimum no less than 50 square feet per animal providing for adequate
movement of each animal. Nursing animals under three months of age may be
kenneled together.



(Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS



§ 97.20  DEFINITIONS.



    (A)   The term dangerous wild animal means any:



      (1)   Poisonous reptile;



      (2)   Any animal of the crocodilian order;



      (3)   Lion;



      (4)   Tiger;



      (5)   Ocelot;



      (6)   Cougar;



      (7)   Leopard;



      (8)   Cheetah;



      (9)   Jaguar;



      (10)   Bobcat;



      (11)   Lynx;



      (12)   Serval;



      (13)   Caracal;



      (14)   Hyena;



      (15)   Bear;



      (16)   Coyote;



      (17)   Jackal;



      (18)   Nonhuman primate;



      (19)   Wolf;



      (20)   Fox;



      (21)   Camel;



      (22)   Raccoon;



      (23)   Skunk;



      (24)   Bat; and



      (25)   Any hybrid of an animal listed herein.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to import, offer for sale
or trade, keep, or harbor in the city any dangerous wild animal as defined
herein.



   (C)   This section does not apply to:



      (1)   A county, municipality, agency of the state, or an
agency of the United States, or an agent or official of a county,
municipality, or agency acting in an official capacity;



      (2)   An organization that is an accredited member of the
American Zoo and Aquarium Association;



      (3)   An injured, infirm, orphaned, or abandoned dangerous
wild animal while being transported for care or treatment;



      (4)   An injured, infirm, orphaned, or abandoned dangerous
wild animal while being rehabilitated, treated, or cared for by a licensed
veterinarian, an incorporated humane society or animal shelter, or a person
who holds a rehabilitation permit issued under Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code,
§§ 42.021 et seq. for the species of animal being rehabilitated;



      (5)   A dangerous wild animal owned by and in the custody and
control of a transient circus company if:



         (a)   The animal is used as an integral part of the
circus performances; and



         (b)   The animal is kept within this city only during
the time the circus is performing in this city;



      (6)   A dangerous wild animal while in the temporary custody
or control of a television or motion picture production company during the
filming of a television or motion picture production in this city;



      (7)   A dangerous wild animal owned by and in the possession,
custody, or control of a college or university solely as a mascot for the
college or university; and



      (8)   A dangerous wild animal while being transported in
interstate commerce through the state in compliance with the Animal Welfare
Act, 7 USC 2131 et seq. and its subsequent amendments and the regulations
adopted under that Act.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



Statutory reference:



   Dangerous wild animals, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, §§ 822.001
et seq. (Subchapter E)



DANGEROUS DOGS



§ 97.25  DEFINITIONS.



    For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DANGEROUS DOG.  A dog that:



      (1)   Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes
bodily injury and occurs while the dog is at-large;



      (2)   Commits unprovoked acts while dog is at-large and those
acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause
bodily injury to that person; or



      (3)   Injures or kills a domestic animal without provocation
while at-large.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.26  DANGEROUS DOGS PROHIBITED.



    As a public safety requirement, it shall be unlawful for any person to
keep or harbor any dangerous dog within the corporate limits of the city
without complying with the provisions listed herein and/or state law
requirements to keep a dangerous dog on the owner's premises.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2008-3, passed 2-5-08; Am. Ord.
2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 2017-21, passed 12-19-17) Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.27  DETERMINATION THAT A DOG IS DANGEROUS.



    (A)   The Animal Control Authority shall be notified of a dangerous
dog investigation when initiated by animal control officers. Once the
investigation is complete, the case and all evidence is forwarded to the
Animal Control Authority for review and determination if the dog is deemed a
dangerous dog. The owner of the dog being investigated shall pay to the city
all fees and expenses associated to keep the dog impounded, if applicable,
during the course of the investigation, which should be concluded within
three business days in most circumstances.



   (B)   If the Animal Control Authority determines that the dog, which
is the subject of the investigation, is a dangerous dog, the Animal Control
Authority will notify the animal's owner by certified mail, return-receipt
requested, that a determination has been made that the dog is a dangerous
dog. In lieu of notice by certified mail, the Animal Control Authority may
elect to have the notice personally served by an animal control officer or
police officer of the city.



   (C)   Upon notice to the owner that his or her dog is declared a
dangerous dog, the Animal Control Authority, or an animal control officer
with a city police officer, shall immediately seize and impound the dangerous
dog with a seizure order issued by the Municipal Judge or Magistrate. The dog
owner must notify the Animal Control Authority, either verbally or in
writing, of his or her plan to appeal the dangerous dog declaration within 72
hours. If notified of an appeal within 72 hours of the dangerous dog
declaration, the Animal Control Authority shall suspend further action
involving the dog until the Municipal Court has rendered a final decision.
The owner of the dangerous dog shall pay to the city all fees and expenses
associated to keep the dog impounded during the duration of the appeal
process.



   (D)   Once the owner notifies the Animal Control Authority of their
intention to appeal, the owner shall notify the Municipal Court, in writing,
within 15 days of the determination for a hearing de novo. The Animal Control
Authority or representative shall furnish the Municipal Court Judge with all
reports, memoranda, and other tangible evidence received by the Animal
Control Authority, as well as a summary of the evidence and the Animal
Control Authority's findings. The Municipal Court Judge's decision will be
made by a de novo hearing with the appeal of such judgment being in the same
manner as in other civil cases. Each day following the finding will
constitute a violation of this section if the owner fails to comply with
state law requirements for dangerous dogs.



   (E)   The Municipal Court Judge may also require the attendance of
complainant, any known witnesses, the animal owner against whom the complaint
was filed, and the Animal Control Authority or his or her representative. At
this appeals hearing, the city shall be represented by the City Attorney or
an assistant.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2008-3, passed 2-5-08; Am. Ord.
2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



Statutory reference:



   Dangerous dogs, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, §§ 822.041 et seq.



§ 97.28  REQUIREMENTS FOR OWNER OF DANGEROUS DOG.



    (A)   When a person learns that the person is the owner of a
dangerous dog, the owner shall comply with Tex. Health and Safety Code §
822.042. For purposes of the section, a person learns that the person is the
owner of a dangerous dog when:



      (1)   The owner knows of conduct by the dog described under
the definition of a dangerous dog in § 97.25 of this subchapter;



      (2)   The owner knows of conduct by the dog described in Tex.
Health and Safety Code § 822.041(2)(B);



      (3)   The owner is informed by the Animal Control Authority
that a determination has been made that the dog is a dangerous dog; or



      (4)   The owner is informed after an appeal hearing by the
Municipal Court Judge that the dog is a dangerous dog.



   (B)   If a person outside the city limits wants to move inside the
city limits, and is an owner of a dog declared dangerous by another city or
jurisdiction, the owner must notify the Animal Control Authority before
moving the dog inside the city limits. The Animal Control Authority will
determine if the dog will be allowed to be kept at a residence inside the
city and the dog owner shall be held to all rules and regulations per this
subchapter and state law regarding dangerous dogs.



   (C)   Declaration by Municipal Court Judge. Not later than the tenth
day after a person learns by the Municipal Court Judge at the appeal hearing
that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog:



      (1)   The dangerous dog shall be euthanized if so ordered by
the court; or



      (2)   If the dangerous dog is not ordered to be euthanized,
the person shall have the dangerous dog returned to him or her when the
following requirements are met:



         (a)   Register the dangerous dog with the Animal Control
Authority for the area in which the dog is kept and pay an annual
registration fee of $250 to the city plus the cost of a dangerous dog tag;



         (b)   Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash
in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure. Such dog shall
not be leashed to an inanimate object such as a tree, post, building, and the
like. Each dangerous dog on a leash outside the animal's secure enclosure
must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent the dog from
biting persons or other animals but will not harm the dog itself; and



         (c)   Obtain (and show proof annually to the Animal
Control Authority) liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility
in an amount of at least $100,000 to cover damages resulting from an attack
by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 2-5-08; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.29  REGISTRATION.



    (A)   An owner of a dangerous dog must annually register with the
Animal Control Authority for the area in which the dog is kept and the owner
must:



      (1)   Present proof of:



         (a)   Liability insurance or financial responsibility,
as required by Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 822.042; and



         (b)   Current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog;
and



         (c)   The approved secure enclosure in which the
dangerous dog will be kept; and



      (2)   Pay an annual registration fee of $250.



   (B)   The Animal Control Authority shall provide to the owner
registering a dangerous dog a registration tag at the owner's expense. The
owner must place the tag on the dog's collar.



   (C)   The dog must be spayed or neutered within ten days of being
declared a dangerous dog.



   (D)   The dog must be microchipped with a national registry by a
licensed veterinarian at the time the dog was spayed or neutered and the
owner must provide such proof to Animal Control.



   (E)   The owner of a registered dangerous dog shall provide to the
Animal Control Authority two color photographs of the registered animal in
two different poses showing the color and approximate size of the dog.



   (F)   If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the
dog to a new address inside the city limits, the owner, not later than the
fourteenth day after the date of the sale or move, shall notify the Animal
Control Authority for this area in which the new address is located. On
presentation by the current owner of the dangerous dog's prior registration
tag and payment of a $125 fee, the Animal Control Authority shall issue a new
registration tag to be placed on the dangerous dog's collar. If the owner
moves the dog to another location outside the city limits, the owner shall
notify the local Animal Control Authority of the dangerous dog's new location
within 15 days of moving. If the dog is transferred to a new owner, the
former owner is required, within ten days, to notify the Animal Control
Authority of the new owner's address and name and the official date of
transfer of ownership of the dangerous dog.



   (G)   An owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the office
in which the dangerous dog was registered of any attacks the dangerous dog
makes on people.



   (H)   If the owner of a dangerous dog fails to register the dog as
required by this section, such failure shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor
punishable as allowable by law.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 2-5-08; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.30  ATTACK BY DANGEROUS DOG.



    (A)   A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a
dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person
outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person.



   (B)   An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor, but
state law allows for more serious charges to be filed if the owner is found
negligent in keeping the dangerous dog secured as required by law.



   (C)   If the dangerous dog attacks and seriously injures or causes
the death of a human, city animal control officers or police officers may
seize the animal and it will be euthanized as soon as possible and practical.
If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may
order the dangerous dog destroyed by a person listed in Tex. Health and
Safety Code, § 822.003.



   (D)   In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an
offense under this section is liable for a civil penalty as determined by
statute. The City Attorney or an assistant may file suit in a court of
competent jurisdiction to collect the penalty. Penalties collected under this
section shall be retained by the city.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 2-5-08; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.31  OFFICER SAFETY.



    There is no provision in this subchapter requiring an Animal Control
Officer or a police officer to place his or her personal safety at risk
attempting to capture, impound, trap, or otherwise detain a known dangerous
dog or dog suspected to be vicious and/or dangerous by its actions or
demeanor. For their safety, officers of the Police Department and city animal
control officers are authorized to use force, including deadly force, to stop
a current or imminent attack upon themselves or a third person by a dog,
whether or not the dog has been declared to be a dangerous dog.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 2-5-08; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.32  GUARD DOGS.



    (A)   It shall be unlawful to place or maintain any dog solely for
the protection of persons and/or property unless the dog is physically
confined to a specific enclosed area. The enclosed area in which the dog is
confined must be within a chain link fence of a least six feet in height and
is reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its
own.



   (B)   The area in which the dog is confined must be conspicuously
posted with warning signs bearing letters not less than two inches high,
stating "Guard Dog," and placed not less than every 25 feet, on each side of
the structure or barrier confining dog(s). No less than one warning sign
shall be posted.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 2-5-08; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



DOGS DANGEROUS TO PERSONS



§ 97.35  DEFINITIONS.



    For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY.  An injury characterized by severe bite wounds
or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause a reasonably prudent
person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require
hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical
treatment.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.36  RESERVED.



§ 97.37  RESERVED.



§ 97.38  DESTRUCTION OF A DOG.



    The destruction of a dog under this subchapter must be performed by:



   (A)   A licensed veterinarian;



   (B)   Personnel of a recognized animal shelter or humane society who
are trained in the humane destruction of animals; or



   (C)   Personnel of a governmental agency responsible for animal
control who are trained in the humane destruction of animals.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.39  PROVOCATION OR LOCATION OF ATTACK IRRELEVANT.



    This subchapter applies to any dog that causes a person's death or
serious bodily injury by attacking, biting, or mauling the person, regardless
of whether the dog was provoked and regardless of where the incident
resulting in the person's death or serious bodily injury occurred.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2008-3, passed 2-5-08; Am. Ord.
2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



Statutory reference:



   Dogs that are a danger to persons, see Tex. Health and Safety Code,
§§ 822.001 et seq.



IMPOUNDMENT



§ 97.45  ANIMAL SHELTER.



    For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL SHELTER.  A facility designated by the City Manager to
temporarily contain, house, and care for domestic animals held under
authority of this chapter.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.46  IMPOUNDMENT.



    Any animal found in violation of the terms of this chapter or law of
the State of Texas may be seized and impounded by the animal control officer,
police officer, or duly authorized agent of the city.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.47  AUTHORITY TO INDIVIDUALS TO IMPOUND.



    (A)   If any animal shall be found to be at-large upon the premises
of any person, other than the owner or harborer of such animal, that person
shall have the right to confine animal in a humane manner until an animal
control officer or police officer can be notified.



   (B)   Any citizen of the city is hereby authorized to take control
of and deliver to the office of Animal Services any animal that may be found
running at large within the territorial limits of the city, other than
prohibited animals or animals suspected of being rabid, subject to the
applicable provisions of law.



   (C)   A person commits, an offense if he takes control of an animal
under this section and fails to deliver it to an Animal Services employee
within 72 hours.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.48  NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT.



    Reasonable effort shall be made by the animal control officer to
contact the owner or harborer of an impounded animal, however the
responsibility for an animal rests solely with the owner or harborer of such
animal.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.49  REDEMPTION OR ADOPTION.



    (A)   If the owner of any animal impounded pursuant to this
subchapter shall appear and claim the animal within 72 hours, excluding
Sunday and holidays, the animal control officer shall, if satisfied that such
person is the true owner, relinquish the animal to that person upon payment
of fees for impoundment. The owner or harborer of such animal must provide
proof that the animal has been vaccinated within the subsequent 12 months. If
proof cannot he shown that animal has been vaccinated within the subsequent
12 months, the owner or harborer shall pay to the city an amount equal to the
cost of the vaccination of the animal and shall receive a receipt which shall
be presented to a licensed veterinarian in the city who shall vaccinate the
animal and then bill the city for vaccination.



   (B)   If any animal is not redeemed within 72 hours, excluding
Sunday and holidays, and after reasonable effort has been made to locate the
owner or harborer, it shall be considered abandoned and becomes the sole
property of the city regardless of where the animal was found or who
delivered the animal to the city. The animal may be subject to adoption after
payment by the prospective owner of all applicable vaccination,
sterilization, and/or impoundment fees. Adopted animals are not guaranteed as
to health, temperament, or longevity, and no refund of fees shall be allowed.



   (C)   Home quarantine may be approved by the Animal Control
Authority where all of the following requirements are met:



      (1)   The animal owner is a resident of the city and has a
facility in the city limits to provide absolute security and isolation for
the animal. If the owner of a biting animal fails to keep the animal so
confined, an offense shall have been committed.



      (2)   The owner of the biting animal agrees that he will have
the animal inspected by a licensed veterinarian on the first day of isolation
and on the day immediately following the ten-day isolation period. The owner
further agrees to furnish the Animal Control Authority with a certificate of
health showing the animal to be free of rabies. If the owner of the biting
animal fails to have the animal inspected on the first day of and on the day
immediately following this ten-day observation period as required, an offense
shall have been committed.



      (3)   The biting animal was currently vaccinated and was not
at large at the time of the bite. If an animal dies while in home quarantine,
the Animal Control Authority shall be notified immediately, and the animal
will be surrendered to the Animal Control Authority for testing.



      (4)   Failure to comply with the home observation requirements
shall constitute an offense.



   (D)   A microchip implant in the animal is required before release.
If the animal is not already identifiable by microchip, the owner shall pay a
fee to have the microchip implanted in the animal prior to release.



   (E)   Sterilization of animal required.



      (1)   Before release the owner shall submit proof of having
had the animal sterilized. Any found animal released from the shelter, even
animals claimed by an owner, are required to have the animal sterilized
within 30 days of its release. The proof shall be a completed sterilization
certification form provided by Animal Services signed by the sterilizing
veterinarian.



      (2)   Division (E)(1) above shall not apply if the owner
provides proof that the animal meets the following conditions at the time of
impoundment:



         (a)   Either the animal is registered with a national
registry and is a certified member of a local breed club, sporting, or
hunting club; or



         (b)   The animal was a professionally trained assistance
or police service animal; or



         (c)   The animal was at large due to forces of nature,
fire, or the criminal act of a third party who was not residing at the animal
owner's residence, and there is documented proof from a city or county
official stating the fact.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2004-17, passed 10-5-04; Am. Ord.
2008-3, passed 2-5-08; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 2017-21,
passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.50  EUTHANIZATION OF ANIMALS.



    (A)   If any animal is not redeemed or adopted within a 72-hour
period, excluding Sunday and holidays, and after the animal becomes the sole
property of the city by virtue of this chapter, the animal control officer is
authorized to humanely destroy the animal and dispose of the carcass.



   (B)   Any nursing animal impounded without the mother, or where the
mother will not or cannot provide nutritious milk, may be euthanized
immediately to prevent further suffering.



   (C)   Any animal impounded and considered by the animal control
officer to be feral or of a nature that would cause injury to a person may be
euthanized immediately, except when such animal has inflicted a bite to a
human during the preceding ten days.



   (D)   Any animal taken into custody that, in the opinion of the
animal control officer, is visibly afflicted with any sign of communicable
disease or appears to be mortally injured may be euthanized immediately to
prevent future suffering.



   (E)   Any owner or harborer may relinquish ownership to any animal
in writing to the animal control officer, who shall then have authority to
immediately euthanize such animal, except when such animal has inflicted a
bite to a human during the preceding ten days or if the animal is viable for
adoption.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.51  FEES.



    The following fees shall be charged for the impoundment of any animal:



   (A)   Impoundment fee - first
day                        $25



   (B)   Each subsequent
day                           $10



   (C)   Redemption      Impoundment fee, and if necessary,
actual cost of vaccination(s)



   (D)   Adoption fee               Actual cost of
vaccination(s) and sterilization



   (E)   Microchip
fee                                 $10



   (F)   Owner requested and ACO approved euthanization
fee            $10



   (G)   Dangerous dog impound
fee                        $50 per calendar day



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2008-18, passed 8-19-08; Am. Ord.
2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.52  LIABILITY OF OWNERS.



    The payment of impound fees shall not exempt an owner or harborer from
prosecution under this chapter.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



RABIES



§ 97.60  DESIGNATION OF LOCAL RABIES CONTROL AUTHORITY.



    The city shall designate an officer to act as the "Local Rabies
Control Authority" for the purposes of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.61  VACCINATION OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS.



    (A)   The owner or harborer of any domestic animal shall have such
animal vaccinated against rabies by the time such animal is four months of
age and within every subsequent 12 months thereafter.



   (B)   All vaccinations of a domestic animal shall be done by a
licensed veterinarian. Upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall give to the
owner or harborer a vaccination certificate which shall include:



      (1)   Owner or harborer's name, address, and phone number;



      (2)   Animal identification;



      (3)   Vaccine used, and producer of vaccine;



      (4)   Date vaccinated;



      (5)   Rabies tag number; and



      (6)   Veterinarian's signature and license number.



   (C)   Upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall issue to the owner or
harborer a suitable metal tag to be placed on a collar around the animal's
neck, and on such tag there shall be stamped an identifying number, and the
name, address, and phone number of the issuing veterinarian.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.62  VACCINATION TAG.



    It shall be unlawful for any owner or harborer of any domestic animal
to allow such animal to be without a current vaccination tag upon a collar
around such animal's neck at anytime.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.63  CONFIDENTIALITY.



   Information that is contained in a rabies vaccination certificate that
identifies or tends to identify the owner or an address, telephone number, or
other personally identifying information of the owner of the vaccinated
animal is confidential and not subject to disclosure under Tex. Gov’t Code,
§§ 552.001 et seq.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.64  DOMESTIC ANIMALS EXPOSED TO RABIES.



    (A)   This section applies only for domestic animals that can be
legally vaccinated for rabies and have been exposed by physical contact with
a rabid animal or suspected rabid animal.



   (B)   The owner of such animal shall notify the local rabies
authority or designated agent within 24 hours of an incident, who shall
investigate and if investigation warrants, follow the requirements set forth
herein.



   (C)   If the exposed animal was currently vaccinated (more than 30
days prior to bite and within the past 12 months) against rabies at the time
of exposure, it must be:



      (1)   Humanely destroyed; or



      (2)   Vaccinated against rabies immediately and placed in
strict isolation for 45 days. STRICT ISOLATION shall be defined as a secure,
locked enclosure that would prevent the animal from escape, prevent access to
the animal by the public, and care of animal restricted to one individual.



      (3)   The owner or harborer of such animal shall he
responsible for all cost associated with this section.



   (D)   If the exposed animal was not vaccinated against rabies at the
time of the exposure it must be:



      (1)   Humanely destroyed; or



      (2)   Vaccinated against rabies:



         (a)   Immediately after exposure;



         (b)   Given a second vaccination three weeks after
exposure; and



         (c)   Given a third vaccination eight weeks after
exposure; and



      (3)   Placed in strict isolation for 90 days from date of
exposure; and



      (4)   The owner or harborer of such animal shall be
responsible for all cost associated with this section.



   (E)   Any veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies or any person
who suspects rabies in an animal shall immediately notify the local rabies
control authority or designated agent for investigation.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.65  ANIMAL BITES TO HUMANS.



    (A)   The owner or harborer of a domestic animal that has bitten
any person must report the event to the local rabies control authority or
designated agent within 24 hours of such bite for investigation. Every
physician or other medical practitioner who treats a person or person(s) for
such bites shall, within 12 hours, report such treatment to the local rabies
control authority or designated agent for investigation. Bites by birds or
reptiles are exempted from this section.



   (B)   When a domestic animal has bitten any person, the owner or
harborer shall be required to place the animal in quarantine, or the owner or
harborer may sign a release allowing the animal to be humanely destroyed and
tested at owner’s or harborer’s expense. The animal should be placed in
quarantine as soon as possible after the bite incident. The ten-day
observation period begins on the first day of occurrence of bite.



      (1)   Unvaccinated animals should not be vaccinated for rabies
during the observation period, however the animal may be treated for
unrelated medical problems.



      (2)   An unowned domestic animal that has bitten a person may
be humanely destroyed and tested.



      (3)   A high risk animal (bat, raccoon, fox, skunk, or coyote)
that has bitten a person must be humanely destroyed and tested.



      (4)   A low risk animal that has bitten someone does not have
to be tested unless the local rabies control authority or designated agent
suspects rabies.



      (5)   An animal that inflicts multiple wounds to a person may
be required by the local rabies control authority or designated agent to be
humanely destroyed and tested.



      (6)   Animals that are not defined herein as domestic animals
or high risk animals (as defined in § 97.65(C)(3)), that have bitten a
person, may at the discretion of the local rabies control authority, be
humanely destroyed and tested, or be quarantined or suitably confined for 30
days for observation.



      (7)   Currently vaccinated (prior 12 months) therapy or police
dogs may not be required to be quarantined.



      (8)   Any animal that cannot be quarantined properly must be
humanely destroyed and tested.



      (9)   The owner or harborer of such animal shall be
responsible for all costs associated with this section.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



Statutory reference:



   Rabies control act, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, §§ 826.001 et
seq.



DOG AND CAT STERILIZATION



§ 97.70  DEFINITIONS.



    For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   NEW OWNER.  A person who is legally competent to enter into a binding
contract and who is adopting a dog or cat from the animal shelter.



   STERILIZATION.  The surgical removal of the reproductive organs of a
dog or cat to render the animal unable to reproduce.



   VETERINARIAN.  A person licensed to practice veterinary medicine by
the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.71  REQUIREMENTS FOR ADOPTION.



    Except as provided by § 97.80, the animal shelter may not release a
dog or cat for adoption unless the animal has been sterilized or the release
is made to a new owner who signs an agreement to have the animal sterilized.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.72  STERILIZATION AGREEMENT.



    (A)   The sterilization agreement used by the animal shelter must
contain:



      (1)   The date of the agreement;



      (2)   The names, addresses, and signatures of the releasing
agency and the new owner;



      (3)   A description of the animal to be adopted;



      (4)   The sterilization due date; and



      (5)   A statement, printed in conspicuous, bold print, that
sterilization of the animal is required under Tex. Health and Safety Code,
§§ 828.001 et seq., and that a violation of this section is a criminal
offense punishable as a Class C misdemeanor.



   (B)   The sterilization completion date contained in the
sterilization agreement must be:



      (1)   The thirtieth day after the date of adoption in the case
of an adult animal; or



      (2)   The thirtieth day after a specified date estimated to be
the date an adopted infant female animal becomes six months old or an adopted
infant male animal becomes eight months old.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)   Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.73  STERILIZATION REQUIRED.



    (A)   Except as provided by this section, a new owner who signs an
agreement under § 97.71 shall have the adopted animal sterilized on or
before the sterilization completion date stated in the agreement.



   (B)   If the sterilization completion date falls on a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday, the deadline is extended to the first day that is
not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.



   (C)   The animal shelter may extend the deadline for 30 days on
presentation of a written report from a licensed veterinarian stating that
the life or health of the adopted animal may be jeopardized by surgery. There
is no limit on the number of extensions that may be granted under this
section.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.74  CONFIRMATION OF STERILIZATION.



    (A)   Except as provided by §§ 97.75 or 97.76, each new owner who
signs a sterilization agreement under § 97.71 shall deliver to the animal
shelter from which the animal was adopted a letter signed by the veterinarian
who performed the surgery.



   (B)   The letter must be delivered in person or by mail not later
than the seventh day after the date on which the animal was sterilized.



   (C)   The letter must state that the animal has been sterilized,
briefly describe the animal, and provide the date of sterilization.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.75  LETTER CONCERNING ANIMAL'S DEATH.



    (A)   If an adopted animal dies on or before the sterilization
completion date agreed to under § 97.71, the new owner shall deliver to the
animal shelter a signed letter stating that the animal is dead.



   (B)   The letter must be delivered not later than the seventh day
after the date of the animal's death and must describe the cause of death, if
known, and provide the date of death.



   (C)   The letter required by this section is in lieu of the letter
required by § 97.74.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.76  LETTER CONCERNING LOST OR STOLEN ANIMAL.



    (A)   If an adopted animal is lost or stolen before the
sterilization completion date agreed to under § 97.71, the new owner shall
deliver to the animal shelter a letter stating that the animal is lost or
stolen.



   (B)   The letter must be delivered not later than the seventh day
after the date of the animal's disappearance and must describe the
circumstances surrounding the disappearance and provide the approximate date
of the disappearance.



   (C)   The letter required by this section is in lieu of the letter
required by § 97.74.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.77  RECLAMATION.



    (A)   If the animal shelter does not receive a letter after the
expiration of the seventh day after the sterilization completion date agreed,
the Animal Control Officer may promptly reclaim the animal from the new
owner. The animal will become the sole property of the city at the time of
reclamation.



   (B)   A person may not prevent, obstruct, or interfere with
reclamation under this section.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.78  CRIMINAL PENALTY.



    (A)   A new owner that violates this chapter commits an offense.



   (B)   An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)   Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.79  SURGERY AND OTHER VETERINARY SERVICES.



    Surgery performed in accordance with this chapter must be performed by
a veterinarian or a full time student of an accredited college of veterinary
medicine as provided by the Veterinary Licensing Act (Article 8890, Vernon's
Texas Civil Statutes).



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



§ 97.80  EXEMPTIONS.



    This subchapter does not apply to:



   (A)   A dog or cat that is claimed from the animal shelter by a
person who already owns the animal; or



   (B)   An institution of higher education that purchases or otherwise
procures a dog or cat for the purpose of biomedical research, testing, or
teaching.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



Statutory reference:



   Dog and cat sterilization, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, §§
828.001 et seq.



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



    (A)   Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision
of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided by the State of
Texas or § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   A violation of any provision of §§ 97.25 through 97.32 shall
constitute an offense punishable as allowable by law. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense. The owner may instead or also be
charged for violation(s) of state law regarding dangerous dogs that may
result in a more severe charge and penalty.



(Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2008-3, passed 2-5-08; Am. Ord.
2017-1, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 2017-21, passed 12-19-17)



CHAPTER 98:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   98.001   Adoption of state law relative to street improvements



   98.002   Access driveways to highways



   98.003   Obstruction of drainage ditches



   98.004   Approval of plans and specifications



   98.005   Street numbers for buildings



   98.006   Obstruction to public ways prohibited; exception



   98.007   Interference, obstruction of public improvements prohibited



   98.008   Manner of work; cleanliness of premises



   98.009   Maintenance of right-of-way



Excavations



   98.025   Purpose



   98.026   Unlawful to excavate street or alley without permit



   98.027   Street excavation permit; application



   98.028   Fee for issuance of permit



   98.029   Removal of surface and base



   98.030   Excavated materials



   98.031   Backfilling



   98.032   Replacement of base



   98.033   Replacement of surface



   98.034   Curb, gutter and sidewalk replacement



   98.035   Tunneling, boring and jacking



   98.036   Closing streets



   98.037   Protection



   98.038   Detour



   98.039   Cleanup



   98.040   Inspection



   98.041   Violations



Sidewalks



   98.055   Construction permit required



   98.056   Plans and specifications



   98.057   Action by Building Official



   98.058   Abatement of nonconforming construction



   98.059   At commercial, retail buildings



Curbs, Gutters and Driveways



   98.070   Required



   98.071   Waiver or denial of installation



   98.072   Inspection



   98.073   Minimum specifications



Growth of Shrubs at Intersections



   98.085   Definition



   98.086   Enforcement of provisions



   98.087   Restricted areas



   98.088   Maximum height of shrubs



   98.089   Minimum clearance of trees



   98.090   Maximum heights for shrubbery and fixtures



Changing Street Names



   98.105   Application



   98.106   Notice; administrative review



   98.107   Reason for change



   98.108   Public hearing



   Appendix A:   Curb and gutter details



   Appendix B:   Concrete driveway approach details



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 98.001  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW RELATIVE TO STREET IMPROVEMENTS.



   The provisions of Tex. Transportation Code, §§ 313.001 et seq., as
amended, are adopted by the city as controlling the establishment,
construction and repair of street and/or curb and gutter improvements within
the city.



(`87 Code, § 20-1)



§ 98.002  ACCESS DRIVEWAYS TO HIGHWAYS



   Any landowner or any other person shall not be allowed an access
driveway onto any state highway located within the city unless and until he
or she has obtained a permit from the Texas Department of Transportation.



(`87 Code, § 20-3) (Ord. passed 4-6-65; Am. Ord. 2002-29, passed 3-5-02)



§ 98.003  OBSTRUCTION OF DRAINAGE DITCHES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place dirt, trash, broken
concrete, bricks, rubbish or any other obstruction in any drainage ditch
within the city without written permission therefor from the City Manager.



(`87 Code, § 20-4) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.004  APPROVAL OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   All street and alley improvements within the city shall be constructed
only in accordance with plans and specifications as approved by the Director
of Public Works and/or the City Engineer.



(`87 Code, § 20-5)



§ 98.005  STREET NUMBERS FOR BUILDINGS.



   (A)   All buildings fronting on any street or alley in the city
shall be numbered in some conspicuous place by the owner thereof according to
the map made by the Building Official for such purpose and on file in his or
her office, all odd numbers being on one side of the street and all even
numbers on the other.



   (B)   Any person desiring to have a number to be put on his or her
building shall first apply to the Building Official for the proper number,
and any person failing or refusing to put the proper number on his or her
building or putting the wrong number thereon or failing or refusing to comply
with any other requirement of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(`87 Code, § 20-7) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.006  OBSTRUCTION TO PUBLIC WAYS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   Prohibition. A person shall not stop or stand in the way so as
to in any manner obstruct the use of the sidewalks, streets or any other
public place in the city by loafing, lounging or standing in or upon the same.



(`87 Code, § 20-8)



   (B)   Exception. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any
materials, boxes or other objects whatsoever in or upon any street, alley or
sidewalk in the city without first obtaining the written permission of the
City Manager. If written permission is obtained, then it shall be unlawful to
remove the material so placed without first obtaining the written permission
of the City Manager to remove same.



(`87 Code, § 20-9) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.007  INTERFERENCE, OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct any
public improvements authorized by the City Council, the Mayor or the City
Manager by means of threats, coercion, duress or any other method whatsoever,
either directly or indirectly.



(`87 Code, § 20-10) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.008  MANNER OF WORK; CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES.



   All work done or performed under the provisions of this chapter shall
be done or performed in a good, workmanlike manner. Such work shall not be
accepted or approved by the city until the premises thereof has been cleaned
and cleared of all debris, trash and rubbish which may have accumulated
during such work.



(`87 Code, § 20-11)



§ 98.009  MAINTENANCE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   It shall be the duty of the property owner to maintain or remove all
trees, shrubs, fences and the like within the area from the line of his or
her property to the curb line or street adjacent to it, except when the city
or its authorized agents must do so for the installation of utilities or
maintain minimum clearance for the travel lanes of the street.



(`87 Code, § 20-12) (Am. Ord. 1993-18, passed 10-19-93)



EXCAVATIONS



§ 98.025  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter includes the procedures and specifications approved by
the City Council for making and restoring an excavation or pavement cut in
any alley or street, improved or unimproved, within the corporate limits of
the city. This subchapter applies to, but is not limited by, the type of
excavations involving utility extensions, utility connections, conduit
placement, repair of utility lines and utility line construction. Exhibit A
of Amending Ordinance 1988-2, “Street Excavations and Paving Cuts,” is
expressly incorporated as a part of this subchapter.



(`87 Code, § 20-21) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88)



§ 98.026  UNLAWFUL TO EXCAVATE STREET OR ALLEY WITHOUT PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, utility or organization of any kind to excavate, cut or
bore any street or alley, improved or unimproved, within the corporate limits
of the city without obtaining a street excavation permit in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter; provided, however, that the provisions
hereof shall not apply to city personnel in the normal maintenance and/or
construction of city streets, alleys and utilities or to contractors
performing the same on behalf of the city.



(`87 Code, § 20-22) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.027  STREET EXCAVATION PERMIT; APPLICATION.



   All applications for a street excavation permit shall be made in
writing and shall be addressed to the city’s Director of Public Works/City
Engineer. The application shall state specifically the nature, location,
purpose, length of the proposed excavation in lineal feet and estimated date
of beginning and completion of the proposed excavation. Except in instances
of emergency repair to utility lines, a street excavation permit must be
obtained prior to the beginning of excavation. In such instances of emergency
repair to utility lines, a street excavation permit must be obtained within
two working days after the beginning of excavation, excluding weekends and
designated city holidays. An application for a street excavation permit must
be approved or denied by the Director  of Public Works/City Engineer within
two working days after the date of its submission. Approval of an application
for a street excavation permit shall not be unreasonably withheld by the
Director of Public Works/City Engineer. Denial of an application for a street
excavation permit may be appealed to the City Manager.



(`87 Code, § 20-23) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88; Am. Ord. 2002-29,
passed 3-5-02)



§ 98.028  FEE FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   A fee equal to a minimum of $250.00 or $20.00 multiplied by the square
yardage of the surface area of the street or alley which will have to be
restored as a result of the excavation or pavement cut shall be charged for
the issuance of a street excavation permit to cover the city’s cost of
restoring the street or alley surface. No fee shall be charged for the
issuance of a street excavation permit to excavate or cut an unimproved or
unpaved street or alley. Restoration of an asphalt, concrete or brick paved
surface shall be done, or caused to be done, by the city; however, the
person, firm or organization making the excavation or cut shall be
responsible for proper backfilling of the excavation or cut and replacement
of base material in accordance with the provisions hereof. No fee shall be
charged for the issuance of a street excavation permit to tunnel, bore or
jack under an improved or unimproved street or alley. Additionally, in
instances where utilities are required to be relocated due to city, state or
federal street or highway construction or reconstruction projects and where
existing street or highway surfaces will be reconstructed or replaced as a
part of such projects, the City Manager may waive the fees for issuance of
street excavation permits required for the relocation of such utilities.



(`87 Code, § 20-24) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88; Am. Ord. 1993-18,
passed 10-19-93)



§ 98.029  REMOVAL OF SURFACE AND BASE.



   (A)   Prior to the removal of an asphalt paving surface, a smooth
vertical joint shall be cut through the surface and completely around the
area to be removed. This joint may be made with an ax or any suitable tool
that is approved by the City Manager or his or her authorized representative.
Prior to the removal of any concrete paving surface or concrete base, a
vertical joint shall be cut with a concrete saw completely around the area to
be removed. This cut shall be of sufficient depth to insure a smooth joint
when a concrete paving surface or concrete base is removed. The width of
concrete removed shall conform to Exhibit A, “Street Excavations and Paving
Cuts,” incorporated as a part of this subchapter.



   (B)   Upon approval of the City Manager, or his or her authorized
representative, the width of a trench excavation in instances where
appropriate tamping equipment is provided may be less than the minimum 24
inches specified on Appendix A; provided, however, that in all instances the
width of the improved or paved surface to be removed and replaced as a result
of such trench excavation shall not be less than the minimum 24 inches so
specified on Appendix A and that the fee for issuance of the street
excavation permit shall be calculated on the basis of said 24-inch minimum
width. Any brick surface shall be removed with as little damage as possible
to the brick.



(`87 Code, § 20-25) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88; Am. Ord. 1993-18,
passed 10-19-93)



§ 98.030  EXCAVATED MATERIALS.



   Excavated materials shall be laid along the side of the excavation and
kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to public
travel. If the excavated area is muddy and causes inconvenience to
pedestrians, temporary wooden plank walks shall be constructed. If the street
is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of the
adjacent sidewalk, at least ½ of the sidewalk width shall be kept open at
all times as a pedestrian passageway.



(`87 Code, § 20-26) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88)



§ 98.031  BACKFILLING.



   (A)   All debris, wasted concrete, lumber scraps or other foreign
matter that may be in the backfill material shall be removed prior to
beginning the backfill.



   (B)   Backfilling shall be accomplished by one of the following
methods:



      (1)   Backfill shall be placed in uniform layers of eight inch
maximum thickness and each layer shall be compacted to a density equal to the
adjacent undisturbed soil. If necessary to obtain proper density, the
backfill material shall be moistened. If the base and surface are to be put
in place immediately after backfilling, the excavation shall be backfilled to
the subbase level. If there is to be a lapse of time between the completion
of the backfill and the restoration of the paving base and surface, the
excavation shall be backfilled to the grade of the adjacent paving surface.
In unimproved alleys or streets, the compacted backfill shall be brought up
to grade;



      (2)   The excavation shall be completely backfilled and the
water jetting method used to settle and backfill material. Excess water in
any excavation shall be cause for rejection of the water jetting method and a
requirement to use pneumatic tamps. Prior to the restoration of the paving
base and surface, the backfill material shall be removed from the excavation
to a point of two feet below the adjacent paving surface and replaced in
uniform layers of eight inch maximum thickness. Each layer shall be compacted
to a density equal to the adjacent undisturbed soil.



      (3)   No base material shall be placed in the excavation until
the subbase is stable and free of excess moisture. Any water needed in the
backfilling of a street excavation may be taken from a city fire hydrant
equipped with a meter, if approved by the City Manager. The person, firm or
organization using the water will be billed for same.



(`87 Code, § 20-27) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88)



§ 98.032  REPLACEMENT OF BASE.



   The restoration of a flexible base or concrete base shall be done with
materials and methods approved by the Director of Public Works/City Engineer.
The restored base must be of equal or better quality than existing.



(`87 Code, § 20-28) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88; Am. Ord. 2002-29,
passed 3-5-02)



§ 98.033  REPLACEMENT OF SURFACE.



   The restoration of an asphalt, concrete or brick paving surface shall
be done, or caused to be done, by the city. The restoration of an unimproved
surface shall be done by the person, firm or corporation making the
excavation or cut by bringing the compacted backfill up to grade.



(`87 Code, § 20-29) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88)



§ 98.034  CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK REPLACEMENT.



   Any curb, gutter or sidewalk removed or damaged during the work
involved in any street excavation shall be replaced with equal or better
quality concrete. Any curb, gutter or sidewalk replaced shall be of the same
size and section as the existing curb, gutter or sidewalk. Even though the
damage to any curb, gutter or sidewalk does not involve a full joint, the
entire joint shall be replaced.



(`87 Code, § 20-30) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88)



§ 98.035  TUNNELING, BORING AND JACKING.



   The method of performing any tunneling, boring or jacking under an
improved street and the type of pipe to be placed under the street shall be
approved by the Director of Public Works/City Engineer or his or her
authorized representative before work begins. Mud formed in boring
excavations shall be used to fill voids around any pipe or casing in a bored
excavation. If possible, pits or trenches needed to facilitate jacking,
tunneling or boring operations shall be excavated outside the paved area of
the street. Any pits or trenches excavated for tunneling, boring or jacking
purposes shall be backfilled immediately after the pipe is in place.



(`87 Code, § 20-31) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88; Am. Ord. 2002-29,
passed 3-5-02)



§ 98.036  CLOSING STREETS.



   Before any street is closed, the City Manager must be contacted. After
approval is procured and prior to the time the street is closed, the person,
firm or corporation closing the street shall notify all ambulance services,
local law enforcement agencies and the Fire Department advising them when the
street will be closed and when it will be reopened.



(`87 Code, § 20-32) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88)



§ 98.037  PROTECTION.



   The person, firm or organization making the excavation or cut shall
furnish, place, erect and maintain adequate flares, barricades, construction
signs, guards and any and all things necessary for the protection of private
property and the public.



(`87 Code, § 20-33) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88)



§ 98.038  DETOUR.



   Should it be necessary to detour traffic at any point, the person, firm
or organization making the excavation or cut shall erect proper barricades
and post definite detour directions at all points to be traveled by those who
must detour. If a dirt street is used for a detour, the dust shall be kept
settled on a detour so that it will not be obnoxious to those living adjacent
or near the detour.



(`87 Code, § 20-34) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88)



§ 98.039  CLEANUP.



   When backfilling of the excavation and restoration of the paving
surface has been completed, all surplus construction materials, equipment,
scraps, broken pipe, debris and rubbish shall be removed, and the site shall
be left in a clean and neat condition.



(`87 Code, § 20-35) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88)



§ 98.040  INSPECTION.



   The City Manager or his or her authorized representative shall be
authorized to inspect all work done in connection with an alley or street
excavation or pavement cut and the replacement of same. All work involved in
making and restoring an excavation or pavement cut shall be in accordance
with these specifications and Appendix A.



(`87 Code, § 20-36) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88; Am. Ord. 1993-18,
passed 10-19-93)



§ 98.041  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person violating this subchapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as provided in § 10.99, and each
act done in violation hereof and each day that such violation or violations
continue shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such.



(`87 Code, § 20-37) (Am. Ord. 1988-2, passed 3-29-88)



SIDEWALKS



§ 98.055  CONSTRUCTION PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Any person desiring to remove, repair, rebuild or build a sidewalk
within the city shall, prior to the commencement thereof, submit an
application for a permit therefor to the City Building Official.



(`87 Code, § 20-39) (Ord. passed 1-3-67)



§ 98.056  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   At the time of filing his or her application for a permit required by
the provisions of this subchapter, the applicant shall also file a drawing
showing the location of the project and plans and specifications of the work
to be done.



(`87 Code, § 20-40) (Ord. passed 1-3-67)



§ 98.057  ACTION BY BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   The City Building Official shall examine the application for a permit
required by the provisions of this subchapter and make such changes as he or
she may deem necessary and then shall issue the permit for the work. A copy
of any changes made by the Building Official shall accompany the permit.



(`87 Code, § 20-41) (Ord. passed 1-3-67)



§ 98.058  ABATEMENT OF NONCONFORMING CONSTRUCTION.



   The city shall have the right to remove or cause to be removed at the
owner’s or adjoining owner’s expense any sidewalk constructed contrary to
the permit issued therefor under the provisions of this subchapter.



(`87 Code, § 20-42) (Ord. passed 1-3-67)



§ 98.059  AT COMMERCIAL, RETAIL BUILDINGS.



   A distance of not less than five feet in width for sidewalks shall be
left between the front or side of all commercial or retail buildings,
including but not limited to porches, steps, awnings or other projections.
However, in areas where sidewalks are in existence, the width may be made to
conform to existing sidewalks. It is not intended that sidewalks be placed on
every commercial or retail building, but the space of not less than five feet
shall be left whether or not sidewalks are constructed. The City Building
Official shall have the authority to require that sidewalks be placed on new
commercial or retail buildings if, in his or her opinion, there is sufficient
pedestrian traffic to justify the need; and if required, such shall be shown
on the building permit.



(`87 Code, § 20-43) (Ord. passed 1-3-67)



CURBS, GUTTERS AND DRIVEWAYS



§ 98.070  REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any property owner desiring to install curbs, gutters and/or
driveway approaches on a city street shall construct such facilities in
accordance with the requirements of this subchapter. A plan or sketch of
proposed facilities shall be submitted to and approved by the Director of
Public Works/City Engineer prior to construction.



   (B)   The owners of any building, residential or business,
constructed in the city shall, as a part of the construction, place a curb,
gutter and driveway approach according to specifications established by the
city on all streets adjoining the lot where the building is being
constructed. The moving in of a pre-fabricated or already built house shall
be considered as construction and shall require the placing of the curb,
gutter and driveway approach. No building permits shall be issued unless such
curb, gutter or driveway approach is included in the plans and specifications
for construction of the building.



(`87 Code, § 20-54) (Am. Ord. 1996-17, passed 12-3-96; Am. Ord. 2002-29,
passed 3-5-02)



§ 98.071  WAIVER OR DENIAL OF INSTALLATION.



   (A)   Upon recommendation of the City Engineer and/or Director of
Public Works, the city may waive the requirement for curb and gutter on new
construction or deny request for curb and gutter in the following instances:



      (1)   Where the construction of curb and gutter will have an
adverse impact on the natural flow of storm water runoff in the immediate
area;



      (2)   Where curb and gutter to be constructed will not connect
at either of its ends to existing curb and gutter which conforms to grade and
location requirements concurrent with the city’s standard street design;



      (3)   On streets designated as federal or state highways
within the city where the construction of curb and gutter is not practicable
nor feasible for reasons stated herein or otherwise;



      (4)   Where the installation of curb and gutter would require
street reconstruction not included in current street improvement program or
where alternate funding is not available.



   (B)   In such instances involving new construction, the City
Engineer and/or Director of Public Works shall notify the Building Official
who shall note his or her decision on the application for building permit.



   (C)   Any curb or gutter constructed without prior approval by the
City Engineer and/or Director of Public Works may be subject to removal at
the owner’s expense and will not be recognized as existing curb and gutter
with regard to the city’s street improvement assessment policy.



(`87 Code, § 20-55) (Am. Ord. 1990-3, passed 2-6-90; Am. Ord. 1993-20,
passed 12-7-93)



§ 98.072  INSPECTION.



   The Director of Public Works/City Engineer will require inspection of
the construction before concrete is poured and after forms and reinforcement
steel is in place. This will assure construction is in accordance with the
specifications and grade established by the city, therefore, and until such
is done, utilities will not be permitted to be connected to the building or
lot. Concrete poured prior to inspection will not be accepted.



(`87 Code, § 20-57) (Ord. passed 8-4-64; Am. Ord. 1990-3, passed 2-6-90; Am.
Ord. 1996-17, passed 12-3-96; Am. Ord. 2002-29, passed 3-5-02)



§ 98.073  MINIMUM SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Curbs and gutters. All curbs and gutters constructed under the
provisions of this subchapter shall conform to the following minimum
specifications:



      (1)   Height along back of the curb:  12 inches;



      (2)   Top:  6 inches;



      (3)   Height of curb from gutter to top:  6 inches;



      (4)   Gutter width:  24 inches;



      (5)   Front depth:  5 inches;



      (6)   Base:  30 inches.



   (B)   Driveway approaches.  All driveway approaches constructed
under the provisions of this subchapter shall conform to the following
minimum specifications:



      (1)   All concrete and reinforcing steel shall conform to the
subdivision regulations adopted by reference in Ch. 154;



      (2)   Where a new driveway approach is to be constructed at a
location with existing curb and gutter, the existing curb and gutter must be
saw cut at each end of the approach and removed without damage to the
existing street or remaining curb and gutter. If the existing curb and gutter
is integral to an existing concrete street, the concrete street shall be saw
cut to a minimum of 18 inches from the face of the curb;



      (3)   All parts of the driveway approach including radii shall
be confined within the grantee’s property frontage;



      (4)   Radii for all concrete driveways shall not be less than
five feet to back of curb;



      (5)   Asphalt, oil, sand, gravel or dirt driveways shall have
approaches constructed as “driveway gutter.” Off-street parking or
driveway widths in excess of 30 feet shall use “gutter with laid down
curb.” An 18-inch long curb transition shall be installed on each side of a
driveway gutter;



      (6)   Gutter portion of approach shall be six inches thick
minimum and concrete approach apron shall be four-inches thick minimum;



      (7)   At least 2, 3/8-inch smooth steel dowels shall be
inserted in the end of the sawed gutter for a minimum of 12 inches. These
dowels shall become part of the reinforcing steel for the new driveway
approach. The use of existing undamaged reinforcing steel in lieu of dowels
will be acceptable, but must extend a minimum of 24 inches into the new
driveway approach or curb and gutter;



      (8)   When driveway approaches are to be constructed at
locations where there is no existing curb and gutter, a culvert, valley
gutter or other drainage structure approved by the City Engineer shall be
installed to facilitate drainage;



      (9)   Deviations from these requirements may be approved by
the City Engineer if justified by field conditions that prohibit compliance.



(`87 Code, § 20-58) (Ord. passed 5-17-49; Am. Ord. 1990-3, passed 2-6-90;
Am. Ord. 1996-17, passed 12-3-96)



GROWTH OF SHRUBS AT INTERSECTIONS



§ 98.085  DEFINITION.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the phrase STREET GUTTER FLOW LINE
shall mean the street gutter flow line of the curb adjacent to and bordering
upon each such restricted area; in the event there is no such curb, the
height restrictions set forth in this subchapter shall be based upon the
actual level of the paved or used portion of the public street adjacent to
and bordering upon each such restricted area.



(`87 Code, § 20-70)



§ 98.086  ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.



   In addition to any penalty which may be imposed for the violation of
this subchapter, the city shall be entitled to enter upon and remove from the
triangular corner areas described in this subchapter any of the growths
prohibited by this subchapter. Such entry and removal shall be without
liability to the owners thereof.



(`87 Code, § 20-71)



§ 98.087  RESTRICTED AREAS.



   (A)   The areas in the city restricted by the provisions of this
subchapter are as follows:



      (1)   All of that portion of land lying within a
triangular-shaped area on each street corner within the city described by
metes and bounds as follows: beginning at the precise corner of intersection
point of the curbs of each of the two streets forming each corner and
extending 20 feet along each such curb line from said curb intersection
point, the third side being determined by the drawing of a straight line from
the ends of such 20-foot extensions; whether said land be privately owned or
unpaved or untraveled street right-of-way property.



      (2)   Where no curbs are in existence at such street
intersections, said 20-foot lines shall coincide with the central flow line
of the ditches paralleling such uncurbed streets as shall be determined by
the City Engineer.



   (B)   Provided, however, that the provisions of this subchapter
shall apply only to those areas of the city designated and classified by the
city’s zoning ordinance requiring construction on lots in zoned sections to
be set back from the property line of such lot.



(`87 Code, § 20-72)



Cross-reference:



   Subdivision regulations, see Ch. 154



   Zoning Code, see Ch. 155



§ 98.088  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF SHRUBS.



   No person shall plant, grow or maintain in any restricted area any
plant, hedge, shrub or other growth, except trees, at a height greater than
three feet from the street gutter flow line.



(`87 Code, § 20-73)



§ 98.089  MINIMUM CLEARANCE OF TREES.



   Any trees planted, grown and maintained in any restricted area shall
not have branches or foliage extending from the trunk thereof at a height
lower than 15 feet from the street gutter flow line.



(`87 Code, § 20-74)



§ 98.090  MAXIMUM HEIGHTS FOR SHRUBBERY AND FIXTURES.



   (A)   On any corner lot on which front and side yards are required
by the Zoning Code, no solid wall or fence, shrub, hedge, vine or sign shall
be permitted that is higher than three and one-half feet within the said
yards.



   (B)   On lots other than corner lots, no solid wall or fence, shrub,
hedge, vine or sign shall be permitted that is higher than 3½ feet within
the front yard as such front yard is defined by the Zoning Code.



   (C)   The provisions of this section may be enforced by either or
both criminal proceedings or injunctive relief.



(`87 Code, § 20-75) (Ord. 1973-11, passed 9-18-73)



CHANGING STREET NAMES



§ 98.105  APPLICATION.



   (A)   An application may be filed with the City Secretary in writing
by complying with one or both of the following:



      (1)   A petition signed by not less than 55% of all property
owners abutting subject city street. Owners of such abutting property shall
be determined by the current city ad valorem tax roll; or



      (2)   An application from an authorized officer or attorney
representing a governmental subdivision, agency or department.



   (B)   The application (petition) shall provide:



      (1)   The present official city name of the street;



      (2)   The proposed new name;



      (3)   The name of each person, group, agency or entity
requesting the street name change;



      (4)   The name, address and telephone number of one person
with authority to represent binding commitments and take official action
relative to such street name change on behalf of each incorporated
association, group or entity applying;



      (5)   The reason(s), from those listed herein, claimed for
such street name change;



      (6)   Name, address and telephone number for all abutting
property owners shall be shown on the application as indicated on the current
city tax roll.



   (C)   The application (petition) must be accompanied by a processing
fee in the sum of $50.00 (payable without right of any refund) to the city.
This fee shall be waived for all governmental subdivisions, agencies or
departments.



(`87 Code, § 20-80) (Am. Ord. 1994-11, passed 7-19-94)



§ 98.106  NOTICE; ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   The application (petition) shall be referred from the City Secretary to
the following departments for review and comment:



   (A)   Director of Public Works;



   (B)   Director of Fire Services;



   (C)   Director of Police Services;



   (D)   City Planner;



   (E)   Chief Building Official;



   (F)   United States Post Office;



   (G)   Others as may be determined appropriate.



(`87 Code, § 20-81) (Am. Ord. 1994-11, passed 7-19-94; Am. Ord. 2002-29,
passed 3-5-02)



§ 98.107  REASON FOR CHANGE.



   Applications for street name changes may be considered for any one or
more of the following reasons, which must be specified in the petition.



   (A)   Technical.



      (1)   To establish continuity of the street’s name;



      (2)   To eliminate name spelling duplication, phonetic
duplication or misspelling;



      (3)   To establish coherence to the street numbering system
designation;



      (4)   To provide necessary roadway designation (street,
avenue, lane and the like.)



   (B)   Recognition. To honor a person, place, institution, group,
entity, event or similar subjects.



   (C)   Neighborhood enhancement. To enhance a neighborhood through
association of the street name with its location, area characteristics or
history.



(`87 Code, § 20-82) (Am. Ord. 1994-11, passed 7-19-94)



§ 98.108  PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   A public hearing shall be held by the City Council no earlier
than 14 days after mailing of notification of public hearing to abutting
property owners as shown on petition and publication in the local newspaper.



   (B)   Adoption of an ordinance for the street name change shall be
required by Council action to be effective upon notification in writing to
property owners and the following departments and/or entities:



      (1)   Director of Public Works;



      (2)   Director of Fire Services;



      (3)   Director of Police Services;



      (4)   City Planner;



      (5)   Chief Building Official;



      (6)   United States Post Office;



      (7)   Others as may be determined appropriate (all public
safety agencies, chamber of commerce, school district and the like).



(`87 Code, § 20-83) (Am. Ord. 1994-11, passed 7-19-94; Am. Ord. 2002-29,
passed 3-5-02)



APPENDIX A:  CURB AND GUTTER DETAILS







 



(Am. Ord. 1996-17, passed 12-3-96)



APPENDIX B:  CONCRETE DRIVEWAY APPROACH DETAILS







 



(Am. Ord. 1996-17, passed 12-3-96)



CHAPTER 99:  ABANDONED AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES



Section



   99.01   Adoption of abandoned motor vehicle provisions



   99.02   Definitions



   99.03   Procedures for abating junked vehicle as a public nuisance



§ 99.01  ADOPTION OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE PROVISIONS.



   There is adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing abandoned or junked vehicles as found in the Tex. Transportation
Code, §§ 683.061 et seq., as now exists or may hereafter be amended.



(Ord. 1996-6, passed 11-5-96)



§ 99.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   INOPERATIVE or INOPERABLE.  Any condition that would prevent the
vehicle from operating upon a public street, road, alleyway or highway under
its own locomotion without requiring repairs and if inspected by state
(Texas) standards would be eligible to receive a Texas Safety Inspection
sticker.



(Ord. 1996-6, passed 11-5-96)



§ 99.03  PROCEDURES FOR ABATING JUNKED VEHICLE AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   For the abatement and removal of a junked vehicle, the city
shall provide not less than ten days notice of the nature of the nuisance and
notice must be sent by certified mail, with a five-day return receipt
requested to:



      (1)   Last known registered owner of vehicle;



      (2)   Each lienholder of record;



      (3)   Owner or occupant of:



         (a)   Property on which the junked vehicle is located; or



         (b)   If the junked vehicle is located on a public
right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way.



   (B)   The notice shall state that:



      (1)   The junked vehicle must be plated and removed not later
than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was mailed; and



      (2)   Any request for a hearing must be made before that
ten-day period expires.



   (C)   If the post office address of the last known registered owner
of the junked vehicle is unknown, notice may be placed on the junked vehicle
or, if the owner is located, hand delivered.



   (D)   If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the
nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the eleventh day after
the date of the return receipt.



   (E)   If a hearing is requested, the presiding municipal judge for
the city shall conduct said hearings. If a hearing is requested by the owner
of the property for which the junked vehicle is located, the hearing shall
not be held earlier than the eleventh day after the date of the service of
notice.



   (F)   At the hearing the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless
demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperative.



   (G)   If the information is available at the location of the junked
vehicle, an order requiring removal of the vehicle must include the vehicle:



      (1)   Description;



      (2)   VIN; and



      (3)   License plate number.



(Ord. 1996-6, passed 11-5-96)



CHAPTER 100:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   100.01   General provisions



   100.02   Definitions



   100.03   Alarm system permit required



   100.04   Proper alarm system operation and maintenance



   100.05   Alarm business requirements



   100.06   Alarm systems in apartment complexes; contracted for by an
individual



   100.07   Alarm systems in apartment complexes; furnished by the
apartment complex as an amenity



   100.08   Service fees for responses to excessive false alarms



   100.09   False alarms exempt from service fees



   100.10   Appeal from fees



 



   100.99   Penalty



§ 100.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users and
alarm businesses to maintain operational reliability and properly use alarm
systems and to reduce or eliminate false alarms.



   (B)   This chapter governs alarm systems intended to summon police
or fire responses, requires permits, provides for penalties for violations,
establishes a system of administration, and sets conditions for suspension or
revocation of permits.



(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-5-01)



§ 100.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   ALARM ADMINISTRATORS.



      (1)   SECURITY ALARM ADMINISTRATOR.  Chief of Police or his
or her designee.



      (2)   FIRE ALARM ADMINISTRATOR.  Fire Chief or his or her
designee.



   ALARM BUSINESS. 



      (1)   The business, by an individual, partnership, corporation
or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing,
altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring an alarm system in an
alarm site.



      (2)   A person or organization that sells alarm devices
exclusively over-the-counter or by mail order and the person or organization
does not plan, certify, install, service, or maintain this equipment are
exempted.



   ALARM SITE. A single premise or location (one street address) served by
an alarm system or systems that are under the control of one person.



   ALARM SYSTEM. Any assembly of mechanisms, equipment, device or devices,
arranged or designated to detect the presence of a fire, an unauthorized
entry or activity in any building or any property, or to direct attention to
a fire, robbery, burglary, or any other emergency in progress, and to signal
the above occurrences either by a local or monitored alarm, directly or
indirectly to the Police Department Communications Center.  The following
devices shall not constitute an ALARM SYSTEM within the meaning of this
subsection:



      (1)   Devices which do not activate alarms that are audible,
visible, or perceptible outside the protected premises;



      (2)   Devices which are not installed, operated or used for
the purpose of reporting an emergency either directly or by a third party to
the Police or Fire Department;



      (3)   Alarm devices installed in motor vehicles;



      (4)   Alarm devices installed on a temporary basis by the
Police or Fire Department.



   ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT.



      (1)   FIRE ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT. A certificate of authorization
issued by the fire alarm administrator to the owner, agent or person in
control of the property, which authorizes the operation of a fire alarm
system at an alarm site.



      (2)   SECURITY ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT. A certificate of
authorization issued by the security alarm administrator to the owner, agent
or person in control of the property, which authorizes the operation of a
security alarm system at an alarm site.



   ALARM USER. The owner, occupant, agent or person in control of the
property on which the alarm system is maintained within the city and who is
responsible for proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system.



   APPLICANT.  Any person who has requested or is requesting an alarm 
system permit to install, operate, or maintain an alarm system at a
particular location.



   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE.  An alarm system which automatically sends
over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or coded signal indicating
the existence of an emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to
detect.



   BURGLAR.  An alarm that is designed to detect unauthorized entry into
or upon the property of a closed business or residence.



   DIRECTOR. The City Manager.



   DURESS and EMS ALARMS.  An alarm activated by switch or button to
signify a medical problem.



   FALSE ALARM.  Any activation of an alarm system through mechanical or
electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, negligence of the
owner, agent or person in charge of the property, or negligence of the alarm
business operator or its employees or agents, or any other activation to
which a police or firefighter responds and no emergency exists for which the
alarm system was designed to give notice. However, for the purpose of this
chapter FALSE  ALARMS shall not include alarm system activation caused by
utility line mishaps, tornadoes, earthquakes, or similar acts of nature.



   HOLDUP (ROBBERY) ALARM.  A manually activated alarm designed to alert
law enforcement officials or others of a robbery in progress.



   LOCAL ALARM.  An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site
that is audible from the interior and/or exterior at the alarm site only.



   MONITORING.  The process by which an alarm business receives signals
from an alarm system and contacts the Police Department Communications Center
for city personnel response.



   MONITORED ALARM.  An alarm system that sends a signal indicating a
need for response to an alarm business which operates with trained personnel
on duty at all times who will relay the need for response by city personnel
to the Police Department Communications Center on a person-to-person basis.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person, corporation, partnership or other legal
entity, to whom an alarm system permit is issued.



   POLICE DEPARTMENT COMMUNICATIONS CENTER.  The office within the Mount
Pleasant Police Department responsible for receiving requests for emergency
services and for dispatching appropriate city personnel.



   RESPONSE.



      (1)   A RESPONSE by the Fire Department shall be deemed to
have occurred upon the need to respond being relayed to the Fire Department
via the radio or telephone from the Police Department Communications Center.



      (2)   A RESPONSE by the Police Department shall be deemed to
have occurred upon the need to respond being relayed to police department
personnel via the radio or telephone from the Police Department
Communications Center or the discovery of an activated alarm by police while
on routine patrol.



(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-5-01)



§ 100.03  ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Permit required.  No person shall operate, cause to be
operated, install, connect or maintain a fire alarm system or security alarm
system at an alarm site or location subject to this chapter unless a fire
alarm permit or a security alarm system permit has first been issued by the
Fire Alarm Administrator or the Security Alarm Administrator.  Any person
using or owning an alarm system at the time of the adoption of this chapter
shall obtain the required permit.  Said permit shall be maintained at the
alarm site and displayed in close proximity of the alarm panel(s) and shall
be available for inspection.  A copy of the permit will be filed with the
Fire or Police Department depending on the type of alarm system. There is no
fee for the alarm system permit.



   (B)   Application for permit.  The information on the alarm a
system application will remain confidential to the fullest extent permitted
by applicable law.  The application for an alarm system permit shall state
the following:



      (1)   Name and address of the alarm site;



      (2)   Full name, address, telephone number of the permittee or
person in control of the premises;



      (3)   The purpose of each alarm system located at an alarm
site such as fire, burglary, holdup;



      (4)    Names, address, and telephone number of one or more
persons who are able and agree to receive notification at any time from the
Police or Fire Departments to respond to the alarm site, should it become
necessary, within 30 minutes;



      (5)   The date of installation, conversion or takeover of the
alarm system, whichever is applicable;



      (6)   The name, address and phone number of the alarm business
performing the alarm system installation, conversion or alarm system takeover
and responsible for providing repair service to the alarm system; or if an
alarm system user installs and maintains their own alarm system it shall be
so stated;



      (7)    If the alarm system is monitored, the name, address,
phone number and state license number of the alarm business monitoring the
alarm system if different from the installing alarm business;



      (8)   That a set of written operating instructions for the
alarm system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms, have
been left with the applicant;



      (9)   That the alarm business has trained the applicant in the
proper use of the alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid false
alarms;



      (10)   A copy of this chapter was left with the applicant; and



      (11)   If the alarm system is a local or monitored alarm.



   (C)   False statements.  Any false statement or misrepresentation
of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm
permit or renewal, or for the purpose of making a change thereto, shall be
sufficient cause for refusal to grant or the suspension of a permit.



   (D)   Issuance.  Upon receipt of the completed application form,
the fire alarm and/or security alarm administrator shall issue a fire alarm
and/or security alarm system permit unless there is reasonable cause not to
do so, including but not limited to:



      (1)   False statements of material matter made by an applicant
for the purpose of obtaining an alarm system permit;



      (2)   The applicant failed to pay fees assessed under §
100.08 of this chapter.



   (E)   Appeal from denial, suspension or revocation of a permit. 
The following steps will be used for appealing the denial, suspension or
revocation of an alarm system permit:



      (1)   If the Alarm Administrator denies the issuance of a
permit, or suspends or revokes a permit, he or she shall send written notice
of this action and a statement of the right to appeal, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to both the applicant or alarm user and the alarm
business.  Notice shall be mailed to the address listed in the
application.  If a request for appeal is not made within ten days, the
action of the Alarm Administrator is final.



      (2)   The applicant or alarm user may appeal the decision of
the Alarm Administrator to the Director by filing a written request for a
review setting forth the reasons for the appeal within ten days after receipt
of the notice or public posting when such letter is returned
“undeliverable” from the alarm administrator.  An alarm business may
submit the request for review on behalf of an alarm user.



      (3)    Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action by
the Alarm Administrator of suspending or revoking an alarm system permit
until the Director has completed his or her review of the appeal.



      (4)   The Director shall consider the evidence by any
interested person(s).  The Director shall make his or her decision on the
basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented, including, but not
limited to, certification that the alarm user has been retrained, that a
defective part has been repaired or replaced, or that the cause of the false
alarm has been otherwise determined and corrected. The Director must render a
written decision within 20 days after the request for an appeal hearing is
filed. The Director shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the Alarm
Administrator.  The decision of the Director is final as to administrative
remedies with the city.



   (F)   Reinstatement of permit. A person whose alarm system permit
has been revoked may be issued a new permit if the person:



      (1)   Submits an updated application;



      (2)   Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding fees; and



      (3)   Submits a certification from an alarm business stating
that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired, if necessary, by the
alarm business or submits a written certification, in the case of an
individual who installs and maintains their own alarm system, signed by the
individual and stating that they have inspected the alarm system and made
repairs, if necessary.  The certification shall list repairs made to the
system or steps taken to correct the false alarms.



   (G)   Transferability.  An alarm system permit cannot be
transferred to another person.



   (H)   Duration of permit.  Each permit issued to a permittee shall
be valid until such time as one of the following occurs:



      (1)   Control of the alarm site or property is transferred
from the permittee; or



      (2)   The city revokes the permit.



(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-5-01)



§ 100.04  PROPER ALARM SYSTEM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.



   An alarm user shall:



   (A)   Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that
will:



      (1)   Minimize or eliminate false alarms; and



      (2)   Ensure proper operation of the alarm system.



   (B)   Train each employee and all other persons who operate the
alarm system or have access to enter the alarm site during closed hours when
a burglar alarm system is likely to be armed how to properly operate the
alarm system.



   (C)   Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm site
within 30 minutes when notified by the city to deactivate a malfunctioning
alarm system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide security for
the premises.



   (D)   In the event that an alarm system is activated on the
premises, immediately report or have an alarm business charged with the
responsibility of notification immediately report such alarm to the Police
Department Communications Center.  No owner, occupant, or alarm business
shall delay or interfere with the immediate notification of the alarm system
activation to the Police Department Communication Center.  (Exception: With
prior written notification a burglar or holdup alarm user, or an alarm
business charged with the responsibility of notification, may stop or delay
police department notification until they can locate and correct the source
of false alarms.)



   (E)   Refrain from manually activating an alarm system for any
reason other than the occurrence of an event that the alarm system was
intended to report.



   (F)   Notify the Police Department Communications Center prior to
activating an alarm system for maintenance, testing or fire drills.



   (G)   Report any change of information on the alarm system permit to
an Alarm Administrator within ten days of the change, such as the alarm
business is responsible for monitoring and/or repairs, the contact person's
name and phone number.



(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-5-01)



§ 100.05  ALARM BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every alarm business selling, leasing, or furnishing to any
alarm user an alarm system which is subject to this chapter shall, prior to
alarm activation, furnish the alarm user with:



      (1)   A copy of this chapter;



      (2)   Instructions explaining how to properly operate the
alarm system;



      (3)   Training to the alarm user and/or permittee or their
designee regarding the proper operation of the alarm system and provisions of
this chapter;



      (4)   Instructions explaining how to obtain service for the
alarm system at any time;



      (5)   Inform their customers of permit requirements.



   (B)   Each alarm business shall be licensed by the state and shall
have their license available for inspection.



   (C)   Each alarm business that provides a monitoring service shall:



      (1)   Send notification of an alarm to the Police Department
Communication Center person-to- person.



      (2)   Report alarms only to the telephone number designated by
the Alarm Administrator.



(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-5-01)



§ 100.06  ALARM SYSTEMS IN APARTMENT COMPLEXES; CONTRACTED FOR BY AN
INDIVIDUAL.



   (A)   If an alarm system installed by an individual tenant in an
apartment complex unit is monitored, the tenant must provide the name of a
representative of the apartment owner or property manger who can grant access
to the apartment to the alarm business which is providing the monitoring
service.



   (B)   A tenant of an apartment complex shall obtain an alarm permit
from an Alarm Administrator before operating or causing the operation of an
alarm system in the tenant's residential unit.



   (C)   For the purpose of enforcing this chapter, the tenant is
responsible for false alarms emitted from the alarm system in the tenant's
residential unit.



(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-5-01)



§ 100.07  ALARM SYSTEMS IN COMPLEXES; FURNISHED BY THE APARTMENT COMPLEX AS
AN AMENITY.



   (A)   If the owner or property manager of an apartment complex
provides alarm systems in each residential unit as an amenity, then the owner
or property manager of the apartment complex shall obtain a master alarm
system permit from an Alarm Administrator.



   (B)   For purposes of assessing fees and enforcing this chapter,
against an individual residential unit, the tenant is responsible for false
alarm notifications emitted from the alarm system in the tenant's residential
unit.



   (C)   The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall
obtain a separate alarm permit for any alarm system operated in a
nonresidential area of the apartment complex, including, but not limited to,
common tenant areas and office, storage, and equipment areas.  The owner or
property manager of an apartment complex shall be responsible for false
alarms in the nonresidential areas.



   (D)   The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall be
responsible for false alarms emitted from unoccupied residential units.



(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-5-01)



§ 100.08  SERVICE FEES FOR RESPONSES TO EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   An alarm site with less than 500 heat and/or smoke sensing
devices is allowed four false alarms in a 12-month period. An alarm site with
more than 500 heat and/or smoke sensing devices is allowed eight false alarms
in a 12-month period. The alarm user shall be subject to a fee for responses
to false alarms in excess of four in a calendar year.



   (B)   The fees are:



      (1)   False fire alarms:  $150.00 per false alarm response
after four or eight, depending on the number of heat/smoke sensing devices a
facility has in a calendar year.



      (2)   False police alarms:  $50.00 per false alarm response
after four in a calendar year.



   (C)   Upon each response to a false alarm the fire department or
police department personnel will complete a duplicate written notice.  A
copy of the written notice will be given to the alarm system user with a
notation of the number of false alarm responses made to the location.  The
original notice will be maintained at the Police Department Communications
Center.  The notice will state the number of false alarms that have occurred
in the current calendar year, the violation and the fee associated with
violation when applicable.



   (D)   Upon response to the fifth or ninth false alarm, depending on
the number of heat/smoke sensing devices a facility has, a letter will be
sent to the location stating the violation and the appropriate assessed fee.



   (E)   The fee shall be paid within 15 days after notice of the
imposition of the service fee, unless the service fee is appealed as provided
for in § 100.10.



(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-5-01)



§ 100.09  FALSE ALARMS EXEMPT FROM SERVICE FEES.



   The following shall be exempt as being counted toward false alarms as
alarm site is allowed in a calendar year.



   (A)   A natural or man-made catastrophe;



   (B)   Activations as a result of weather (lightning, high winds);



   (C)   Vandalism;



   (D)   Telephone line outage, or electrical outage or utility line
mishaps;



   (E)   Attempted entry or attempted robbery;



   (F)   Activations within the first 30 days of installation of a new
alarm system.



(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-5-01)



§ 100.10  APPEAL FROM FEES.



   (A)   The alarm user may appeal the assessment of the fee to the
Alarm Administrator.  The burden of proof is on the alarm user to show the
activation was not false.  If a request for appeal is not made within ten
days, the action of the Alarm Administrator is final.



   (B)   The alarm user may appeal the assessment of the fee by the
Alarm Administrator to the Director by filing a written request for a review
setting forth the reasons for the appeal within  ten days after the Alarm
Administrator's decision.  An alarm business may submit the request for
review on behalf of an alarm user.



   (C)   The Director shall consider the evidence by any interested
person(s).  The Director shall make his/her decision on the basis of a
preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing.  The Director must
render a written decision within 20 days after the request for an appeal
hearing is filed. The Director shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of
the Alarm Administrator.  The decision of the Director is final as to
administrative remedies with the city.



(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-5-01)



§ 100.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or
terms of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided for in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.



(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-5-01)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   SECOND-HAND SALES





         111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES





         112.   AMUSEMENTS





         113.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES





         114.   ITINERANT MERCHANTS, ITINERANT VENDORS AND
PAWNBROKERS





         115.   TAXICABS





         116.   HEALTH AND SANITATION





         117.   AUTOMOBILE WRECKERS




CHAPTER 110:  SECOND-HAND SALES



Section



Junk and Junk Dealers



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   Purchase of junk from intoxicated persons and minors



   110.03   Examination of junk by police



Junk Dealers, Scrap Metal Processors and Demolishers



   110.15   Definitions; inapplicable to automotive dealers,
second-hand dealers and pawnshops



   110.16   Operation of yards used by junk dealers, scrap metal
processors or demolishers



   110.17   Application to existing junk dealers, scrap metal
processors or demolishers



   110.18   Violations



JUNK AND JUNK DEALERS



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   JUNK.  Shall mean and include scrap iron, tin, brass, copper, lead,
zinc and all metallic substances, secondhand watches, knives, guns, cameras,
jewelry, fishing equipment and similar items handled, purchased, received or
offered for sale by dealers in junk and shall mean and include secondhand
plumbing and electric fixtures, wires, globes, brass pipe, lead pipe and pipe
of other metals, melted metals of any kind, such parts of machinery or
machines that may be identified as such, any fixtures pertaining to a
residence, business house or other house of any kind, automobile accessories,
including horns, hub caps, prestolite tanks, tires and all detached and
detachable parts of any automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or motor vehicle of
any kind or any vehicle of any kind, hydrants, faucets, lawn hose, lawn
sprinklers, gas fixtures, fittings and appliances, garden tools, mechanical
tools of every description, harness, rags, rubber, rope, bottles and utensils
of every description. This enumeration of the articles above shall not be
held to exclude other articles that may be reasonably included under the
general definition of JUNK when given its usual trade meaning.



   JUNK DEALER. Any person primarily engaged in collecting, handling,
buying or selling any of the articles defined as junk or other secondhand
goods, wares or merchandise.



(`87 Code, § 14-61)



§ 110.02  PURCHASE OF JUNK FROM INTOXICATED PERSONS AND MINORS.



   No junk dealer shall receive or purchase any junk from any intoxicated
person nor from any person under the age of 18 years, except upon the written
consent of the parent or guardian of such minor, and in that event, such
writing shall be preserved by such junk dealer for a period of not less than
six months thereafter for public inspection.



(`87 Code, § 14-62)



§ 110.03  EXAMINATION OF JUNK BY POLICE.



   Every junk dealer shall at all times allow the Chief of Police or some
other police officer the privilege of examining all articles of junk he or
she may have received, whether at his or her place of business or elsewhere,
for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the articles are lost or
stolen property.



(`87 Code, § 14-63)



JUNK DEALERS, SCRAP METAL PROCESSORS AND DEMOLISHERS



§ 110.15  DEFINITIONS; INAPPLICABLE TO AUTOMOTIVE DEALERS, SECOND-HAND
DEALERS AND PAWNSHOPS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      DEMOLISHER. Anyone who engages in the business of converting
motor vehicles into processed scrap or scrap metal or of otherwise wrecking
or dismantling motor vehicles.



      JUNK DEALER. Anyone who engages in the business of buying,
selling, trading or otherwise dealing in new or used scrap materials,
including ferrous and nonferrous metal, brass, waste material and the like.



      SCRAP MATERIALS. New or used iron, steel or nonferrous metallic
scrap, brass, waste material and any of the following materials or parts of
said materials or any combination thereof: used and/or inoperative household
appliances, household electrical or plumbing fixtures, floor coverings and/or
window coverings; used lumber, brick, cement block, wire, tubing and pipe,
tubs, drums, barrels and/or roofing material; air conditioning and heating
equipment not currently in use; wrecked and/or junked vehicles; used vehicle
components and parts; used furniture other than that designed for outdoor use
or that which would normally be considered as antique furniture; inoperative
residential lawn care equipment and machinery; used pallets; used windows and
doors; new or used sheet metal, structural steel and/or chain; used and/or
inoperative vending machines, radios and/or televisions; and inoperable
machinery or equipment.



      SCRAP METAL PROCESSOR. Anyone who, from a fixed location, engages
in the business of utilizing machinery or equipment, including wrecked or
junked vehicles, for the processing of or manufacturing of iron, steel or
nonferrous metallic scrap and whose principal product is scrap iron, scrap
steel or nonferrous metallic scrap for remelting purposes.



      SECOND-HAND DEALER. Anyone who engages in the business of buying,
selling, trading or otherwise dealing exclusively in: used books, magazines
and other printed documents; used phonographic records, magnetic audio tapes,
audio discs or other recordings of sound which do not include recordings of
visual images; and/or used items of clothing; but not in any other items,
goods, products, wares or articles which are subject to regulation under this
subchapter.



      USED. Any items, goods, products, wares, chattels or articles of
any sort which have previously been owned by someone other than the
manufacturer or a dealer whose business it is to sell such items, goods,
products, wares, chattels or articles when new to the consumer.



   (B)   Application. This subchapter shall not apply to new or used
equipment, machinery and/or implement dealers not engaging in the business of
buying, selling, trading or otherwise dealing in new or used scrap materials,
as defined herein; or to businesses licensed and/or defined by this section,
other sections of this code and/or state law as new or used automobile
dealers, secondhand dealers or pawnshops. Nor shall this subchapter apply to
anyone who engages in the business of buying, selling, trading or otherwise
dealing in used items or scrap materials, as defined herein, and who conducts
such business from within a wholly enclosed building or structure with no
ongoing or permanent outside storage or display of such used items or scrap
materials.



(`87 Code, § 14-91)



§ 110.16  OPERATION OF YARDS USED BY JUNK DEALERS, SCRAP METAL PROCESSORS
OR DEMOLISHERS.



   (A)   Compliance. All lots or tracts of land used for the purpose of
carrying on the business or trade of junk dealers, scrap metal processors or
demolishers shall comply with the requirements of this section.



   (B)   Fencing, wall requirements. Every yard owned or operated by a
junk dealer, scrap metal processor or demolisher within the city shall be
completely surrounded and enclosed by a fence or wall as follows:



      (1)   All sides of such yard shall be bounded by a fence or
wall at least six feet in height;



      (2)   The term FENCE OR WALL, as used herein, shall include a
fence or wall which is of either solid or chain link construction;



      (3)   The provisions of this section pertaining to fencing or
wall requirements for such yards shall supersede and repeal the provisions
the Zoning Code which provide that wrecking yards and junk yards established
in Light or Heavy Industrial Zoning Districts after the effective date of the
Zoning Code must be wholly enclosed within a building or by a fence not less
than eight feet in height and in which the openings or cracks are less than
15% of the total area;



      (4)   The provisions the Zoning Code, which provide that when
a commercial, industrial or business use established after the effective date
of the Zoning Code is established on a lot or premises located adjacent to
any residential zoning district, a six-foot high solid fence or wall shall be
erected and maintained along the property line to provide visual screening
shall, in such instances involving the businesses defined and regulated by
this subchapter, supersede and govern over the provisions of this section.



   (C)   Constructions, maintenance of fence or wall. Every fence or
wall herein required shall be constructed and maintained as follows:



      (1)   All fences or walls shall be constructed of wood,
masonry, corrugated sheet metal, chain link or any combination thereof;
provided, however, that any one side shall be bounded by a fence or wall
constructed of only one of the above materials;



      (2)   Chain link fences shall be constructed of galvanized
chain link fencing;



      (3)   All fences or walls shall extend downward to within
three inches of the ground and shall test plumb and square at all times;



      (4)   All fences or walls shall be constructed in compliance
with all applicable provisions of the Building Code of the city.



   (D)   Use of wall, door or building as part of fence or wall. Any
part of a fence or wall required by division (B) of this section may consist,
in whole or in part, of a solid wall and door, or walls and doors, of any
completely enclosed building on said premises, if such wall or door meets all
construction requirements herein set forth.



   (E)   Gates at openings in enclosure. Openings in the prescribed
enclosure which are necessary to permit reasonable access to such yards shall
be equipped with a gate or gates, constructed and maintained in accordance
with the requirements for a fence or wall herein set forth. Such gates shall
be closed and securely locked at all times except during business hours.



   (F)   Use of premises outside enclosure. It shall be unlawful for
any owner, operator, his or her agents or employees to display, store or work
on any junked or wrecked automobile vehicle or the parts, accessories or junk
therefrom or any other new or used scrap materials outside of the herein
required fence or wall.



   (G)   Control of vegetation. It shall be unlawful for the owners or
operators of any yard used by a junk dealer, scrap metal processor or
demolisher to allow grass or other vegetation to grow to a height of more
than 12 inches above the ground.



   (H)   Compliance with regulations and ordinances. All yards used by
a junk dealer, scrap metal processor or demolisher must at all times be in
full compliance with all city ordinances regarding health and safety,
including specifically, without limitation, all requirements of the City Fire
Code.



   (I)   Vector and rodent control. An owner or operator shall provide
for vector and rodent control at least once within a 90-day period or more
frequently as needed.



(`87 Code, § 14-92) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.17  APPLICATION TO EXISTING JUNK DEALERS, SCRAP METAL PROCESSORS OR
DEMOLISHERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a junk
dealer, scrap metal processor or demolisher in the city who is not in
compliance with the provisions and requirements of this subchapter; provided
however, that existing junk dealers, scrap metal processors or demolishers
operating in the city upon the effective date of this subchapter shall be
authorized and allowed to continue to maintain and operate their yards and/or
businesses for a period of six months after the effective date of this
subchapter without being subject to the provisions and requirements of same.



   (B)   Upon expiration of the six-month period provided in this
subchapter, each such existing junk dealer, scrap metal processor or
demolisher shall be subject to the provisions and requirements of this
subchapter and to the penalties provided herein for violation of same.



(`87 Code, § 14-93) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.18  VIOLATIONS.



   Violations of or failure to comply with any provision or requirement of
any subsection or section of this subchapter by any junk dealer, scrap metal
processor or demolisher in the city shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as
provided in § 10.99. Each day any such violation shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.



(`87 Code, § 14-94) (Ord. 1986-4, passed 3-16-86; Am. Ord. 1988-5, passed
7-5-88)



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



Sale of Alcoholic Beverages



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Permitted uses



   111.03   Sale of alcoholic beverages prohibited near public schools,
private schools, churches and public hospitals



   111.04   Sale of alcoholic beverages prohibited near day-care
centers and child-care facilities; exception



   111.05   Sale of alcoholic beverages prohibited in residential areas



   111.06   Signage



   111.07   Local fees for license and application



Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages



   111.20   Definitions



   111.21   Consumption of alcoholic beverages unlawful in certain
places



 



   111.99   Penalty



SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL BEVERAGE PERMIT. An official certificate issued by the City
Secretary certifying compliance with this chapter.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol or any beverage containing more than
one-half of 1% of alcohol by volume which is capable of use for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted.



   ALE OR MALT LIQUOR. A malt beverage containing more than 4% of alcohol
by weight.



   BEER. A malt beverage containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and
not more than 4% of alcohol by weight and does not include a beverage
designated by label or otherwise by a name other than beer.



   BEER AND WINE RETAIL SALES. Businesses that engage in the sale of beer,
wine and/or malt liquors containing alcohol in excess of one-half of one
percent by volume but not more than 17% by volume for off-premises
consumption only.



   BILLBOARD. A structure directly attached to the land, a house, or a
building having one or more spaces used to display a sign or advertisement of
an alcoholic beverage or a person engaged in the manufacture, sale, or
distribution of alcoholic beverages, whether or not the structure is
artificially lighted.



   CHILD-CARE FACILITY. As some terms are defined by Tex. Human Resources
Code § 42.002 means a certified facility licensed, certified or registered
by the Department of Family and Protective Services to provide assessment,
care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for a child who
is not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of
the facility for all or part of the 24-hour day whether or not the facility
is operated for profit or charges for the services it offers.



   CITY. Shall mean and refer to the City of Mount Pleasant, Texas.



   CONVENIENCE CENTER. Retail establishments which carry convenience
goods, such as groceries, drugs and some variety items, including grocery
stores, markets, supermarkets and variety stores.



   DEALER. As that term is used in § 109.33, Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code
V.T.C.S. and shall include "person" as that term is defined herein.



   ELECTRIC SIGN. A structure or device other than an illuminated
billboard by which artificial light produced by electricity is used to
advertise the alcoholic beverage business by a person who manufactures,
sells, or distributes alcoholic beverages or to advertise an alcoholic
beverage.



   HOTEL/MOTEL. A building or a group of two or more buildings containing
guest rooms or apartments and used primarily for the accommodation of
automobile travelers containing a restaurant as defined herein.



   LICENSEE. A person who is the holder of a permit provided for in this
chapter, or any agent, servant, or employee of that person.



   MIXED BEVERAGE. One or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or
part of an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal
size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the holder of a
mixed beverage permit.



   OFF-PREMISES CONSUMPTION. The sale of sealed alcoholic beverage by an
establishment permitted herein for the sale of consumption off-premises.



   ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION. The sale of an alcoholic beverage for the
consumption in a business establishment as permitted herein.



   OPEN CONTAINER. A container that is no longer sealed.



   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING. Any sign bearing a word, mark, description, or
other device that is used to advertise an alcoholic beverage or the business
of a person who manufactures, sells or distributes an alcoholic beverage if
the sign is displayed outside the walls or enclosure of a building or
structure where a license or permit is issued or if it is displayed inside a
building so that it is visible by a person of ordinary vision from outside
the building.



   PERMITTEE. A person who is the holder of a permit provided for in this
chapter, or an agent, servant or employee of that person.



   PERSON. A natural person or association of natural persons, trustee,
receiver, partnership, or corporation, organization of the manager, agent,
servant or employee of any of them.



   PRIVATE SCHOOL. A private school including a parochial school that:



      (1)   Offers a course of instruction for students in one or
more grades from kindergarten through grade 12; and



      (2)   Has more than 100 students enrolled and attending
courses at a single location.



   RESTAURANT. A place where meals are prepared and served to the public
for consumption on or off the premises.



   WINE. The product obtained from the alcoholic fermentation of juice of
sound ripe grapes, fruits, berries or honey, and includes wine coolers.



   WINE COOLER. An alcoholic beverage consisting of vinous liquor plus
plain, sparkling or carbonated water and which may also contain one or more
natural or artificial blending or flavoring ingredients. A wine cooler may
have alcohol content as low as one-half of 1% by volume.



(Ord. 2015-20, passed 10-20-15)



§ 111.02  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Beer and wine retail sales and pre-packaged alcoholic beverage
retail sales and holding an alcoholic beverage permit issued by the City
Secretary of the City of Mount Pleasant will be allowed to operate only in
areas that are zoned "PD" Planned Development District, "HI" Heavy Industrial
District, "LI" Light Industrial District, "C" Commercial District, "CB"
Central Business District, "GR" General Retail District, and "NS"
Neighborhood Services District. Zoning requirements and restrictions shall be
enforced concerning the location of retail and/or wholesale outlets that
provide and/or promote alcohol sales.



   (B)   The sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption
shall only be permitted by restaurants or hotels/ motels holding a food and
beverage certificate and the restaurant's or hotel/ motel's revenue from sale
of alcoholic beverages shall be less than 50% of its gross revenue.



   (C)   The sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption
shall only be permitted by convenience centers that derive 40% or more of its
gross revenue from the sale of non-alcoholic products.



   (D)   Mixed beverage sales for on-premises consumption will be
allowed to operate only in areas that are zoned "PD" Planned Development
District, "HI" Heavy Industrial District, "LI" Light Industrial District, "C"
Commercial District, "CB" Central Business District, "GR" General Retail
District, and "NS" Neighborhood Services District. Zoning requirements and
restrictions shall be enforced concerning the location of retail and/ or
wholesale outlets that provide and/ or promote alcohol sales to the extent
that such requirements and/ or restrictions do not violate the laws of the
state or the rules and regulations of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission
as they may currently exist or in the future be enacted.



   (E)   Any business existing or new that desires to sell any
alcoholic beverage within the city limits of the city must obtain an
alcoholic beverage permit issued by the city.



(Ord. 2015-20, passed 10-20-15)



§ 111.03  SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED NEAR PUBLIC SCHOOLS,
PRIVATE SCHOOLS, CHURCHES AND PUBLIC HOSPITALS.



    (A)   It shall be unlawful for any dealer to sell alcoholic
beverages from or at a place of business within this city within 300 feet of
a public or private school or a licensed public hospital.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any dealer to sell alcoholic
beverages from or at a place of business within this city within 300 feet of
a church, except this section shall not apply to the sale for on-premise
consumption by restaurants or hotels/motels holding a food and beverage
certificate, or to the sale for off- premise consumption by a convenience
center holding the appropriate license, located within the zoning area "CB"
Central Business District.



   (C)   The measurement of the distance between the place of business
where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be
along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front
door and in direct line across intersections.



   (D)   The measurement of the distance between the places of business
where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public or private school shall be
in a direct line from the property line of the place of business and in a
direct line across intersections.



(Ord. 2015-20, passed 10-20-15; Am. Ord. 2017-17, passed 11-21-17)



§ 111.04  SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED NEAR DAY-CARE CENTERS AND
CHILD-CARE FACILITIES; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a wine and beer
retailers permit, mixed beverage permit, retail dealers on premise license,
or brew pub license who does not hold a food and beverage certificate to sell
alcoholic beverages from or at a place of business within this city within
300 feet of a day-care or child-care facility.



   (B)   This section does not apply to a foster group home, foster
family home, family home, agency group home or agency home as those terms are
defined by Tex. Human Resources Code § 42.002.



   (C)   The measurement of the distance between the place of business
where alcoholic beverages are sold and the day-care center or child-care
facility shall be in a direct line from property line of the day-care center
or child-care facility to the property line of the place of business and in a
direct line across intersections.



(Ord. 2015-20, passed 10-20-15)



§ 111.05  SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or dealer to sell alcoholic
beverages on residential lots, tracts, or parcels of land zoned as "FD"
Future Development District, "SF-1" Single Family Residential District,
"SF-2" Single Family Residential District, "TF" Two Family Residential
District, "MF" Multi-Family Residential District, "MH" Mobile Home District
within this city.



(Ord. 2015-20, passed 10-20-15)



§ 111.06  SIGNAGE.



   No person may erect or maintain a billboard, electric sign, or any
outdoor advertising in violation of any ordinance of the city.



(Ord. 2015-20, passed 10-20-15)



§ 111.07  LOCAL FEES FOR LICENSE AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   For on-premises consumption, the city hereby levies an annual
fee, beginning after the third year of the initial permit, in a sum equal to
50% of the state's third renewal fee for a mixed beverage permit with a food
and beverage certificate, and all other licenses required, as authorized by
the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, except a temporary or agent's beer license
issued for premise locations within the corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   For off-premises consumption, the city hereby levies an annual
fee in a sum equal to 50% of the state's fee for a beer retailer's
off-premises license, and all other licenses required, as authorized by the
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, except a temporary or agent's beer license
issued for premises locations within the corporate limits of the city.



   (C)   There is levied a $150.00 administrative processing fee for
acceptance, review and verification of all new applications.



   (D)   All payments shall be made to the city along with the
submission of the application. The city shall issue a receipt for display
with the state license or permit on the licensed or permitted premises.



(Ord. 2015-20, passed 10-20-15)



CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



§ 111.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, all definitions of words, terms
and phrases as set forth in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code are adopted and
made a part thereof.



(Ord. 2015-9, passed 6-2-15)



§ 111.21  CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES UNLAWFUL IN CERTAIN PLACES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic
beverage or to have in his or her possession an open container that contains
an alcoholic beverage while in, upon or at any of the following premises
without submitting an application for a special event and the special event
application has met all requirements and has been approved as provided in
Chapter 112.



      (1)   A public park owned by the city;



      (2)   The Mount Pleasant Civic Center as set by the Civic
Center Policy and Procedures Manual;



      (3)   Any facilities and/or premises owned by the city;



      (4)   City owned cemeteries;



   (B)   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this
section shall be fined as provided in § 10.99.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE is used as
defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.



(Ord. 2015-9, passed 6-2-15)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   Any violation of chapter shall be subject to the penalty as provided
for in § 10.99 of this code.



(Ord. 2015-20, passed 10-20-15)



CHAPTER 112:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



General Provisions



   112.01   Pool halls



Special Events



   112.15   Definitions



   112.16   Purpose



   112.17   Application for permit



   112.18   Reserved



   112.19   Issuance or denial of permit



   112.20   Appeal procedure



   112.21   Revocation of permit



   112.22   Events exempt from permit



   112.23   Expiration



   112.24   Fees



   112.25   Inspections



   112.26   Requirements



   112.27   Prohibitions



   112.28   Restrictions



Dances and Dance Halls



   112.40   Definitions



   112.41   Enforcement



   112.42   Cumulative remedies



   112.43   Duty of Chief of Police relative to licenses and permits



   112.44   Transfer of license or permit



   112.45   Maintenance of dance hall premises



   112.46   Certain persons and conduct prohibited



   112.47   Authority to vacate premises



   112.48   License required



   112.49   License application



   112.50   License inspection prerequisite to issuance



   112.51   License issuance



   112.52   License fee



   112.53   License contents; posting



   112.54   License termination



   112.55   License confers no vested right



   112.56   License suspension, revocation



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 112.01  POOL HALLS.



   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this section, pool halls may be
established and operated in the city. As used in this section, the term POOL
HALL shall mean and include any commercial amusement and recreation center
open to the public and offering pool tables, video and/or arcade games,
pinball games and/or other games of skill or pleasure.



(Ord. 1985-12, passed 5-7-85)



   (B)   (1)   All persons desiring to open and operate a pool hall
in Mount Pleasant must secure a permit from the Chief of Police. If the
permit is sought at a location where other business is or will be conducted,
the applicant must be the person conducting the business. The person desiring
the permit shall file an application with the City Police Department and pay
a fee of $25.00. This application shall contain the personal history of the
applicant and the location of the pool hall. The application shall be
submitted to the Chief of Police for investigation, and he or she shall make
an investigation of the applicant and the proposed location and return same
to the City Manager with his or her recommendation as to whether the license
shall issue. Upon receiving the report of the Chief of Police, the City
Manager shall direct the Chief of Police to issue or not issue the license.



      (2)   Any applicant who has been refused a license may appeal
to the City Council for a review by filing a written appeal within ten days
after the applicant is notified that the license will not be issued. The
decision of the Council shall be final.



   (C)   Permits shall be issued subject to the following:



      (1)   Permits shall be issued to individuals and not
corporations or other legal entities;



      (2)   Permits shall not be transferable by sale, inheritance
or otherwise. Cessation of business for 20 days shall cancel the permit;



      (3)   The location of a permit shall not be moved without
written application and approval by the Chief of Police;



      (4)   No gambling shall be permitted;



      (5)   An adult person shall be present as an attendant during
open hours;



      (6)   No drinking of intoxicants, nor persons under the
influence of intoxicants, nor loud and abusive language shall be permitted;



      (7)   The place of business shall be well lighted and kept
clean;



      (8)   During business hours, the doors shall not be locked or
otherwise fastened so as to prevent access by the public;



      (9)   City officials and police officers shall be permitted in
and on the premises at all times;



      (10)   All attendants shall be persons of good moral character;



      (11)   The application for the license has been correctly
answered;



      (12)   The business will at all times be conducted in
compliance with the city code, state and federal law;



      (13)   On the street front of the building there shall be an
area of uncovered glass that will enable a full view of the inside of the
building from the outside;



      (14)   Upon issuance, permits must be conspicuously displayed
in full view of the public.



   (D)   A violation of these restrictions shall permit the city to
cancel the license.



(`87 Code, § 14-101) (Ord. passed 2-4-64; Am. Ord. 1973-13, passed 9-18-73)



SPECIAL EVENTS



§ 112.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT. Any person who has filed a written application for a special
events permit.



   ARTERIAL STREETS. Major streets in the city’s street system that
serve as an avenue for the circulation of traffic into, out of or around the
city and carry a high volume of traffic.



   CARNIVAL. An amusement park set up temporarily.



   CHAIRPERSON. The individual responsible for conducting the special
event.



   CIRCUS. A public entertainment with performances by acrobats, clowns
and/or trained animals.



   CITY CO-SPONSOR. An event jointly sponsored by the city and a
non-profit organization and approved by the City Manager.



   CLOSURE. The time and equipment used to secure one street at one point
from curb to curb.



   CONCERT. A public musical performance in which a number of singers or
singer, instrumentalists, or disc jockey perform that draw a significant
crowd.



   DISC JOCKEY. A person who selects, plays or announces music at a
gathering.



   FESTIVAL. A period or program of activities, cultural events or
entertainment.



   MASS GATHERING. Any meeting or gathering held at one specific location
within the city limits, wherein anyone in attendance at the meeting or
gathering is or is not expected to be within a permanent structure and which
attracts or can be expected to attract persons who will remain at the
location of the meeting or gathering for a period of time.



   NONPROFIT EVENT. A fundraising event planned, organized, promoted,
managed, and held wholly by a legitimate nonprofit 501c, whereby all proceeds
raised during the event will benefit the sponsoring agency.



   PARADE. The assembly of three or more persons or vehicles whose
gathering is for the common design and purpose of traveling in procession on
a public thoroughfare from one location to another.



   PERSON. Any individual, assumed name entity, partnership, association,
corporation or organization.



   SIDEWALK. A paved path for pedestrian foot traffic.



   SPECIAL EVENT. An occurrence which takes place on a periodic or special
occasion, wholly or partly on the city's rights-of-way, public property or
private property, which may cause interruption of regular activities of the
citizens when the needs of traffic, parking, restrooms, crowds, zoning, etc.
exceed the original design and intent of the site or location or may require
the special attention and involvement of city personnel or facilities.
Examples of such activities are, but not limited to, nonprofit fundraising
events, tent sales, parking lot sales, political rallies, amusement rides,
parades, block parties, disk jockey other than at a permitted dance hall,
carnivals, marathon, 5k, walk-a-thon, festival, closing of a public street,
blocking or restriction of public property where otherwise may be prohibited
by this Code or any other code adopted by the city.



   SPECIAL EVENTS PERMIT. An official document issued by the City of Mount
Pleasant authorizing performance of a special event.



   STREET. A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, boulevard or any other designation.



   SUPERVISED EVENT. The critical watching or overseeing of a special
event by a public law enforcement agency, security company or responsible
adult officer(s) or agent(s) of the nonprofit agency sponsoring event, as
approved by the Chief of Police.



(`87 Code, § 14-112) (Ord. 1994-5, passed 6-7-94; Am. Ord. 2009-15, passed
10-6-09; Am. Ord. 2017- 8, passed 8-1-17)



§ 112.16  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide requirements to safeguard
life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the location, duration, hours of operation and quality of
materials and appurtenances for specific events within the city.



(`87 Code, § 14-113) (Ord. 1994-5, passed 6-7-94; Am. Ord. 2009-15, passed
10-6-09)



§ 112.17  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person or organization who wants to conduct a special
event shall apply to the City of Mount Pleasant for a permit at least 30 days
in advance of the date of the proposed special event. The City Manager may,
in his or her discretion, consider any application for a permit to conduct a
special event which is filed less than 30 days prior to the date such special
event is to be conducted. The application for such permit shall be made in
writing on a form approved by the City Manager. In order that adequate
arrangements may be made for the proper policing, fir standards, sanitation
and overall public safety of the special event, the application shall contain
the following information:



      (1)   The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization,
the special event chairman and the addresses and telephone numbers of each;



      (2)   The purpose of the special event, the date when it is
proposed to be conducted, the location of the assembly area, the location of
the disbanding area, the route to be traveled and the approximate time when
the special event will assemble, start and terminate. Arterial street
closings must be approved by the City Council prior to issuance of permit;



      (3)   A brief description of the type and number of individual
floats, marching units, vehicles, bands and/or boats, including a description
of any sound amplification equipment to be used;



      (4)   A map indicating the route of the special event;



      (5)   What portions of streets to be traversed or occupied by
such special event;



      (6)   The maximum length of such special event in miles or
fractions thereof;



      (7)   The disbanding area and disbanding time;



      (8)   The number of persons and vehicles required to monitor
the special event;



(`87 Code, § 14-118) (Ord. 1994-5, passed 6-7-94; Am. Ord. 2009-15, passed
10-6-09)



§ 112.18  RESERVED.



§ 112.19  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Standards for issuance. The City Manager or designee shall
issue a special event permit conditioned upon the applicant’s written
agreement to comply with the terms of such permit.



   (B)   Standards for denial. The City Manager or designee shall deny
an application for a special event and notify the applicant of such denial
where:



      (1)   The City Manager or designee makes any finding contrary
to the findings required to be made for the issuance of a permit;



      (2)   The information contained in the application is found to
be false or nonexistent in any material detail;



      (3)   The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply
with all conditions of the permit.



(`87 Code, § 14-120) (Ord. 1994-5, passed 6-7-94; Am. Ord. 2009-15, passed
10-6-09; Am. Ord. 2017- 8, passed 8-1-17)



§ 112.20  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Upon a denial by the City Manager of an application made
pursuant to § 112.17, the applicant may appeal from the determination of the
City Manager within five days thereafter to the City Council by filing a
written notice of appeal for hearing by the City Council at its next meeting.
Upon such appeal, the City Council may reverse, affirm or modify in any
regard the determination of the City Manager.



   (B)   In the event an application is not filed within the required
time, as specified in § 112.17, the applicant may request a waiver of such
requirement by the City Council at its next regular meeting, or at a special
meeting which may be called prior thereto by said City Council to consider
such matter, and the City Council, if it finds unusual circumstances and in
the exercise of its sound discretion, may waive such requirement.



(`87 Code, § 14-121) (Ord. 1994-5, passed 6-7-94; Am. Ord. 2009-15, passed
10-6-09)



§ 112.21  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   Any permit for a special event issued pursuant to this chapter may be
summarily revoked by the City Manager at any time when by reason of disaster,
public calamity, riot or other emergency the City Manager determines that the
safety of the public or property requires such revocation. Notice of such
action revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing to the permittee by
personal service or by certified mail.



(`87 Code, § 14-123) (Am. Ord. 1994-5, passed 6-7-94; Am. Ord. 2009-15,
passed 10-6-09)



§ 112.22  EVENTS EXEMPT FROM PERMIT.



   (A)   A special events permit will not be required for the following:



      (1)   City-sponsored events;



      (2)   Private party when private property is used and the
event does not infringe on the rights of others;



      (3)   Church-sponsored and supervised events when church
property is used;



      (4)   Mount Pleasant Independent School District-sponsored and
supervised events when school property is used;



      (5)   Tent sales, truck load sales and promotions when private
property is used and the activity/event is not otherwise prohibited by
ordinance;



      (6)   Funeral procession;



      (7)   Weddings and wedding receptions when private or church
property is used; and



      (8)   Construction projects.



   (B)   Exemption from permit shall not be deemed to grant
authorization for any special event to be held in violation of the provisions
of this subchapter or any other laws, ordinances or codes of the city.



   (C)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to waive any
other requirement for separate plumbing, electrical, mechanical, health and
fire prevention related permits when these trades are applied.



(`87 Code, § 14-124) (Am. Ord. 1994-5, passed 6-7-94; Am. Ord. 2009-15,
passed 10-6-09)



§ 112.23  EXPIRATION.



   Every permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall
expire by limitation and become null and void if the special event authorized
by such permit is not held on the permitted date. Before such special event
can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the
fee shall be one- half the amount required for the first permit, provided the
suspension has not exceeded 45 calendar days from the date of the first
permit issuance. In order to renew after this expiration, the applicant shall
pay a new full permit fee.



(`87 Code, § 14-125) (Am. Ord. 1994-5, passed 6-7-94; Am. Ord. 2009-15,
passed 10-6-09)



§ 112.24  FEES.



   The fees for each special event permit shall be as set forth below:



   (A)   Special events:   $250.00;



   (B)   Building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, fire prevention
and health permit fees will be separate and in addition to fees stated above;



   (C)   All taxing entities within Titus County shall be exempt from
all fees;



   (D)   The Mt. Pleasant/Titus County Chamber of Commerce shall be
exempt from all fees;



   (E)   Local nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from special
event permit fee;



   (F)   No other waiver of fees may be granted except by the City
Council;



   (G)   Public safety inspection fee (see § 112.25);



   (H)   Fees for expenses related to the use of public safety or other
city services personnel and/or equipment related to the special event as
required and approved through the application process.



(`87 Code, § 14-126) (Am. Ord. 1995-10, passed 6-20-95; Am. Ord. 2009-15,
passed 10-6-09; Am. Ord. 2017-8, passed 8-1-17)



§ 112.25  INSPECTIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the permit applicant at the time of permit
issuance to determine the need and type of any required inspections. If
inspections are required, no special event shall be commenced without such
inspection and approval. An inspection fee will be charged to cover the cost
of the inspection by city officials.  The fee amount will be predetermined
and provided to the applicant as part of the application process.



(`87 Code, § 14-127) (Am. Ord. 1994-5, passed 6-7-94; Am. Ord. 2009-15,
passed 10-6-09; Am. Ord. 2017-8, passed 8-1-17)



§ 112.26  REQUIREMENTS.



   All special events shall comply with the following requirements unless
specific exemptions are noted on the special event permit.



   (A)   When required, the Street Department will provide all required
barricading for street closures.



   (B)   When required, all owners of property abutting a special event
location shall be notified in writing by the applicant of any upcoming event
that may by scope and nature impact such owners.



   (C)   Applicants shall submit evidence of adequate parking. Parking
on property not owned by the applicant shall require a written agreement
signed by the involved persons.



   (D)   Amusement rides and/or attractions associated with special
events shall comply with statutory rules and regulations set forth in Tex.
Occupations Code, §§  2151.001 et seq., designated as Amusement Ride
Safety Inspection and Insurance Act. Acceptable proof of a “Ride Safety
Certification Inspection Report,” issued within six months of the time the
amusement rides and/or attractions are to be offered within the city.



   (E)   Special events that include the use of tent(s), canvas
material or any temporary structures shall comply with the requirements as
set forth in the Fire and Building Codes as adopted by the city. When
required, fire lanes shall be provided and maintained and the site shall be
maintained in such manner that fire hazards are not created.



   (F)   Where food service is provided, such service shall be in
self-contained units or in a manner as specified by the Tex. Health and
Safety Code.



   (G)   Sufficient number of sanitary facilities shall be provided on
the premises as determined by estimate of guests.



   (H)   Animals shall not be kept closer than 300 feet to any
residential use districts or commercial use districts during nonoperating
hours of such event. Waste from animals shall be removed daily from the
premises.



   (I)   When required, provisions for purchase of city water shall be
made through the designated city office.



   (J)   Provisions for the disposal of solid waste shall be required
for all outdoor special events.



   (K)   An applicant for a special events permit, when such special
event is to be held on public property as defined herein, and circuses or
carnivals held on private property shall furnish the city with a certificate
of public liability insurance, with the city as an additional named insured
before such special events permit is issued. The certificate shall serve as
evidence of a policy written by a company licensed in the State of Texas. The
policy is to be in effect for the duration of the event, with minimum limits
of liability of $250,000.00 per person and $500,000.00 per occurrence for
bodily injury or death and $100,000.00 for property damage per occurrence.
Exception: the provisions stated above shall not apply to private parties
that will not be open to the general public.



   (L)   An applicant for any special events permit shall sign an
agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees,
agents and representatives against all claims and liability in causes of
action resulting from injury or damage to persons or property arising out of
the special event.



(`87 Code, § 14-128) (Am. Ord. 1994-5, passed 6-7-94; Am. Ord. 2009-15,
passed 10-6-09; Am.Ord. 2017-8, passed 8-1-17)



§ 112.27  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Safe and orderly movement of normal traffic shall not be
substantially interrupted. (“Substantially interrupted” shall be
determined by the city.)



   (B)   The event shall not impede the movement of firefighting
equipment or ambulances.



   (C)   An event shall not conflict in time or location with any other
event for which a permit has been issued.



   (D)   It is unlawful for a person to use or cause to be used any
loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, sound amplifier, or any other machine or
device that produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound outside of a building or
enclosed structure or causes sounds produced, reproduced, or amplified within
a building or enclosed structure to exceed 85 decibels as specified in Tex.
Penal Code, § 42.01 when measured, without first obtaining a permit to do so.



(`87 Code, § 14-129) (Ord. 1994-5, passed 6-7-94; Am. Ord. 2009-15, passed
10-6-09; Am. Ord. 2017- 8, passed 8-1-17)



§ 112.28  RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   An event may not require the assignment of so great a number
of police, ambulances or firefighting equipment that normal emergency
services could be hindered.



   (B)   The concentration of people, vehicles and animals at assembly
points for any event may not unduly interfere with fire and police protection
or ambulance service to areas near such assembly points.



   (C)   The city may prohibit or restrict parking when in the opinion
of the City Manager or his or her designee it is reasonable and necessary.



(`87 Code, § 14-130) (Am. Ord. 1994-5, passed 6-7-94; Am. Ord. 2009-15,
passed 10-6-09)



DANCES AND DANCE HALLS



§ 112.40  DEFINITIONS.



   The term PUBLIC DANCE, as used in this subchapter, shall be taken to
mean any dance or ball to which admission can be had by payment of a fee, by
the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token or at which a
charge is made for caring for clothing or other property, or any other dance
to which the public generally may gain admission with or without the payment
of a fee. The term PUBLIC DANCE HALL as used herein shall be taken to mean
any room, place or space in which a public dance or public ball is held or
any room, place or space where dancing is permitted.



(`87 Code, § 14-135)



§ 112.41  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Chief of Police, or other persons under his or her direction, shall
have the authority to enforce the provisions of this subchapter and all
rules, regulations and ordinances relating to public dances and public dance
halls. In making determinations as to proper cleanliness and sanitation
conditions, fire safety requirements, building regulations, uses and
requirements and the like, the Chief of Police or other persons under his or
her direction shall work with and seek the aid of the proper city department
administering such regulations for the city.



(`87 Code, § 14-136)



§ 112.42  CUMULATIVE REMEDIES.



   Any remedy prescribed by this subchapter for the enforcement of same
shall be merely cumulative and shall not preclude resorting to any other
remedy provided by law.



(`87 Code, § 14-137)



§ 112.43  DUTY OF CHIEF OF POLICE RELATIVE TO LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   The Chief of Police shall examine all applications for dance hall
licenses and dance permits and make recommendations with reference to
applications for dance hall licenses and dance permits.



(`87 Code, § 14-138)



§ 112.44  TRANSFER OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.



   No license or permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter
shall be transferred without the written consent of the City Council.



(`87 Code, § 14-139)



§ 112.45  MAINTENANCE OF DANCE HALL PREMISES.



   All public dance halls shall be kept at all times in clean, healthful
and sanitary condition, and all rooms connected therewith shall be kept open
and the entire place shall be well lighted.



(`87 Code, § 14-140)



§ 112.46  CERTAIN PERSONS AND CONDUCT PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any public dance hall
to permit any boisterous or disorderly person to enter, be or remain in or to
assist in any such public dance hall or public dance, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to conduct himself or herself in a boisterous or
disorderly manner in any public dance hall or at any public dance. No
intoxicated, gross-mannered or vulgar person or person of indecent character
shall be permitted in any dance hall, and no person shall be permitted who
conducts himself or herself in a gross or vulgar manner. No indecent, freak
or immodest dances shall be allowed.



(`87 Code, § 14-141) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.47  AUTHORITY TO VACATE PREMISES.



   The Chief of Police, or other person under his or her direction, shall
have the power and it shall be his or her duty to cause any place, hall or
room where any public dance is held or given to be vacated whenever any
provision of this subchapter is being violated or whenever any indecent act
is committed or when any disorder of a gross, violent or vulgar character
shall take place therein.



(`87 Code, § 14-142)



§ 112.48  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or conduct any
public dance within the city, unless the dance hall in which the same is held
is licensed for such purpose.



   (B)   It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to dance at any
public dance that is not duly licensed and any person engaging in a dance or
dancing at an unlicensed public dance hall shall be deemed guilty of
disorderly conduct and a misdemeanor. The owner, proprietor, manager or
person in charge of any unlicensed public dance hall who permits or condones
any person to engage in a dance shall also be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(`87 Code, § 14-151) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.49  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   Any person desiring a license to operate a public dance hall shall file
with the Chief of Police an application for such license on a form furnished
by the city giving the information requested thereon, and it shall be
unlawful for an applicant to misrepresent any fact or make any false
statement in such application, and any such misrepresentation shall, in
addition to the other penalties prescribed by law, be sufficient cause for
denial, suspension or revocation of the license.



(`87 Code, § 14-152)



§ 112.50  LICENSE INSPECTION PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE.



   No dance hall license shall be granted unless it shall appear, upon
inspection and investigation by the Chief of Police, the Health Officer, the
Fire Marshal and the Building Inspector, that the premises desired to be used
for the purpose of conducting a dance hall comply with the laws of the state,
the provisions of this subchapter, the ordinances of the city regulating
health and sanitation, the fire regulations, the zoning requirements and the
Building Code and that the proposed dance hall is properly ventilated and
supplied with sufficient toilet conveniences and a safe and proper place for
the purpose for which it is used, as determined by regulations adopted by the
city. The officers named herein shall, in their respective capacities, note
their approval or disapproval upon the application for the license.



(`87 Code, § 14-153)



§ 112.51  LICENSE ISSUANCE.



   Upon the approval of the application by the various city officials and
the payment of the required fee, the Chief of Police shall issue the license
applied for under the provisions of this subchapter.



(`87 Code, § 14-154)



§ 112.52  LICENSE FEE.



   Before any license shall be issued under the provisions of this
subchapter, the applicant shall pay an annual fee of $100.00 at the time of
making application for such license. Under no conditions shall such fee be
refunded if such license is not issued or is terminated before the same
expires.



(`87 Code, § 14-155)



§ 112.53  LICENSE CONTENTS; POSTING.



   A dance hall license issued under this subchapter shall state on its
face to whom it is issued, the date of expiration, the address and location
of such dance hall and shall be signed by the Chief of Police and posted by
the licensee in a conspicuous place and in such a manner and position that it
may be easily read at any time of the day or night.



(`87 Code, § 14-156)



§ 112.54  LICENSE TERMINATION.



   All licenses issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall
terminate one year from the date of such issuance.



(`87 Code, § 14-157)



§ 112.55  LICENSE CONFERS NO VESTED RIGHT.



   The granting of any dance hall license shall in no event be construed
as the granting or conferring of any vested right to the licensee or
operator, but such license shall be subject to revocation or suspension.



(`87 Code, § 14-158)



§ 112.56  LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION.



   Any license issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be
suspended or revoked for the violation of any application provision of this
code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation.



(`87 Code, § 14-159)



CHAPTER 113:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



General Provisions



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Purpose



   113.03   Classification



   113.04   Exceptions



   113.05   Location



   113.06   Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit
films or videos



   113.07   Additional regulations for adult motel



Licenses



   113.20   License required



   113.21   Display of license



   113.22   Application



   113.23   Investigation, issuance or denial of license



   113.24   Fee



   113.25   Transfer of license



   113.26   Expiration and renewal



   113.27   Enforcement and inspection



   113.28   Suspension and revocation of licenses



   113.29   Notice, hearing and appeal



   113.30   Amortization of nonconforming uses



   113.31   Unlawful acts



   113.32   Not to legalize anything prohibited by state law or city
ordinance



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically-controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of SPECIFIED
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment which
as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any
form of consideration any one or more of the following:



      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations which depict or describe SPECIFIED
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS; or



      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed
for use in connection with SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:



      (1)   Persons, including any employee(s), who appear in a
state of nudity or semi-nudity;



      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS; or



      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:



      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of
this adult type of photographic reproductions; or



      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
less than ten hours; or



      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any
form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized
by the depiction or description of SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED
ANATOMICAL AREAS.



   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a
state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure
of SPECIFIEDSEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police or his or her designated agent.



   CHURCH. A building in which persons regularly assemble to worship,
intended primarily for purposes connected with faith or for propagating a
particular form of religion.



   ESCORT. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.



   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.



   ESTABLISHMENT. This term means and includes any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented
business as a new business;



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;



      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any
other existing sexually oriented business; or



      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.



   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license.



   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person who appears in a state of
nudity or displays SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by
other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.



   NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY. This term means:



      (1)   The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male
genitals, female genitals or female breast; or



      (2)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or areola of the female breast.



   PERSON. An individual, partnership or corporation or other entity.



   REGULATIONS. The provisions of this chapter, as it may be amended from
time to time.



   SCHOOL. A building where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of
instruction or education, together with playgrounds, dormitories, stadium and
other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith and is limited to
public and private schools used for preschool, primary, secondary or college
education and child care facilities.



   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions
of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as
one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:



      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex; or



      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or
persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of
nudity or seminude.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult
video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Human genitals in the state of sexual
arousal.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any one of the following: human genitals
in a discernible state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human
masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching
of human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock or female breasts; or
any combination of the foregoing.



   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT. In a sexually oriented business, this term
means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25%,
as the floor area exists on the effective date of this subchapter.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL. A sexually oriented business means
and includes any of the following:



      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar
means; or



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.



(`87 Code, § 14-170) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94; Am. Ord. 2007-15,
passed 11-20-07)



§ 113.02  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent the continued concentration of sexually oriented businesses within
the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect
of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment
to their intended market.



(`87 Code, § 14-171) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94)



§ 113.03  CLASSIFICATION.



   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:



   (A)   Adult arcades;



   (B)   Adult bookstores or adult video stores;



   (C)   Adult cabarets;



   (D)   Adult motels;



   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters;



   (F)   Adult theaters;



   (G)   Escort agencies;



   (H)   Nude model studios;



   (I)   Sexual encounter centers.



(`87 Code, § 14-172) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94)



§ 113.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   The regulations contained in this chapter do not apply to the following:



   (A)   Any business opened by or employing psychologists, physical
therapists, athletic trainers, masseuses, cosmetologists or barbers licensed
by the State of Texas and performing functions authorized under the licenses
held;



   (B)   Any business operated by or employing physicians, osteopaths,
nurses or chiropractors, licensed by the State of Texas, engaged in
practicing the healing arts; and



   (C)   Any retail business whose major business is the offering of
wearing apparel for sale to customers.



(`87 Code, § 14-173) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94)



§ 113.05  LOCATION.



   (A)   The location of sexually oriented businesses is hereby
allowed, subject to the distance, zoning and licensing requirements within
this code of ordinances.



   (B)   Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant must certify
that the proposed business will be located within a heavy industrial zoning
district and a minimum of 2,000 feet from the following:



      (1)   Child care facility;



      (2)   Church or place of worship;



      (3)   Dwelling;



      (4)   Hospital;



      (5)   Building in which alcoholic beverages are sold or
consumed;



      (6)   Public facility;



      (7)   Public park;



      (8)   School;



      (9)   Existing licensed sexually oriented business.



   (C)   Each sexually oriented business shall comply with all of the
city’s sign requirements. Signs shall not depict, either by sight or sound,
any specific sexual activity or specified anatomical areas.



(`87 Code, § 14-174) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94; Am. Ord. 2007-15,
passed 11-20-07)



§ 113.06  REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS
OR VIDEOS.



   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room less than
400 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements.



   (B)   Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may
not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the
place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or
architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should
be oriented to the north or to some designated scale or with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of
the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The
Chief of Police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if
the application adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies
that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was
prepared.



   (C)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.



   (D)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager’s station may be made without the prior approval of the Chief of
Police.



   (E)   It is the duty of the owner and/or operator of the premises to
ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.



   (F)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose,
excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior
of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of
sight from the manager’s station.



   (G)   It shall be the duty of the owner and/or operator, and it
shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises,
to ensure that the view area specified remains unobstructed by any doors,
walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all to ensure that no
patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.



   (H)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle as
measured at the floor level.



   (I)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall
also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to
ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that
any patron is present on the premises.



(`87 Code, § 14-175) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94)



§ 113.07  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTEL.



   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this
subchapter.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a
sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does
not have a sexually oriented business license, he or she rents or subrents a
sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is
rented, he or she rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.



   (C)   For purposes of division (B) of this section, the terms RENT
or SUBRENT mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.



(`87 Code, § 14-176) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94)



LICENSES



§ 113.20  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   All sexually oriented businesses to be operated within the
city shall first obtain a valid license under the provisions of this
subchapter.



   (B)   A license shall only be issued for sexually oriented
businesses that fulfill the locational requirements of § 113.05.



   (C)   A business is not exempt from regulation under this subchapter
because it holds a license or permit under the Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code
authorizing the sale or service of alcoholic beverages.



(`87 Code, § 14-177) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94)



§ 113.21  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   A license issued under these regulations shall be displayed at all
times in an open and conspicuous place on the premises of the sexually
oriented business for which it was issued.



(`87 Code, § 14-178) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94)



§ 113.22  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any person desiring a license shall file a sworn written
application on a form provided by the Chief of Police. The application shall
set forth the following:



      (1)   The name of the applicant and whether the applicant is
an individual, general partnership, limited partnership, corporation or other
entity;



      (2)   The name under which the sexually oriented business is
to be operated and a general description of the services or products to be
provided;



      (3)   The address and legal description of the parcel of land
on which the sexually oriented business is to be located;



      (4)   The name, resident address and telephone number of the
manager or other individual to be principally in charge of the operation of
the sexually oriented business;



      (5)   A written declaration that the information contained in
the application is true and correct;



      (6)   If the applicant is an individual, the application shall
be signed and verified by the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership,
the application shall be signed and verified by all of the partners thereof.
If the applicant is a corporation or other entity, the application shall be
signed and verified by the President and the Treasurer of such corporation or
entity.



   (B)   In addition, the application shall be accompanied by the
following:



      (1)   Payment of the license fee, as provided in this
subchapter;



      (2)   A certified copy of the assumed name certificate filed
in compliance with the Assumed Business or Professional Name Act (Tex. Rev.
Civ. Stat., Business and Commerce Code, §§ 36.01 et seq.) if the applicant
is to operate the sexually oriented business under the assumed name;



      (3)   If the applicant is a Texas corporation, a certified
copy of the Articles of Incorporation, together with all amendments thereto,
shall be filed;



      (4)   If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certified
copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in the state,
together with all amendments thereto, shall be filed;



      (5)   If the applicant is a foreign or limited partnership, a
certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all
amendments thereto, filed in the office of the Secretary of State under the
Texas Limited Partnership Act (Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6132a-1);



      (6)   A complete list of persons employed by the sexually
oriented business, including their age, date and place of birth, social
security number, driver’s license number and salary or wage rate. This list
shall be updated monthly by a verified report to the Chief of Police, listing
all of the above information for any employees hired during the previous
month;



      (7)   A detailed development plan which describes the
dimensions and location of the sexually oriented business and clearly shows
it to be in compliance with the locational requirements of § 113.05.



(`87 Code, § 14-179) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94)



§ 113.23  INVESTIGATION, ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon receiving an application for a license, the Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, shall conduct an investigation for the
purpose of determining whether the requirements of this subchapter have been
satisfied. The Chief of Police shall coordinate this investigation in order
to determine if the application complies with the locational and sign
requirements as set forth in these regulations. The Chief of Police shall
deny the application for a license if any requirement of this subchapter is
not satisfied.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall deny the application for a license
if one or more of the following is determined to be true:



      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age or under 21 years
of age if alcoholic beverages are to be served or consumed in the
establishment or on the premises;



      (2)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in
payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or
imposed upon the applicant or the applicant’s spouse in relation to a
sexually oriented business;



      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;



      (4)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse has been
convicted of a violation of a provision of this subchapter, other than the
offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within
two years immediately preceding the application, the fact that a conviction
is being appealed shall have no effect;



      (5)   The license fee required by this subchapter has not been
paid;



      (6)   An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented
business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has
demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business
premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by
law enforcement officers;



      (7)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented
business have not been approved by the Health Department, Fire Department and
the Building Official as being in compliance with applicable laws and
ordinances;



      (8)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted
of a crime:



         (a)   Involving:



            1.   Any of the following offenses as described in
the Tex Penal Code, §§ 43.01 et seq.: prostitution, promotion of
prostitution; aggravated promotion of prostitution; obscenity; sale,
distribution or display of harmful material to minors; sexual performance by
a child; possession of child pornography; employment harmful to minors;



            2.   Any of the following offenses as described in
Tex. Penal Code, §§ 21.01 et seq.: indecent exposure; indecency with a
child;



            3.   Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault
as described in Tex. Penal Code, §§ 22.01 et seq.;



            4.   Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring
a runaway child as described in Tex. Penal Code,§ 25.01 et seq.; or



            5.   Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation
to commit any of the foregoing offenses;



         (b)   For which:



            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;



            2.   Less than two years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony
offense;



            3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of the last conviction, or the date of release from confinement for the
last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two
or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any 24-month period.



   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant’s spouse.



   (D)   An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been
convicted of an offense listed in division (B) of this section may qualify
for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required
by that subsection has elapsed.



   (E)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the
address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business
so that it may be easily read at any time.



   (F)   The Chief of Police shall notify each applicant of their
eligibility for a license within 30 days of receipt of the completed
application. If the applicant complies with the provisions of these
regulations, then the Chief of Police shall issue a license. In the event
that an applicant fails to comply with these regulations, then the applicant
shall be so notified and be entitled to a hearing held pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter.



(`87 Code, § 14-180) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94; Am. Ord. 2007-15,
passed 11-20-07)



§ 113.24  FEE.



   The applicant shall pay an annual fee for a sexually oriented business
license in the amount of $500.00. The business license is valid for one year.
No portion of any fee collected under this section shall be returned after a
license has been issued, suspended, or denied The applicant shall have to re-
apply and be approved annually for a business license to continue operating
the sexually oriented business.



(`87 Code, § 14-181) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94; Am. Ord. 2007-15,
passed 11-20-07)



§ 113.25  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A license shall not be transferred to another, nor shall a license
holder operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the application.



(`87 Code, § 14-182) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94)



§ 113.26  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.



   Each license shall be effective when issued and shall be renewable
annually upon filing an application as provided for herein. All licenses are
renewable on the anniversary date of each year succeeding the year in which
they are first issued.



(`87 Code, § 14-183) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94)



§ 113.27  ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall have the
power to administer and enforce the provisions of these regulations upon
presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent or tenant in charge
of any premises where a sexually oriented business is located. The Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, may enter for the purposes of inspection or
investigation to ensure compliance with the terms of these regulations any
building, structure or other premises where the sexually oriented business is
located at any time it is occupied and open for business.



   (B)   A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his or
her agent or employee commits an offense if he or she refuses to permit a
lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the Chief of Police
at any time it is occupied or open for business.



   (C)   However, when the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, is
denied permission to inspect any premises, inspection shall be made only
under the authority of a warrant issued by a Magistrate authorizing the
inspection for violations of these regulations. In applying for such a
warrant, the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall submit an
affidavit to a Magistrate setting forth his or her belief that a violation of
these regulations exists with respect to the premises sought to be inspected
and the reasons for such belief. The affidavit shall designate the location
of such operator or occupant thereof. If the Magistrate finds that a probable
cause exists for a search of the premises, such warrant describing the
premises with sufficient certainty to identify the same. A warrant so issued
shall constitute authority for the Chief of Police, or his or her designee,
to enter upon or inspect the premises described therein.



(`87 Code, § 14-184) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94)



§ 113.28  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   (A)   The Chief of Police is granted and shall have the power to
suspend any and all licenses authorized by these regulations, subject to the
requirement of § 113.27, if he or she determines that licensee or employee
of a licensee has:



      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of
this chapter;



      (2)   Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on
the sexually oriented business premises;



      (3)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented
business premises as authorized by this subchapter;



      (4)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the
sexually oriented business premises; or



      (5)   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually
oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating
action by law enforcement officers.



   (B)   The Chief of Police is granted and shall have the power to
revoke any and all licenses authorized by these regulations, subject to the
requirements of § 113.27, if he or she determines that:



      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted to the Chief of Police during the application process;



      (2)   A licensee or any employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;



      (3)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s
license was suspended;



      (4)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in §
113.23(B) for which the time period required in that subsection has elapsed;



      (5)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period a
person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed
premises of a crime in § 113.23(B)(6) for which a conviction has been
obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented
business at the time the offenses were committed;



      (6)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any
specified sexual activities to occur in or on the sexually oriented business
premises; or



      (7)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for
taxes, fees, fines or penalties.



   (C)   Additionally, the Chief of Police shall revoke a license if a
cause of suspension as listed in division (A) of this section occurs and the
license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.



(`87 Code, § 14-185) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94)



§ 113.29  NOTICE, HEARING AND APPEAL.



   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall conduct a hearing prior
to the suspension, revocation or denial of any license authorized under these
regulations. The person whose license is under consideration shall be given
at least ten calendar days written notice prior to the date of the hearing,
unless such notice is waived by the applicant and shall be permitted to
present relevant facts and legal argument regarding the pending revocation or
denial. Following such hearing, the City Manager, or his or her designee,
shall consider the merits of the case and shall present a written opinion
prior to any action. Any person wishing to appeal the decision of the City
Manager, or his or her designee, regarding the suspension, revocation or
denial of a license may, within ten days after the date of the written
opinion filed by the City Manager, or his or her designee, appeal such
decision to the City Council of Mount Pleasant, by written notice to the City
Manager setting out the basis of such appeal. The City Council shall hold a
hearing on the license suspension, revocation or denial within ten days of
the receipt of written notice of appeal; provided, however, that the
appearing party shall be required to comply with the decision of the Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, during the pendency of the appeal.



(`87 Code, § 14-186) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94)



§ 113.30  AMORTIZATION OF NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   Any use in conflict with the purposes or terms of this
subchapter shall be entirely discontinued and shall thereafter cease
operation within five years from the date any such use becomes nonconforming
under this subchapter. If such nonconforming use is discontinued, interrupted
or changed, or any future use is discontinued, interrupted or changed, any
future use of such land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
subchapter.



   (B)   All existing sexually oriented businesses, even nonconforming
uses under this subchapter, are required to be licensed and shall apply for a
license within 60 calendar days of the date of passage of this subchapter.
All existing sexually oriented businesses must be in compliance with the
provisions of these regulations and secure a license within 90 calendar days
of the passage of this subchapter.



   (C)   The issuance of a yearly license hereunder shall not affect
the amortization of nonconforming uses as provided herein.



(`87 Code, § 14-187) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94)



§ 113.31  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   False or fraudulent statement.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to knowingly make any false, fraudulent or untruthful statement,
either written or oral, or in any way knowingly to conceal any material act
or to give or to use any assumed name or fictitious name other than the one
duly filed for record in compliance with the Assumed Business or Professional
Name Act (Tex. Business and Commerce Code Annotated, §§ 36.01 et seq.).



   (B)   Use of another’s license unlawful. It shall be unlawful for
any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity to use a license
which has been issued to another individual, partnership, corporation or
other entity.



   (C)   Unlawful to deface, alter and the like a license. It shall be
unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface or alter a
license.



   (D)   Violation deemed a misdemeanor. Where authorized by law, the
violation of any provision of these regulations will be considered a
misdemeanor.



(`87 Code, § 14-188) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.32  NOT TO LEGALIZE ANYTHING PROHIBITED BY STATE LAW OR CITY
ORDINANCE.



   These regulations do not legalize anything prohibited under the Tex.
Penal Code or any other state law or city ordinance. Further, any violation
of the Tex. Penal Code or other state law or city ordinance shall be deemed
grounds for revocation of the license issued.



(`87 Code, § 14-189) (Am. Ord. 1994-16, passed 9-20-94)



CHAPTER 114:  ITINERANT MERCHANTS, ITINERANT VENDORS AND PAWNBROKERS



Section



General Provisions



   114.01   Definitions



   114.011   Zoning districts where permitted



   114.012   Frequency of events



   114.013   Frequency of sales per location



   114.02   Refusing to leave



   114.03   Entrance to premises restricted



   114.04   Hours of operation



   114.05   Misrepresentation



   114.06   Sale of goods on streets, parking lots and parks



   114.07   Exceptions



Permit



   114.20   Permit required



   114.21   Persons engaged in interstate commerce to register



   114.22   Application



   114.23   False information



   114.24   Investigation



   114.25   Issuance or denial of permit



   114.26   Appeal



   114.27   Revocation



   114.28   Fee



   114.29   Transfer



   114.30   Duration



   114.31   Display



Charitable Solicitations



   114.45   Definition



   114.46   Permit



   114.47   Investigation



   114.48   Issuance or denial of permit



   114.49   Appeal



   114.50   Duration



   114.51   Transfer



   114.52   Responsibilities for acts of solicitors



   114.53   Soliciting in street



Pawnbrokers



   114.65   Definition



   114.66   Compliance with state law



   114.67   Dealing with minors



   114.68   Responsibilities of owners for employees or agents



 



   114.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIXED BUSINESS LOCATION. A location within the city which complies with
the Zoning and Building Code of the city and which is occupied by the same
business for 30 consecutive days.



   INTERSTATE COMMERCE.  Soliciting, selling or taking orders for or
offering to take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, photographs,
newspapers or magazines or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines which at
the time the order is taken are in another state or will be produced in
another state and shipped or introduced into this city in the fulfillment of
such order.



   ITINERANT VENDOR OR ITINERANT MERCHANT. Shall be construed to mean and
include all persons, firms and corporations, as well as their agents and
employees who engage in the temporary or transient business, in the city, of
selling, or offering for sale, any goods and merchandise, or exhibiting the
same for sale or exhibiting the same for the purpose of taking orders for the
sale thereof, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business or
conducting such exhibits, either hire, rent, lease, or occupy any room or
space in any building, structure or other enclosure or open space in the
city, through or from which any goods or merchandise may be sold, offered for
sale, exhibited for sale or exhibited for the purpose of taking orders for
the sale thereof.



   PEDDLER. Any person who goes from house to house, from place to place,
or remains at one location for a temporary period of time, in the city
soliciting, selling, or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders
for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, or publications and
does not have a fixed business location within the corporate limits of the
city.



   TEMPORARY. The sale or offering for sale any goods, wares, services, or
merchandise, including food products, to the general public without utilizing
a fixed business location and does not include garage sales and does not
continue for a period of time exceeding 72 hours.



(`87 Code, § 16-1) (Am. Ord. 1995-13, passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 1998-3,
passed 2-3-98; Am. Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord. 2015-11, passed
8-4-15)



§ 114.011  ZONING DISTRICTS WHERE PERMITTED.



   Itinerant vendor or itinerant merchant sales may be permitted on sites
that are zoned (C) Commercial zoning District, (LI) Light Industrial Zoning
District and (HI) Heavy Industrial District, or by Specific Use Permit on
sites that are zoned (GR) General Retail Zoning District.  Requests for
specific use permits shall follow procedures and regulations set forth in §
155.45 titled Specific Use Regulations of the zoning code of the city.  Each
proposed event shall require a separate specific use permit, and no more than
three specific use permits of itinerant vendor or itinerant merchant sales
shall be issued per year per site.



(Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05)



§ 114.012  FREQUENCY OF EVENTS.



   Temporary sales event shall be limited to no more than three times per
calendar year, and lasting no more than three consecutive days, for any
individual or business.



(Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05)



§ 114.013  FREQUENCY OF SALES PER LOCATION.



   Any premises located within the city that is utilized as a site for
temporary vendor sales shall be limited to no more than three such sales per
calendar year.



(Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05)



§ 114.02  REFUSING TO LEAVE.



   Any peddler, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor or hawker of goods
or merchandise who enters upon premises owned or leased by another and
willfully refuses to leave said premises after having been notified by the
owner or possessor of said premises, or his or her agent, to leave the same
and not return to such premises shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
chapter.



(`87 Code, § 16-2) (Am. Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord. 2015-11,
passed 8-4-15)



§ 114.03  ENTRANCE TO PREMISES RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, itinerant merchant or itinerant
vendor to enter upon any private premises when the premises is posted with a
sign stating "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitations Allowed" or words to
such effect.



(`87 Code, § 16-3) (Am. Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord. 2015-11,
passed 8-4-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.04  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, itinerant merchant or itinerant
vendor to engage in offering commodities or services for sale within the city
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. or at any time on Sundays or
national holidays, except by specific appointment with or invitation from the
customer.



(`87 Code, § 16-4) (Am. Ord. 1998-3, passed 2-3-98; Am. Ord. 2005-11, passed
10-4-05; Am. Ord. 2015-11, passed 8-4-15) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.05  MISREPRESENTATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, itinerant merchant or itinerant
vendor to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality or
nature of his or her goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purposes
of inducing another to purchase the same.



(`87 Code, § 16-5) (Am. Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord. 2015-11,
passed 8-4-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.06  SALE OF GOODS ON STREETS, PARKING LOTS AND PARKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any wares,
goods, merchandise or services upon the public street or roadway, public
parking lot, city park or city cemetery located within the city limits of
Mount Pleasant. However, the city shall issue permits authorizing operation
of concession stands located in city parks and operation of any such
concession stand shall not be in violation of this section. A concession
stand owned and operated by the city shall be exempt from this chapter. The
act of internment within a city cemetery shall be exempt from this chapter.



(`87 Code, § 16-6) (Ord. passed 4-21-61; Am. Ord. 1984-10, passed 8-21-84;
Am. Ord. 1985-2, passed 2-5-85; Am. Ord. 1998-3, passed 2-3-98; Am. Ord.
2005-11, passed 10-4-05) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.07  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   Public utility companies operating under a franchise granted
by the city;



   (B)   Commercial agents or drummers dealing with local business
establishments in the usual course of business;



   (C)   An insurance salesperson, a real estate salesperson and others
licensed by the State of Texas;



   (D)   Vendors of farm produce, poultry, stock or agricultural
products in their natural state by the person growing same;



   (E)   Sales made under authority and order of law;



   (F)   Sale of goods or merchandise donated by the owners thereof,
the proceeds of which are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic
purpose (see §§ 114.45 et seq.);



   (G)   Organized nonprofit clubs, churches or school groups (see §§
114.45et seq.);



   (H)   Itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor entering property by
express, prior invitation of the person residing on such premises;



   (I)   An itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor who shall rent,
lease or otherwise acquire space wholly inside a permanent facility for a
period of 72 hours or less shall be exempt from this chapter;



   (J)   A person, firm or corporation exhibiting goods for sale
concurrent with and as an adjunct to their business, group display, meeting
or convention.



   (K)   Any person conducting business at a location for which a
certificate of occupancy ahs been granted and the activity conducted is not
in violation of any ordinance regulating zoning or any other applicable laws.



   (L)   Any vending that is conducted as a part of a scheduled event
held on property exclusively owned by the city, such as the Mt. Pleasant
Civic Center or city parks, when approval has been obtained from the city
prior to the event.



   (M)   Any vending that is conducted as a part of a scheduled event
held on property exclusively owned by Titus County, when the vending is
conducted with the permission of the county.



(`87 Code, § 16-18) (Am. Ord. 1995-13, passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 1998-3,
passed 2-3-98; Am. Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05)



PERMIT



§ 114.20  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to engage in business as
a itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor or a person or persons engaged in
interstate commerce, as defined in § 114.01, within this city without first
obtaining a permit to do so.  No individual or business may obtain more than
three permits per calendar year.  No permit shall be valid for more than
three consecutive days.



(`87 Code, § 16-17) (Am. Ord. 1995-13, passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 2005-11,
passed 10-4-05) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.21  PERSONS ENGAGED IN INTERSTATE COMMERCE TO REGISTER.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons
engaged in interstate commerce as the term is herein defined; provided,
however, that it shall be unlawful for persons engaged in interstate commerce
to go from house to house or place to place in the city without having first
registered an application with the Chief of Police as stated in § 114.22.



   (B)   The registrant at the time of registration, as herein provided
for, shall submit for inspection of the Chief of Police written proof of his
or her identity, which may be in the form of an automobile operator’s
license or identification letter or card issued to registrant by the person,
firm or corporation for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or
cleared.



(`87 Code, § 16-19) (Am. Ord. 1995-13, passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 2005-11,
passed 10-4-05)



§ 114.22  APPLICATION.



   Any person desiring a permit required by this chapter shall make
written application to the Chief of Police. The application shall state or
contain the following:



   (A)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any state or federal law
or municipal ordinance or code; the nature of the offense; the punishment or
penalty assessed therefor, if previously convicted; and the place of
conviction;



   (B)   Whether the applicant, upon the sale or order, shall demand,
accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery;



   (C)   The period of time the applicant wishes to engage in business
within this city;



   (D)   Name of applicant, date of birth, social security number and
driver’s license number of applicant;



   (E)   The local and/or permanent address of the applicant;



   (F)   The local and/or permanent address of the firm, person or
persons he or she represents;



   (G)   The kind of goods, wares, merchandise or services which the
applicant offers for sale or exhibit;



   (H)   Current copy of the sales tax permit issued by the Comptroller
of Public Accounts of the State of Texas;



   (I)   If the applicant is a corporation, it shall file with its
application a certified copy of its charter, and if it is not incorporated
under the laws of the State of Texas, a certified copy of its present permit
to do business in the State of Texas;



   (J)   The last five cities or towns wherein the applicant has worked
before coming to this city;



   (K)   Such other relevant information as may be required for the
investigation of the applicant;



   (L)   In case the applicant desires to sell meat, fish or seafood
products, or other food products, the applicant shall comply with these
provisions, as well as those set forth in Ch. 96 of the code (Food and Food
Establishments).



   (M)   A physical address of the location where the event is to take
place.



   (N)   The name, address and phone number of the person who owns the
site where the event is to take place.



(`87 Code, § 16-20) (Am. Ord. 2002-9, passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 2005-11,
passed 10-4-05)



§ 114.23  FALSE INFORMATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading
information in connection with his or her application for a permit required
by this chapter.



(`87 Code, § 16-21) (Am. Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.24  INVESTIGATION.



   The Chief of Police shall cause an investigation of the business and
moral character of any applicant who applies for an itinerant merchant or
itinerant vendor's permit. Such investigation shall be made as the Chief
deems necessary for the protection of the public good.



(`87 Code, § 16-22) (Am. Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05)



§ 114.25  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   (A)   If, as a result of the investigation made pursuant to §
114.24, an applicant’s character or business responsibility are found to be
unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall notify the applicant that his or
her application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued.



   (B)   If, as a result of such investigation, the character and
business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the
Chief of Police shall deliver to the applicant the permit properly signed by
both the applicant and the Chief of Police.



   (C)   The applicant shall be properly notified in writing of the
issuance or denial of the permit within ten calendar days of the date of
application.



(`87 Code, § 16-23) (Am. Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05)



§ 114.26  APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by the action of the city in denial of an
application for a permit as provided in this chapter or in the decision to
revoke a permit shall have the right to appeal to the City Council. Such
appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Secretary a written statement
by the applicant setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal, within ten
days after notice of the denial has been mailed to such person’s last known
address. The Council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal,
and notice of such hearing shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee
at his or her last known address at least five days prior to the date set for
the hearing.



(`87 Code, § 16-24) (Am. Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05)



§ 114.27  REVOCATION.



   Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked
for the violation by the licensee of any applicable provision of this code,
state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation.



(`87 Code, § 16-25) (Am. Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05)



§ 114.28  FEE.



   Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter,
the applicant thereof shall pay a fee of $50.00 for an itinerant permit good
for ten days, not including the date of issuance, and/or pay a fee of $50.00
for a peddler permit good for 180 days, not including the date of issuance if
he or she desires to engage in business in the city. Such fee shall cover the
partial cost of the investigation of the applicant and shall be for the
enforcement of these sections. Persons representing firms or corporations
shall be required to obtain separate permits and pay a separate investigation
fee for each and every person so investigated.



(`87 Code, § 16-27)  (Am. Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord. 2015-11,
passed 8-4-15)



§ 114.29  TRANSFER.



   The itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor permit prescribed by this
chapter shall be nontransferable.



(`87 Code, § 16-28) (Am. Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05)



§ 114.30  DURATION.



   Every permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid
for the period of time stated therein, but in no event shall any such permit
be issued for a period of time in excess of ten days for an itinerant permit
or 180 days for a peddler permit.



(`87 Code, § 16-29)  (Am. Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord. 2015-11,
passed 8-4-15)



§ 114.31  DISPLAY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity for which
a permit is required by this chapter unless he or she is carrying such permit
on his or her person or displays such license in a conspicuous place on the
premises where the sale or exhibit is being conducted.



(`87 Code, § 16-30) (Am. Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-4-05) Penalty, see § 10.99



CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS



§ 114.45  DEFINITION.



   (A)   As used in this chapter, the term CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
CAMPAIGN shall mean any course of conduct whereby any person, organization,
society, association, corporation or any agent, member or representative
thereof shall solicit property or financial assistance of any kind or sell or
offer to sell any article, tag, service, emblem, publication, ticket,
advertisement, subscription or any thing of value on the plea or
representation that such sale or solicitation or the proceeds therefrom are
for a charitable, educational, patriotic or philanthropic purpose.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to conduct any charitable solicitations
campaign on the streets or in any public place or in any business
establishment or by house-to-house canvass in the city unless the person,
organization, society, association or corporation conducting same and
responsible therefor shall first have obtained a permit in compliance with
the terms of this subchapter; provided, however, that the provisions hereof
shall not apply to:



      (1)   Any church, congregation, religious society, sect, group
or order which solicits funds for religious purposes;



      (2)   Any organization which solicits funds solely from its
own members or from its own assemblies not using public streets or public
places for such purposes; or



      (3)   An existing civic organization which is involved in
selling or offering to sell property or services.



(`87 Code, § 16-40) (Ord. 1975-3, passed 7-1-75)



§ 114.46  PERMIT.



   Each applicant for a permit to solicit funds in the city shall submit
to the City Secretary a statement sworn to and containing the following
information:



   (A)   The full name of the organization applying for a permit to
solicit and the address of the headquarters in the city; if the organization
is a chapter or other affiliate of an organization having its principal
office outside the city, the name and address of the parent organization;



   (B)   The names and addresses of all officers and directors or
trustees of the organization and the name of the city of residence of all
officers, directors or trustees or the parent organizations, if any;



   (C)   The purpose or purposes for which the gross receipts derived
from such solicitations or other activities are to be used;



   (D)   The name and address of the person or persons who will be in
charge of conducting the charitable solicitations campaign;



   (E)   Outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the
charitable solicitations campaign;



   (F)   Total amount of funds proposed to be raised;



   (G)   The period of time the applicant wishes to engage in the
solicitations campaign;



   (H)   The percentage of collections to be paid solicitors.



(`87 Code, § 16-41)



§ 114.47  INVESTIGATION.



   The City Secretary shall cause an investigation of the business and
moral character of any applicant who applies for a charitable solicitations
permit. Such investigation shall be made as the City Secretary deems
necessary for the protection of the public good.



(`87 Code, § 16-42)



§ 114.48  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a proper application, the City Secretary shall
issue within ten calendar days of date of application the permit applied for
unless one of the following is found to be true during the course of the
investigation:



      (1)   One or more of the statements made in the application
are not true;



      (2)   The applicant or person in charge of the charitable
solicitations campaign has been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of a crime involving moral turpitude or the applicant or its
agent has made or caused to be made false statements or misrepresentations to
any member of the public with regard to the charitable solicitations campaign
or other activities described in the permit;



      (3)   The applicant is not properly organized as a corporation
under the direction and administration of a board of directors;



      (4)   The applicant discriminates against any person or group
of persons.



   (B)   If, as a result of the investigation made by the City
Secretary, the application is denied, the City Secretary shall notify the
applicant, in writing, that said application is disapproved and the reasons
for disapproval, within ten calendar days from date of application.



(`87 Code, § 16-43)



§ 114.49  APPEAL.



   Every applicant shall have the right to appeal to the City Council from
any adverse decision or ruling of the city. Such appeal, if taken, must be in
writing addressed to the City Manager and filed within ten days after the
date of the adverse decision or ruling. The Council shall set a time and
place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be
mailed, postage paid, to the applicant, at least five days prior to the date
set for the hearing.



(`87 Code, § 16-44)



§ 114.50  DURATION.



   Charitable solicitation permits granted under this chapter shall be
valid for the period specified thereon and no longer, and in no case shall
they be valid for more than 30 days.



(`87 Code, § 16-45)



§ 114.51  TRANSFER.



   The solicitation permit prescribed herein shall be nontransferable.



(`87 Code, § 16-46)



§ 114.52  RESPONSIBILITIES FOR ACTS OF SOLICITORS.



   The recipient of a permit for a charitable solicitations campaign shall
be responsible for the acts of his or her authorized representatives and
solicitors in connection with such campaign.



(`87 Code, § 16-47)



§ 114.53  SOLICITING IN STREET.



   (A)   No person(s) shall stand in a street, highway or roadway and
solicit, or attempt to solicit, employment, business or contributions from
the occupant of any vehicle except as provided under the Tex. Transportation
Code Title 7, Subtitle C, §§ 552.007 and 552.0071.



   (B)   It is an offense for a person to solicit or attempt to solicit
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.



   (C)   It is an offense for any person to obstruct, tamper with,
alter, cover, or post any object on or to a traffic control device. Traffic
control device includes but is not limited to: median markers, reflectors,
signal control boxes, regulatory signs, directional signs, warning signs, and
pedestrian walk lights.



   (D)   Any peace officer observing any violation of any prohibition
is authorized to issue a citation for the person to appear in municipal court
to answer the charge. Upon issuance of the citation, such person shall
immediately cease soliciting or attempting to solicit any contribution. Any
person continuing to solicit in violation of this section after being warned
and/or cited by a police officer shall be cited for any subsequent offense.



(Ord. 2007-1, passed 2-6-07; Am. Ord. 2015-21, passed 10-20-15)  Penalty,
see § 114.99



PAWNBROKERS



§ 114.65  DEFINITION.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the word PAWNBROKER shall mean one
who pursues the business of lending money upon interest and receiving upon
deposit any personal property as security for the payment of such loan and
interest.



(`87 Code, § 16-51)



§ 114.66  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.



   If any pawnbroker, or person doing business as such, shall receive any
article in pledge or sell any article pledged to him or her, without
complying with the statutes regulating pawnbrokers, he or she shall be fined
as provided in § 10.99.



(`87 Code, § 16-52) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.67  DEALING WITH MINORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager or employee of any
pawnbroking business regulated hereby to buy or receive from any minor any
goods, chattels or other property, unless such minor shall have in his or her
possession the written consent of his or her parent or guardian, provided
that this provision shall not apply to any minor who is married or who has
had the disability of nonage removed.



(`87 Code, § 16-53) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.68  RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS FOR EMPLOYEES OR AGENTS.



   Any owners, manager or operator of any pawnbroking business whose
employees or agents fail to observe any of the provisions of this subchapter
shall be equally guilty with the offender and subject to the same penalties.



(`87 Code, § 16-54)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to license, regulate pawnbrokers, see Tex. Local
Gov't Code, § 215.031;



   Occupation taxes, see Tex. Tax Code, §§ 191.001 et seq.; Pawnbrokers
generally, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6146 et seq.



(`87 Code, § 16-54)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
punished by a fine as provided in § 10.99.



(`87 Code, §§ 16-7, 16-31, 16-48) (Ord. 1978-4, passed 4-4-78; Am. Ord.
1985-2, passed 2-5-85) Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 115:  TAXICABS



Section



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   Enforcement of provisions



   115.03   Registration required; exclusions



   115.04   Registration contents



   115.05   Investigation of application



   115.06   Public convenience and necessity required



   115.07   Drivers



   115.08   Liability and casualty insurance



   115.09   Duration of permit



   115.10   Rates



   115.11   Vehicle requirements



   115.12   Revocation



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRIVER. Every person who operates a vehicle for hire upon public
streets of the city.



   OPERATE. The act of transporting a passenger for hire within the city.



   OWNER. Any person owning or controlling one or more taxicabs and
driving or causing any such vehicle to be driven upon the public streets of
the city.



   TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle used in the business of transporting
passengers for compensation in the city and not operated on a fixed route and
that has a manufacturer’s rated seating capacity of no greater than eight
passengers.



(Ord. 1998-1, passed 2-3-98)



§ 115.02  ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.



   The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be under the
direction, supervision and control of the Chief of Police.



(`87 Code, § 17-72)



§ 115.03  REGISTRATION REQUIRED; EXCLUSIONS.



   (A)   A person may not operate a taxicab service within the city
without first registering and obtaining written approval from the City
Council.



   (B)   A person may not advertise nor cause to be advertised the
operation of service that has not properly registered and been approved by
the City Council.



   (C)   However, no registration is required for the following:



      (1)   Operation of a taxicab which is transporting a passenger
from a location outside the city limits of the city to a location beyond the
city limits and only incidentally traveling through the city;



      (2)   Operating a vehicle owned, operated or funded by the
federal or state government, a Texas political subdivision or Texas substate
political subdivision;



      (3)   Performing a service authorized by state or federal law,
but only to the extent of that authority only;



      (4)   Operating a vehicle owned by a nonprofit organization or
a privately owned vehicle used in connection with a nonprofit organization
carrying only passengers associated with that organization.



(`87 Code, § 17-73)



§ 115.04  REGISTRATION CONTENTS.



   The applicant must be the person who will own, control or operate the
tax service. The registration form shall contain the following:



   (A)   Name and address of applicant, specifying, in the case of any
unincorporated association, partnership or firm the names and addresses of
each member thereof and the title or interest of each member;



   (B)   Business name under which the applicant does or proposes to do
business;



   (C)   Description of past ten years business experience of the
applicant and if applicant has had a transportation service permit or license
revoked and under what circumstances;



   (D)   Location and address of place from which the applicant intends
to operate;



   (E)   Number and description of vehicles the applicant proposes to
use, including make, model, year, seating capacity, Texas license
registration number and color scheme. As vehicles are added or removed, that
information must be provided to the Chief of Police within 30 days of
occurrence;



   (F)   Applicant shall provide a list of all drivers employed with
address, date of birth and current Texas driver’s license number. The Chief
of Police shall be notified in writing of any drivers who have been removed
and all new drivers who have been newly employed, including name, address,
date of birth and Texas driver’s license number;



   (G)   Documentary evidence from an insurance company authorized to
do business in Texas indicating a willingness to provide liability insurance,
as required in this chapter and by Texas state law;



   (H)   Description of service to be offered and rates to be charged;



   (I)   Such additional information as the city considers necessary
for the enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 1998-1, passed 2-3-98)



§ 115.05  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   Within 45 days after receipt of application, the City Council
shall hold a public hearing concerning the application. Notice of such
hearing shall be given, in writing, to the applicant and to all persons
holding like permits.



   (B)   The Council shall give due regard to the following:



      (1)   To the probable performance and quality of services
offered and the experience of the applicant in rendering such services;



      (3)   The rates the applicant proposes to charge and whether
rates are fair and reasonable;



      (3)   Financial ability and character of applicant and drivers;



      (4)   Condition of vehicles to be used.



(Ord. 1998-1, passed 2-3-98)



§ 115.06  PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY REQUIRED.



   (A)   If the City Council finds that public convenience and
necessity require the operation of the services requested by the applicant
and finds the applicant fit to conduct business, and that all requirements
have been complied with, it shall so affirm by majority vote and the permit
shall be issued by the Chief of Police.



   (B)   If the City Council finds that the services are not in the
best interest of public convenience and necessity or the applicant is not a
proper person to conduct business or that applicant did not comply with all
requirements, the Council shall vote not to issue permit and shall instruct
the Chief of Police to so notify applicant of decision.



(Ord. 1998-1, passed 2-3-98)



§ 115.07  DRIVERS.



   No driver shall be approved unless the applicant:



   (A)   Possesses a valid Texas Class C driver’s license;



   (B)   Is of the age of 18 years or older, a United States citizen or
a legal resident alien;



   (C)   Does not suffer from any condition which might render driver
unfit to drive a vehicle safely;



   (D)   Is clean and neat in dress and appearance and is not addicted
to drugs or alcohol;



   (E)   Has not been convicted of any offense involving moral
turpitude;



   (F)   Has not been convicted of the offense of driving while
intoxicated in the past three years;



   (G)   Has not been convicted of more than four moving traffic
offenses in the past three years.



(Ord. 1998-1, passed 2-3-98)



§ 115.08  LIABILITY AND CASUALTY INSURANCE.



   (A)   No permit may be issued nor may any taxicab service be
operated in the city unless there is at all times in force and effect valid
liability and casualty insurance in the amount of $300,000.00 combined single
limit.



   (B)   Every policy of insurance required under this section shall
contain a provision to the insurer to give not less than 30-days' written
notice to the city and the named insured before any cancellation or
termination of policy.



(Ord. 1998-1, passed 2-3-98)



§ 115.09  DURATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   A permit may be issued for a period not to exceed five years
ending on December 31. To obtain renewal, the operation must have shown that
the service has been performed satisfactorily and under the conditions of
city requirements.



   (B)   A permit is not transferable. Any change in ownership must be
reviewed and approved as set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1998-1, passed 2-3-98)



§ 115.10  RATES.



   (A)   The rate structure filed with the application and approved by
the Council shall not be increased without approval by the City Council.



   (B)   Each taxicab shall display current rates in a conspicuous
place on the inside of the vehicle.



(Ord. 1998-1, passed 2-3-98)



§ 115.11  VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every driver shall cause to be posted in a conspicuous place
in the vehicle where it may be seen by the passenger a current rate schedule
as authorized by the city.



   (B)   Every driver shall post in a conspicuous place their own
driver’s permit.



   (C)   Each taxicab will be sufficiently marked to identify it as a
taxi, by use of the painted word “Taxi” upon each front door and trunk
lid of the vehicle in contrasting color to that of the vehicle and no less
than four-inch letters or by use of a dome light device installed on the top
of the vehicle with the word “Taxi” in a contrasting color and no less
than four-inch letters.



   (D)   Each taxi service shall adopt a color scheme for all fleet
vehicles, the color scheme shall be unique and cannot duplicate another taxi
service. The taxicab shall also be numbered with a unique vehicle
identification number. These numbers shall be contrasting color to that of
the vehicle and shall be no less than three inches in height and placed on
each front door and rear trunk lid in a location that is conspicuous to
public view.



(Ord. 1998-1, passed 2-3-98)



§ 115.12  REVOCATION.



   The City Council shall have the right to revoke any permit upon
evidence presented by the Chief of Police that the application for permit has
been misrepresented or for violation of any applicable section of this code
or state law.



(Ord. 1998-1, passed 2-3-98)



CHAPTER 116:  HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section



   116.01   Report of work



   116.02   Disposal of wastes



   116.03   Exemptions from provisions



   116.04   License required



   116.05   License application



   116.06   License fee



   116.07   License investigation



   116.08   License issuance



   116.09   License duration



   116.10   License renewal



   116.11   License revocation



§ 116.01  REPORT OF WORK.



   Every person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall,
within two days after the completion of each job, make a written affidavit,
upon forms furnished by the city, and deliver same to the Building Official,
which report shall provide for the listing of the place served and the date
and place of disposition of the matters removed from the septic tank.



(`87 Code, § 24-91) (Ord. passed 5-4-54)



§ 116.02  DISPOSAL OF WASTES.



   Any person, whether licensed under the provisions of this chapter or
not, who shall remove any excrement, waste, liquids, foreign substances and
any other matters from any septic tank or tanks in the city shall carry or
transport the same to the city disposal plant for disposition.



(`87 Code, § 24-92)



§ 116.03  EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person serving
his or her own septic tank or tanks or to licensed plumbers.



(`87 Code, § 24-96) (Ord. passed 5-4-54)



§ 116.04  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or
vocation of pumping, removal and disposal of waste, excrement, liquids,
foreign substances and any other matters from any septic tank in the city
without first having applied for and obtained a license to do so.



(`87 Code, § 24-97) (Ord. passed 5-4-54) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.05  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   Any person desiring a license required by the provisions of this
chapter shall make written application to the City Building Official
therefor, which application shall state the name and address of the
applicant, and if the applicant is appearing as an agent or representative of
a firm or corporation, the application shall show the name and address of
said firm or corporation revealing the agent’s or representative’s
authority to act on behalf of such firm or corporation.



(`87 Code, § 24-98) (Ord. passed 5-4-54)



§ 116.06  LICENSE FEE.



   At the time of filing any application for a license required by the
provisions of this chapter, the Building Official shall make or cause to be
made such investigation of the applicant as he or she may deem necessary.



(`87 Code, § 24-99) (Ord. passed 5-4-54)



§ 116.07  LICENSE INVESTIGATION.



   Upon receiving an application for a license required by the provisions
of this chapter, the Building Official shall make or cause to be made such
investigation of the applicant as he or she may deem necessary.



(`87 Code, § 24-100) (Ord. passed 5-4-54)



§ 116.08  LICENSE ISSUANCE.



   If the Building Official shall find that the applicant for a license
required by the provisions of this chapter is of good moral character, is
reliable and possesses the necessary qualifications for such work, the
Building Official shall issue such license to the applicant.



(`87 Code, § 24-101) (Ord. passed 5-4-54)



§ 116.09  LICENSE DURATION.



   Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
valid for a period of one year from the date of its issuance.



(`87 Code, § 24-102) (Ord. passed 5-4-54)



§ 116.10  LICENSE RENEWAL.



   Each license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be renewed
by the holder thereof by the payment of an annual fee of $10.00 to the
Building Official prior to the expiration date of the license.



(`87 Code, § 24-103) (Ord. passed 5-4-54)



§ 116.11  LICENSE REVOCATION.



   Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked
at any time by the City Council after notice in writing mailed to the address
listed on the license and after hearing, if demanded by the holder thereof,
upon showing that the person holding such license has been guilty of any
fraudulent or immoral conduct, or in the use of the privilege granted by the
license has become a nuisance to any citizen of the city, or has been
convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or any
applicable provision of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or
regulation, and upon such revocation, the city shall not be required to
return any portion of the unused fee.



(`87 Code, § 24-104) (Ord. passed 5-4-54)



CHAPTER 117:  AUTOMOBILE WRECKERS



Section



   117.01   Definitions



   117.02   Vehicle disabilities and accidents covered



   117.03   Certain emergencies excepted



   117.04   Pushing or towing



   117.05   City employees shall not attempt to influence owners of
vehicles



   117.06   Wrecker prohibited at scene unless called; solicitation
prohibited



   117.07   Inspection certificates required for wreckers and heavy
wreckers



   117.08   Procedure for acquiring inspection certificates, wrecker
rotation list



   117.09   Qualifications, equipment, insurance



   117.10   Requirements for wrecker rotation list



   117.11   Grounds for suspension or removal



   117.12   Procedure used in wrecker selection



   117.13   Storage; wrecker company responsibility



   117.14   Fees for service, towing and storage



   117.15   Fee regulation on police pull not involving accident



   117.16   Rules for extraordinary conditions; large vehicles



   117.17   Removal of wrecks and debris



   117.18   Nonresident wrecker companies



   117.19   Companies to keep records



   117.20   Establishment of rotation schedules



§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCIDENT. An occurrence in the operation of a motor vehicle that
results in injury to any person or property.



   CHIEF OF POLICE.  Wherever the term CHIEF OF POLICE appears in this
chapter, the same shall mean the chief police official of the city or such
other Police Department official as he or she shall designate.



   DISABLED. Any vehicle which had been rendered unsafe to be driven upon
the streets as the result of some occurrence other than a wreck, reasonably
requiring that such vehicle be removed by a wrecker.



   HEAVY DUTY WRECKER. A wrecker not less than two tons in size.



   HOLD. A request made to the wrecker company by a police officer on
behalf of the Mount Pleasant Police Department to maintain custody of a
vehicle until approval to release the vehicle to the proper owner is given by
the Police Department.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled.



   OWNER’S REQUEST. Operator or owner of a wrecked or disabled vehicle
may select a wrecker company to remove his or her vehicle and authorizes the
Police Department to call that wrecker company on behalf of the individual.



   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department.



   POLICE PULL. When the Police Department has called a wrecker company
from the rotation list to remove a wrecked or disabled vehicle or to remove a
vehicle in a safe driving condition when the driver is absent, in custody or
otherwise incapable of making authorization.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY COMMONLY USED BY THE PUBLIC. Supermarkets or shopping
center parking lots, parking areas provided by business establishments for
the convenience of their customers, clients or patrons and parking areas
owned and operated for the convenience of, and commonly used by the public.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any property owned by a governmental entity.



   RESTRICTED USE WRECKER. A wrecker which otherwise complies with the
terms and conditions of this chapter, including a current inspection
certificate and all required equipment and insurance as set out in §§
117.08 and 117.09, but which is operated by a company other than a wrecker
company and is used exclusively for the purpose of hauling or towing vehicles
owned or operated by the same company owning the wrecker.



   ROLLBACK UNIT. A specific type of wrecker consisting of a
drive-on-hydraulic-tilting, flat- surface bed truck equipped with a
forward-mounted winch manufactured with the intent of being able to remove
heavily damaged vehicles from the road surface by having the bed unit tilt to
the surface and winching the vehicle up onto the flat surface bed. Any
rollback unit used under this chapter shall meet all State of Texas tow truck
requirements for its intended purpose. A rollback unit meeting all applicable
requirements of this chapter and of state law shall be considered a qualified
wrecker for the purpose of this chapter, subject to other limitations as set
out herein; provided, however, that a rollback unit shall not qualify as a
heavy-duty wrecker under this chapter.



   ROTATION. When the operator of a wrecked or disabled vehicle fails to
designate a specific wrecker operator to remove the vehicle and he or she has
authorized the Police Department to call a wrecker or heavy duty wrecker from
the appropriate rotation list, a police initiated pull will utilize the same
rotation list. A separate rotation list will exist for both wreckers and
heavy duty wreckers. The Chief of Police will establish the fair and equal
rotation lists.



   STREET. Any street, alley, avenue, lane, public place or highway within
the corporate limits of the city.



   TOW TRUCK. A vehicle equipped with a lifting device which is designed,
made or adapted to tow or carry other vehicles but which does not meet the
minimum requirements for a wrecker. Vehicles which are commonly referred to
as “two-car haulers” or “three-car haulers” are included in this
definition of TOW TRUCK.



   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is, or
may be, transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   WRECKER. A motor vehicle used for the purpose of towing or removing
disabled or wrecked vehicles which meets all the State of Texas tow truck
requirements.



   WRECKED. The status of any vehicle that has been damaged as the result
of an accident so as to reasonably require that such vehicle be removed by a
wrecker.



   WRECKER BUSINESS. Any wrecker company that hauls, tows or in any way
moves vehicles by the use of a wrecker or tow truck.



   WRECKER COMPANY. Any individual, corporation, partnership or
association engaged in the business of towing vehicles on public streets or
highways for compensation or with the expectation of compensation for the
towing, storage or repair of vehicles. The term WRECKER COMPANY includes the
owner, operator, employee or agent or a towing company but does not include
cities, counties or other political subdivisions of the state.



   WRECKER SELECTION.  The selection process provided for in §§ 117.10
and 117.12.



(`87 Code, § 17-51) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.02  VEHICLE DISABILITIES AND ACCIDENTS COVERED.



   The prohibitions and requirements of this chapter shall apply to all
vehicle accidents and vehicle disabilities occurring on public property or
private property commonly used by the public, regardless of whether or not
the final resting place of a vehicle is upon the above described areas
immediately after the accident or disability and to police pulls for the
vehicles for violations of the laws of the State of Texas.



(`87 Code, § 17-52) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.03  CERTAIN EMERGENCIES EXCEPTED.



   The prohibitions and requirements of this chapter shall not apply to
any person who necessarily must act immediately to prevent death or bodily
injury to any person involved in an accident.



(`87 Code, § 17-53) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.04  PUSHING OR TOWING.



   A vehicle may be pushed or towed by another vehicle only when it does
not reasonably require removal by a wrecker and only when it may be done in a
safe manner. Tow trucks may not be used to remove a wrecked vehicle from the
scene of an accident.



(`87 Code, § 17-54) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.05  CITY EMPLOYEES SHALL NOT ATTEMPT TO INFLUENCE OWNERS OF VEHICLES.



   No employee of the city shall recommend to any person in any manner the
name of any repair, wrecker or towing business, nor shall any city employee
influence or attempt to influence in any manner the decision of any person in
choosing or selecting a repair, wrecker service or towing business.



(`87 Code, § 17-55) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.06  WRECKER PROHIBITED AT SCENE UNLESS CALLED; SOLICITATION
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall drive a wrecker to or near the site of an
accident within the corporate limits of the city unless such person has been
called to the site by the owner of the vehicle, his or her authorized
representative or by the Police Department. Any wrecker company when called
as provided herein shall notify the police dispatcher before proceeding to
the disabled vehicle. No person shall solicit in any manner, directly or
indirectly, at or near the site of an accident involving motor vehicles in
the city, any business regarding wrecked or disabled vehicle, regardless of
whether the solicitation is for the purpose of removing, repairing, wrecking,
storing, trading or purchasing said vehicle. The presence of any person
engaged in the wrecker business or other business for which solicitation is
prohibited (such person not having been specifically summoned by the owner of
a wrecked or disabled vehicle, or if not by the owner, the officer in charge
of the accident investigation) either as owner, operator, employee or agent
on any street at or near the site of an accident within one hour after the
happening of such accident shall be prima facie evidence of a solicitation in
violation of this section.



   (B)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses
to comply with or who resist the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
section shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00.



(`87 Code, § 17-56) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.07  INSPECTION CERTIFICATES REQUIRED FOR WRECKERS AND HEAVY WRECKERS.



   No person shall operate a wrecker or heavy duty wrecker to remove a
vehicle within the city, unless a wrecker inspection certificate for such
wrecker has been issued by the Chief of Police. Such certificate shall be
affixed securely to the inside of the windshield of such wrecker and
displayed at all times.



(`87 Code, § 17-57) (Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.08  PROCEDURE FOR ACQUIRING INSPECTION CERTIFICATES, WRECKER ROTATION
LIST.



   (A)   Any wrecker company desiring to engage in the wrecker business
in the city shall annually apply in writing to the Chief of Police on a form
provided for that purpose by the Chief of Police for an inspection
certificate for each wrecker proposed to be operated. The application shall
contain the name, address and telephone number of the wrecker company, the
number and types of wreckers to be operated, the true owner of the company
concerned and a statement that the applicant does or does not desire to
appear on the “wrecker rotation list.”



   (B)   Every application, when filed, shall be sworn to by the
applicant and filed with the Mount Pleasant Police Department.



(`87 Code, § 17-58) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.09  QUALIFICATIONS, EQUIPMENT, INSURANCE.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall issue an inspection certificate for
each qualified wrecker which shall be valid until December 31 of the year in
which same was issued. No inspection certificate authorizing the operation of
a wrecker shall be operated in the city unless the following minimum
requirements are met: each wrecker shall be not less than one ton in size or
equivalent and shall have a gross vehicle weight of not less than 10,000
pounds.



   (B)   Each wrecker shall be equipped with a lifting device, wench
line and boom with a rated lifting capacity of not less than 8,000 pounds,
single-line capacity.



   (C)   Each wrecker shall carry as standard equipment towing
mechanisms, safety chains, a properly functioning fire extinguisher and
emergency lighting as approved by the Police Department. Standard equipment
for wreckers shall also include a broom, square point shovel and a receptacle
for holding debris.



   (D)   Wreckers which are qualified for the rotation list shall be
equipped with flashing or rotating beacons capable of warning motorists that
shall be used in accordance with the Tex. Transportation Code and, if
approved, police radio communications of a type approved the Chief of Police.



   (E)   Each wrecker shall have inscribed on each side thereof, in
letters not less than three inches in height, the name, city and telephone
number of the wrecker company.



   (F)   Each owner of a wrecker must furnish evidence of the minimum
insurance coverage at the time of the application as defined and required for
a tow truck by the Tex. Administrative Code, Title 43, Chapter B.



   (G)   Each policy mentioned in division (F) of this section must
contain an endorsement providing for ten days notice to the city in the event
of any material change or cancellation of each policy and shall name the city
as an additional insured while the wrecker company is performing a wrecker
job for the city.



(`87 code, § 17-58) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.10  REQUIREMENTS FOR WRECKER ROTATION LIST.



   In order to qualify for the wrecker rotation list, the following
requirements must be met:



   (A)   All delinquent taxes due to the city by a wrecker company must
be paid in full to maintain its status on the wrecker rotation list;



   (B)   The applicant shall have a minimum of two wreckers available
for service at all times, one of which may be a rollback unit as defined
herein;



   (C)   If the applicant chooses to become part of the heavy duty
wrecker rotation list, the wrecker company must have a minimum of one heavy
duty wrecker available for service at all times;



   (D)   The applicant shall file a sworn statement that he or she has
no financial interest in any other wrecker service which is on the city’s
wrecker rotation list.



(`87 Code, § 17-59) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.11  GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION OR REMOVAL.



   (A)   After an administrative hearing, the Chief of Police may
suspend or remove any wrecker company from the rotation list on any of the
following grounds:



      (1)   If the place on the wrecker rotation list was procured
by fraudulent conduct, concealment of or false statement of a material fact
concerning the applicant at the time of his or her making application;



      (2)   If the wrecker company violates the provisions of this
chapter or any other city ordinance or any state law regulating vehicular
traffic;



      (3)   If the wrecker company fails to comply with the
provisions of a storage area for wrecked or disabled vehicles;



      (4)   If the wrecker company fails to protect the vehicle in
its care as a result of a wrecker pull and fails to prevent parts,
accessories and personal belongings from being removed from the vehicle,
except as may be necessary to protect such items from theft;



      (5)   If the wrecker company fails to deliver a vehicle
directly to the location within the limits of the city as designated by the
owner of the vehicle or the Police Department, provided such vehicle can be
legally delivered to such location. However, this provision shall not apply
when it is necessary to remove a vehicle to its ultimate destination by two
separate tows because of emergency or breakdown of a wrecker, and no charge
is levied which is greater than the amount provided in § 117.04 for a single
tow from one point on a street to another location within the limits of the
city. This does not prohibit the wrecker business and the owner of the
vehicle from entering into an agreement to deliver the vehicle to any other
location, provided that the Police Department has not required otherwise;



      (6)   If a wrecker company is repeatedly tardy in arriving
after being called to the scene of an accident by the Police Department for a
rotation pull or police pull.



      (7)   If a wrecker company or a wrecker company employee
intentionally provides confidential arrest information learned by the wrecker
company or its employee, as a result of a police action, from the scene of a
rotation pull or police pull and provides this information to any other
person, party or business in the city that may find it advantageous to
acquire such information.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall give ten-days' notice of the time
and place for the administrative hearing concerning suspension, cancellation
or removal as provided above and is empowered to administer oaths to
witnesses and to conduct hearings as otherwise provided by law.



   (C)   Findings of the Chief of Police and his or her written order
of suspension or removal from the rotation list shall terminate all authority
and permission theretofore granted. The period of suspension or removal from
the rotation list shall not exceed one year, unless the violation occurs
under division (A)(7) above, in which case removal from the rotation list
will be permanent. If ownership of the permanently removed wrecker company
changes, the new owners may apply to join the rotation list. The Chief of
Police will present the application to the City Council, who has the final
authority to affirm, reject or modify the application.



   (D)   Any order of the Chief of Police in this section may be
appealed to the City Council within ten days from the date of suspension or
removal. The City Council shall have authority to reverse, affirm, vacate or
modify the order of the Chief of Police; provided, that in the event of
affirmance of the order, the suspension shall commence upon the date of
action by the City Council.



(`87 Code, § 17-60) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 2007-5, passed
6-27-07)



§ 117.12  PROCEDURE USED IN WRECKER SELECTION.



   (A)   When a police officer investigating an accident determines
that any vehicle which has been involved in an accident should be removed by
a wrecker, the officer shall first determine whether or not the owner has
already made arrangements with an authorized wrecker service or, if
appropriate, a restricted use wrecker, for the removal of the vehicle.



   (B)   If not, the officer shall request the owner to either
designate an authorized company or allow a wrecker to be called from the
wrecker rotation list as follows:



      (1)   If the owner or operator selects a wrecker company, the
investigating officer shall notify the police dispatcher to call the wrecker
company. If the requested wrecker company is unable to promptly respond, then
a rotation wrecker will be called.



      (2)   If the owner does not designate a wrecker company to be
called, the investigating officer shall notify the dispatcher to call the
wrecker company next in line on the wrecker rotation list and furnish its
name to the investigating officer. A wrecker company called from the wrecker
rotation list may hereafter be referred to as “rotation pull.” In such
event, the investigating officer shall notify the police dispatcher who shall
call the wrecker company next up from the wrecker rotation list and dispatch
it to the scene. The vehicle or vehicles to be removed shall be taken to the
place designated by the owner or by the investigating officer or to the
wrecker company’s own place of storage if no designation is made. If the
responding wrecker company is unable to immediately provide a wrecker for
each wrecked vehicle at the scene, then the wrecker service next on the
rotation list shall be called to remove excess vehicles.



   (C)   On each succeeding accident or call, or on each equal rotation
of the list, the next wrecker company on the rotation list will be called to
respond. The Chief of Police will establish a fair and consistent rotation
procedure to ensure equal service for each wrecker business on the rotation.



   (D)   To effect the wrecker rotation and heavy duty wrecker list
procedure, the Police Department shall keep a master list of all wrecker
companies which meet all the requirements of this chapter and are qualified
to be on the wrecker rotation and the heavy duty wrecker rotation lists.



(`87 Code, § 17-61) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.13  STORAGE; WRECKER COMPANY RESPONSIBILITY.



   It shall be the responsibility of each wrecker company to provide a
storage area for wrecked or disabled vehicles which are moved or towed as the
result of a police or rotation pull. The storage area may be inspected by the
Chief of Police to determine whether it complies with the provisions of this
section. A wrecker company or storage facility shall meet all requirements
set forth in the Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 18, Chapters A through G
which establish the minimum standards for motor carrier laws and storage
facilities in order to qualify for participation on the rotation list. The
storage area must also be located within the incorporated city limits of
Mount Pleasant.



(`87 Code, §  17-62) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.14  FEES FOR SERVICE, TOWING AND STORAGE.



   (A)   Towing. It is not the policy of the city to regulate the fees
for towing or services provided by an wrecker business/company on the
rotation list. Provided, however, no wrecker business/company on the rotation
list shall charge a higher fee or rate for calls originating by virtue of the
rotation list than for calls for similar services from other sources.



   (B)   Rate sheet required. Each wrecker business/company shall
provide to the Chief of Police a rate sheet listing its published rates for
towing and storage for each class, annually, or sooner if there is a rate
change. This list shall also include all charges for ancillary services such
as the use of dollies, dropping, hooking linkage, clearing debris off the
roadway and similar charges. No charge shall be greater than those listed on
the rate sheet.



   (C)   Storage. Storage fees shall not exceed the limitations as set
forth in the Tex. Administrative  Code, Chapter 18, Chapter G. All storage
charges shall cease at the time the owner or his or her representative
requests the vehicle from the storage yard of the wrecker company, provided
the request is made during regular business hours. No charge for storage
shall be assessed if the vehicle is removed or requested from the wrecker
company within two hours of the time it is placed into storage.



   (D)   Other charges. Any ancillary services are to be performed only
if required and appropriate.



   (E)   Waiting time. A charge of not more than $15.00 for each½ hour
of time spent shall be allowed for waiting to tow a vehicle.



(187 Code, § 17-63) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.15  FEE REGULATION OR POLICE PULL NOT INVOLVING ACCIDENT.



   On a police pull for a vehicle that is in safe driving condition, and
for any reason has no owner or licensed operator present to drive the vehicle
from the site, the wrecker company called from the rotation list shall
observe and maintain the same maximum fees provided for in this chapter. In
the event a police pull is made for a tow-away zone or traffic law violator,
the vehicle shall not be released to the owner or any other person until
authorization is granted by the Police Department. If a police officer
representing the Police Department requests a hold placed on the vehicle,
then the wrecker company and/or storage facility operator may not release the
vehicle to any other person until authorization is granted by the Police
Department.



(`87 Code, § 17-64) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.16  RULES FOR EXTRAORDINARY CONDITIONS; LARGE VEHICLES.



   (A)   If a large or heavy vehicle is wrecked or disabled and a
wrecker of ordinary lifting capacity cannot move the vehicle, the following
rules shall govern notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter:



      (1)   The investigating official from the city will attempt to
summon the appropriate wrecker from the wrecker rotation or the heavy duty
wrecker rotation. In the event that a wrecker is unable to complete the call
due to the need for a heavy duty wrecker with extraordinary lifting capacity,
the city official shall have a heavy duty wrecker summoned to the scene from
the heavy duty wrecker rotation list;



      (2)   The charges rendered for services of wreckers of
extraordinary lifting capacity shall not exceed the usual and customary
charges for like services provided in the wrecker industry.



   (B)   If in the opinion of city fire or police officials, a wrecked
or disabled vehicle or its cargo constitutes a hazard to the public, any
wrecker company shall act at the direction of the said city official.



(`87 Code, § 17-65) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.17  REMOVAL OF WRECKS AND DEBRIS.



   The operator of a wrecker shall remove from the street along with the
disabled vehicle all broken or shattered glass and other debris and parts
coming from the disabled vehicle; and failure to do so shall constitute a
misdemeanor punishable as provided in the code and cancellation of the
wrecker license.



(`87 Code, 17-66) (Am. Ord. 1970-1, passed 1-6-70; Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed
7-6-99) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.18  NONRESIDENT WRECKER COMPANIES.



   The foregoing provisions shall not be construed to prohibit the
transportation by a nonresident wrecker company of a wrecked or disabled
vehicle from some point in the city other than the site of an original
accident to some point outside the city; nor shall it be construed to
prohibit the transportation within the city by a nonresident wrecker company
of a wrecked or disabled vehicle from a point outside the city limits to a
destination inside or outside the city limits.



(`87 Code, 17-67) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.19  COMPANIES TO KEEP RECORDS.



   (A)   Every wrecker company qualified for and whose name appears at
its request on the wrecker rotation list shall maintain at its garage or
storage location within the city records as to all vehicles moved by it after
being notified to do so by personnel of the Police Department in accordance
with provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The records shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Make, model and serial number of the disabled vehicle
moved by the company;



      (2)   Location from which disabled vehicle removed and time of
such removal;



      (3)   Total amount charged for towing;



      (4)   Storage rate per day;



      (5)   Description of all personal property within the disabled
vehicle at the time of its removal.



   (C)   The records described in division (B) of this section shall be
preserved by the wrecker company for at least six months from and after the
date such company came into possession of the disabled vehicle.



   (D)   The records required to be kept shall be made available to the
members of the Police Department by the wrecker company at any reasonable
time.



(`87 Code, § 17-68) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



§ 117.20  ESTABLISHMENT OF ROTATION SCHEDULES.



   The Chief of Police will establish a fair and consistent rotation
procedure to ensure equal service potential for each wrecker business on the
rotation. Fair and consistent will be determined in increments of time rather
than the number of calls for service. The Chief of Police will strive to
offer equal opportunities for all wrecker businesses on the rotation lists.



(`87 Code, § 7-69) (Am. Ord. 1999-7, passed 7-6-99)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   GENERAL OFFENSES





         131.   SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS




CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



General Provisions



   130.01   Adoption of state penal laws



   130.02   Abandoned refrigerators or airtight containers



   130.03   Dangerous weapons; discharge



   130.04   Indecent publications and exposures



   130.05   Obscenity



   130.06   Peeping toms prohibited



   130.07   Trespass



   130.08   Water towers, poles and similar structures; climbing



Noise



   130.25   Unreasonable noise prohibited



   130.26   Enumeration of specific noises



Curfew



   130.40   Purposes and findings



   130.41   Definitions



   130.42   Offenses



   130.43   Exceptions and defenses



   130.44   Supplemental effect



   130.45   Enforcement



   130.46   Council review



Gasoline and Diesel Fuel Theft



   130.60   Definitions



   130.61   Prepayment required for gasoline or diesel fuel dispensed
at a retail fuel business; offense; defense



Banned Substances



   130.75   Certain substances banned; possession, sale or ingestion of
certain substances



   130.76   Definition



   130.77   Affirmative defense



 



   130.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 130.01  ADOPTION OF STATE PENAL LAWS.



   Any act, the commission of which constitutes a misdemeanor under the
laws of the state, is prohibited within the city, and if committed within the
city, is declared to be an offense; provided, however, that the penalty
therefor shall not exceed the penalty prescribed in § 10.99 or the penalty
prescribed by state law, whichever is less.



(`87 Code, § 14-1) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.02  ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS OR AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to remain
outside of any dwelling, building or other structure or within any warehouse
or storage room or any unoccupied or abandoned dwelling, building or other
structure under such circumstances as to be accessible to children any
icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight container which has a
capacity of 1½ cubic feet or more and an opening of 50 square inches or more
and which has a door or lid equipped with a latch or other fastening device
capable of securing such door or lid shut.



(`87 Code, § 14-2) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, §§ 756.00 through
756.013



§ 130.03  DANGEROUS WEAPONS; DISCHARGE.



   (A)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge
any gun, pistol or firearm of any kind, or discharge an air rifle or pistol
of any description, by whatever name known, by means of compressed air,
compressed gas, springs, center fire, rim fire, or any other means capable of
discharging pellets or any solid object, or discharge an arrow or other
object from a bow or cross bow by human or mechanical means:



      (1)   At a velocity in excess of 300 feet per second and
within 300 feet of any business, house or structure within the city limits;



      (2)   On or across any public square, street or alley of the
city limits;



      (3)   Across the boundary of the tract of another owners
property without the permission of the land owner; or



      (4)   Within or across any city park or cemetery.



   (B)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to:



      (1)   Law enforcement personnel or animal control officers in
performance of their duties;



      (2)   For the proper and legitimate use of a firearm by a
citizen described for the protection of a person and/or property;



      (3)   If a location is permitted through inspection by the
Chief of Police under division (B)(1); or



      (4)   As amended under Tex. Local Gov’t Code Chapter 229.



   (C)   Penalty. Any person in violation of this section shall be
fined as provided in § 10.99.



(`87 Code, § 14-4) (Am. Ord. 1994-7, passed 6-7-94; Am. Ord. 2014-20, passed
12-15-14) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.04  INDECENT PUBLICATIONS AND EXPOSURES.



   If any person shall make, publish or print any indecent and obscene
print, picture or written composition manifestly designed to corrupt the
morals of youth or shall designedly make any obscene and indecent exhibition
of his or her own or the person of another in public, he or she shall be
fined as provided in § 10.99.



(`87 Code, § 14-9) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.05  OBSCENITY.



   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the word OBSCENE is
defined as whether to the average person, applying contemporary community
standards, the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to
prurient interests. The term CONTEMPORARY COMMUNITY STANDARDS shall in no
case involve a territory or geographic area less than the state.



   (B)   Generally. Whoever shall knowingly photograph, act in, pose
for, model for, print, sell, offer for sale, give away, exhibit, televise,
publish or offer to publish or have in his or her possession or under his or
her control or otherwise distribute, make, display or exhibit any obscene
book, magazine, story, pamphlet, paper, writing, card, advertisement,
circular, print picture, photograph, motion picture film, image, cast, slide,
figure, instrument, statue, drawing, phonograph record, mechanical recording
or presentation or other article which is obscene shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



   (C)   Affirmative defense. It shall be a defense to any charges
brought hereunder if such prohibited matter or act shall be regularly in use
in any bona fide, religious, educational or scientific institution or the
subject of a bona fide scientific investigation.



   (D)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
any motion pictures produced or manufactured as commercial pictures which:



      (1)   Have the seal under the Production Code of the Motion
Picture Association of America, Inc.; or



      (2)   Legally move in interstate commerce under federal law; or



      (3)   Are legally imported from foreign countries into the
United States and have been passed by a customs office of the U.S. Government
at any port of entry. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
daily or weekly newspaper.



(`87 Code, § 14-10)



Statutory reference:



   Acts involving obscene articles and the like, see Tex. Penal Code, §§
43.21 et seq.



§ 130.06  PEEPING TOMS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to window peep, spy upon or
eavesdrop at or on any private residence in the city, or upon any hotel,
tourist court, apartment or trailer house, whether such private residence,
hotel, tourist court, apartment or trailer house is occupied by people or
not, and it shall be no defense that such window peeper, eavesdropper or
spyer was not trespassing upon private property at the time of such window
peeping, eavesdropping and spying.



(`87 Code, § 14-11) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.07  TRESPASS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
commit a trespass within this municipality upon either public or private
property.



   (B)   Any of the following acts by any person, firm or corporation
shall be deemed included among those that constitute trespasses in violation
of this section, and appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any time,
or from time to time, to prevent or punish any violation or violations of
this chapter.



   (C)   The enumerated acts shall include:



      (1)   An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of
another, including any public property in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach
or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in
writing, by any owner or occupant thereof; or



      (2)   The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental
to the making of any entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice
posted or exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of
approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given
orally or in writing by any owner or occupant thereof; or



      (3)   A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of
another in case of being requested, either orally or in writing, by any owner
or occupant thereof; or



      (4)   Any entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or
watercraft made without the consent of the person having the right to the
possession or control thereof or a failure or refusal to leave any such
vehicle, aircraft or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person
having such right.



(`87 Code, § 14-12) (Am. Ord. 1995-12, passed 8-1-95)



§ 130.08  WATER TOWERS, POLES AND SIMILAR STRUCTURES; CLIMBING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, not employed to do so, to climb or
ascend any water tower, windmill tower, telephone, telegraph, electric light
or any other publicly or privately owned pole in the city.



(`87 Code, § 14-13) Penalty, see § 10.99



NOISE



§ 130.25  UNREASONABLE NOISE PROHIBITED.



   The creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise
within the limits of the city, which when done, accomplished or carried on in
such a manner, or such volume intensity, or with continued duration, so as to
annoy, distress, or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any person of
reasonable sensibilities within the vicinity or hearing thereof, or as to
endanger or injure the safety or health of persons, or as to interfere with
the physical well being of persons, are declared to be "noise nuisances" and
are unlawful and prohibited. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to:



   (A)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to
an emergency.



   (B)   The sound produced by an authorized emergency vehicle.



   (C)   The sound produced by emergency work necessary to restore
public utilities, or to restore property to a safe condition, or to protect
persons or property from imminent danger following fire, accident or natural
disaster.



Statutory reference:



   Municipal Regulation of Nuisances and Disorderly Conduct, see Tex. Loc.
Gov't Code 217.003(d)



(`87 Code, § 14-21; Am. Ord. 2002-38, passed 4-16-02)



§ 130.26  ENUMERATION OF SPECIFIC NOISES.



   The following acts, among others, are declared to be noise nuisances in
violation of this chapter; provided, however, that such enumeration shall not
be construed to be exclusive of other noises, to wit:



   (A)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, streetcar or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a
danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or
if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and
deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such
signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of
such device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;



   (B)   The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or
operated any radio receiving set, television set, musical instrument,
phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the
neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary
for convenient hearing for persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in
which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners
thereto, is hereby prohibited. The operation of any such set instrument,
phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to be audible through an
adjacent wall by a neighboring inhabitant, or at a distance of 50 feet from
the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation;



   (C)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or vehicle so
out of repair, so loaded or operated in such manner as to create loud or
unnecessary noises such as spinning or squealing of tires, grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise;



   (D)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary
boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a
warning of danger;



   (E)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or boat engine
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud
or explosive noises therefrom;



   (F)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air,
except pneumatic drills, unless the noise thereby created is effectively
muffled and reduced;



   (G)   The erection (including excavation), demolition, retention or
repair of any building, street or public utility, other than between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent
necessity in the interest of public safety and convenience, and then only
with a permit from the Chief Building Official. This restriction also shall
apply to the excavating or clearing of land within the limits of the city;



   (H)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to
any school, institution of learning or court while the same are in session,
or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the working
of such institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets
indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street;



   (I)   The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with
the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of
bales, boxes, crates and containers;



   (J)   The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or
premises which is reasonably calculated to disturb a person of ordinary
disposition if such person were in the vicinity thereof;



   (K)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which
disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood;



   (L)   The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device
for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any
performance, show or sale of merchandise;



   (M)   The use of loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other
vehicles.



   (N)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep or
harbor an animal upon their premises that causes the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood or the occupants of adjacent premises to be disturbed, at any
time of the day or night.



(`87 Code, § 14-22) (Am. Ord. 1994-9, passed 6-21-94; Am. Ord. 2002-10,
passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 2002-38, passed 4-16-02)



Cross-reference:



   Animals; noises, see § 97.09



CURFEW



§ 130.40  PURPOSES AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   Purposes. The purposes of this subchapter are to:



      (1)   Protect minors from criminal activity that occurs after
the curfew hour;



      (2)   Protect minors from improper influences that prevail
after the curfew hour;



      (3)   Protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed
after the curfew hour; and



      (4)   Help parents, guardians, custodians, or other
responsible persons in carrying out their responsibility to exercise
reasonable supervision of the children entrusted to their care.



   (B)   Findings. Based on statistical information maintained by the
Police Department, the number of juveniles involved in crime and juveniles
who are victims of crime represent a significant threat to the health,
safety, and peace of the community which constitutes a compelling
governmental interest for initiating this subchapter.



(Ord. 2009-5, passed 4-21-09; Am. Ord. 2014-3, passed 5-5-14; Am. Ord.
2017-19, passed 11-21-17)



§ 130.41  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CURFEW HOURS.



      (1)   11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or
Thursday, until 6:00 a.m. the following day; and



      (2)   12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.



   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is
not limited to a fire, a natural disaster, motor vehicle accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  Any privately owned place of business operated for
profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any
place of amusement or entertainment.



   GUARDIAN.



      (1)   A person who, under court order, has the care, custody,
and control of a minor; or



      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been
placed by a court.



   MINOR.  Any person less than 17 years of age.



   OPERATOR.  Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment, including
the members or partners or an association or partnership and the officers of
a corporation.



   PARENT.  A person who is the natural parent, adoptive parent, or
step-parent of another person. As used herein, PARENT shall also include a
court appointed guardian or other person 21 years of age or older, authorized
in writing by the parent, by a court order, or by the court-appointed
guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.



   PREMISES.  The structure within which the establishment is housed.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
parks, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities, and shops.



   REMAIN.



      (1)   Linger or stay; or



      (2)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a
police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the
premises.



(Ord. 2009-5, passed 4-21-09; Am. Ord. 2014-3, passed 5-5-14; Am. Ord.
2017-19, passed 11-21-17)



§ 130.42  OFFENSES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor to intentionally or
knowingly remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about in or upon any public
place in the city during curfew hours.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the parent of a minor to knowingly
permit, or by insufficient control, to allow such minor to remain, walk, run,
stand, drive, or ride about in or upon any public place in the city during
curfew hours.



      (1)   The term KNOWINGLY includes knowledge which a parent
should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor
in that parent's legal custody.



      (2)   A parent is also presumed to knowingly allow or permit
the minor to be in violation of this subchapter if the minor has two previous
convictions of violations of this subchapter. For the purpose of this
section, a deferred adjudication is a conviction.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or any employee
of an establishment in the city to knowingly allow a minor to enter or to
remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.



(Ord. 2009-5, passed 4-21-09; Am. Ord. 2014-3, passed 5-5-14; Am. Ord.
2017-19, passed 11-21-17)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.43  EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.



   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution of this subchapter that, at the
time of the act that otherwise would constitute an offense:



      (1)   The minor was accompanied by his/her parent;



      (2)   The minor was accompanied by an adult 21 years of age or
older designated by his/her parent;



      (3)   The minor was on a lawful errand, without any detour or
stop, made necessary by an emergency;



      (4)   The minor was attending an official school, religious,
or other activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a governmental
entity, a church, a civic organization, or similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor; or going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other activity supervised
by adults and sponsored by a governmental entity, a church, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor;



      (5)   The minor was engaged in volunteer work at a recognized
charity institution or a lawful employment activity, or going to or coming
from such activity without detour or stop;



      (6)   The minor was, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle
engaged in interstate travel beginning, ending, or passing through the city;



      (7)   The minor was on an errand at the direction of the
minor's parent, without, any detour or stop;



      (8)   The minor was on the property or the sidewalk directly
adjacent to the minor's residence or the place immediately adjacent thereto
if the owner or occupant of the adjacent building does not communicate an
objection to the minor and the Police Department regarding the minor's
presence;



      (9)   The minor was attending or traveling directly to or from
an activity involving exercising First and Fourteenth Amendment rights
protected by the United States Constitution, including but not limited to the
free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly;



      (10)   The minor is married or had been married or had
disabilities of minority removed in accordance with Tex. Family Code, Ch. 31;



      (11)   It is a defense to prosecution under § 130.42(C) that
the owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment in the city promptly
notified the Police Department that a minor is present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refuses to leave; and



      (12)   The minor was following the direction of a peace
officer.



   (B)   Each of the foregoing exceptions and their several limitations
are severable, as hereinafter provided but reemphasized here.



(Ord. 2009-5, passed 4-21-09; Am. Ord.2014-3, passed 5-5-14; Am. Ord.
2017-19, passed 11-21-17)



§ 130.44  SUPPLEMENTAL EFFECT.



   The provisions of this subchapter are supplemental and shall be
cumulative with all other laws and ordinances applicable in any manner to
juveniles.



(Ord. 2009-5, passed 4-21-09; Am. Ord. 2014-3, passed 5-5-14; Am. Ord.
2017-19, passed 11-21-17)



§ 130.45  ENFORCEMENT.



   Before taking any enforcement action under this subchapter, a police
officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the
public place during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or
make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that
an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, no defense or exception listed in this subchapter is present.



(Ord. 2009-5, passed 4-21-09; Am. Ord. 2014-3, passed 5-5-14; Am. Ord.
2017-19, passed 11-21-17)



§ 130.46  COUNCIL REVIEW.



   (A)   Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 370.002 requires the City Council
review this ordinance every three years after the adoption of this subchapter
with the following requirements:



      (1)   Review the subchapter's effects on the community and on
problems the subchapter was intended to remedy;



      (2)   Conduct public hearings on the need to continue the
subchapter; and



      (3)   Decide whether the city should abolish, continue, or
modify the subchapter.



   (B)   Failure to act in accordance with division (A) shall cause the
subchapter to expire.



(Ord. 2009-5, passed 4-21-09; Am. Ord. 2014-3, passed 5-5-14; Am. Ord.
2017-19, passed 11-21-17)



GASOLINE AND DIESEL FUEL THEFT



§ 130.60  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EMPLOYEE.  Person(s) other than the owner or manager/supervisor
employed to perform services on the premises of a retail fuel business who
have no supervisory responsibilities.



   MANAGER/SUPERVISOR.  The person(s) granted authority or responsibility
by the owner for the operations of the retail fuel business.



   OWNER.  The individual, group, corporation, partnership, joint
venture, or other group or entity that owns a retail fuel business.



   PAYMENT.  Payment by any legal means including cash, credit card,
debit card, check or otherwise.  Presenting a form of PAYMENT to be
finalized at the conclusion of the transaction shall be considered payment in
full.



(Ord. 2008-16, passed 6-17-08)



§ 130.61  PREPAYMENT REQUIRED FOR GASOLINE OR DIESEL FUEL DISPENSED AT A
RETAIL FUEL BUSINESS; OFFENSE; DEFENSE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a retail fuel business owner,
manager/supervisor, or employee to knowingly:



      (1)   Activate any gasoline or diesel fuel pumping device
prior to receiving payment in full for the gasoline or diesel fuel; or



      (2)   Allow or permit any person to dispense gasoline or
diesel fuel from a pumping device at a retail fuel business unless the person
has first made payment in full.



   (B)   It shall be a defense if the owner, manager/supervisor or
employee of a retail fuel business allows the dispensing of gasoline or
diesel fuel for repair and/or testing of the dispensing devices used by the
retail fuel business.



(Ord. 2008-16, passed 6-17-08)  Penalty, see § 130.99



BANNED SUBSTANCES



§ 130.75  CERTAIN SUBSTANCES BANNED; POSSESSION, SALE OR INGESTION OF
CERTAIN SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess,
purchase, sell, publicly display for sale or attempt to sell, give, or barter
any one or more of the following substances defined below within the city
limits of the City of Mount Pleasant, Texas.



         (a)   Salviadivinorum or salvinorum A;



         (b)   2-[1R,
3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl}-5(2-methylocatan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47,
497) and homologues;



         (c)   (6aS, 10aS)-9(hydroxmethyl)-6,
6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan–2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]
chormen-l-ol) (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol);



         (d)   l-Pentyl-3-(l-naphthoyl) indole (also known as
JWH-073);



         (e)   Butyl-3-(l-naphthoyl) indole (also known as
JWH-073);



         (f)   Any substance consisting of organic material,
synthetic material or a combination of either which produces, or by its
design is intended to produce, an effect similar to marijuana or other
illegal substance when ingested.



      (2)   Products containing some of the substances in (A)(1) are
commonly marketed under, but not limited to, the following names: "SPICE",
"GENIE", "DaSCENTS", "ZOHAI", "SAGE", "K-2", "KO KNOCK-OUT", "SPICE GOLD",
"SPICE DIAMOND", "YUCATAN FIRE", "SOLAR FLARE", "PEP SPICE", "FIRE N' ICE",
and "SALVIA DIVINORUM".



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase,
barter, give, publicly display, sell or offer for sale any illegal smoking
product.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess an
ingestion device with the intent to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise
introduce into the human body an illegal smoking product.



   (D)   The culpable mental state required by Ch. 6.02 of the Tex.
Penal Code is specifically negated and dispensed with and a violation is a
strict liability offense.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 9-7-10)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.76  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCT. Any plant or other substance, whether
described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any blend thereof, regardless
of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which
includes any one or more of the following substances or chemicals:
salviadivinorum or salvinorum A, all parts of the plant presently classified
botanically as salvia divorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any
extract from the part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts,
derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 9-7-10)



§ 130.77  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.



   (A)   It shall be an affirmative defense for a person charged with
an offense for possession or use of an illegal smoking product that the use
or possession was pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed
physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act.



   (B)   It shall be an affirmative defense that the sale or possession
of Salvinorin A was in conjunction with ornamental landscaping and used
solely for that purpose.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 9-7-10)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A minor who violates a provision of this §§ 130.40 through
130.46 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be
punishable by a fine in accordance with § 10.99, and may be subject to
appropriate action by a juvenile court in accordance to Tex. Family Code §§
51.03 and 51.08, and Tex. Penal Code § 8.07.



   (B)   A parent of a minor who violates any provision of this §§
130.40 through 130.46 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction,
shall be punishable by a fine in accordance with § 10.99.



   (C)   A person who violates any provision of §§ 130.40 through
130.46 is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during
which the violation is committed, continued or permitted.



   (D)   In assessing punishment for any person, parent, or minor found
to have violated any provision(s) of §§ 130.40 through 130.46, the
municipal court judge may consider a community service or teen court program
in lieu of or in addition to assessing a fine.



(Ord. 2009-5, passed 4-21-09; Am. Ord. 2014-3, passed 5-5-14; Am. Ord.
2017-19, passed 11-21-17)



   (E)   Any business owner, manager/supervisor, or employee who
violates any provision of §§ 130.60 or 130.61 shall be subject to a penalty
prescribed in § 10.99.



   (F)   Any person, firm or corporation found to be violating any term
or provision of § 130.75 shall be subject to a fine in accordance with §
10.99 for each offense. Every day a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Ord. 2008-16, passed 6-17-08; Am. Ord. 2010-11, passed 9-7-10)



CHAPTER 131:  SEXUAL OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS



Section



   131.01   Purpose and intent



   131.02   Definitions



   131.03   Sex offender prohibition



   131.04   Property owners prohibited from renting real property to
registered sex offenders



   131.05   Evidentiary matters



   131.06   Exceptions



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The City Council finds that sex offenders who are required to register
as a sexual predator under Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, Ch. 62, present
an extreme threat to the health, safety, and welfare of children. It is the
intent of this section to serve the city's compelling interest to promote,
protect, and improve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate
in concentrated numbers wherein certain registered sex offenders and sexual
predators are prohibited from loitering or prohibited from establishing
temporary or permanent residency.



(Ord. 2018-13, passed 12-4-18)



§ 131.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHILD.  Any person under the age of 17.



   CHILD CARE FACILITY.  A family day care home which provides regular
care to no more than four children under 14 years of age, excluding children
related to the caretaker, and provides care after school hours for not more
than six additional elementary school children, but the total number of
children, including those related to the caretaker, shall not exceed 12 at
any given time.



   CHILD CARE INSTITUTION.  A commercial day care center, which provides
regular care to any number of adults or children for less than 24 hours a day.



   CHILD SAFETY ZONE.  Means public parks, private and public schools,
public library, amusement arcades, video arcades, indoor and outdoor
amusement centers, amusement parks, public or commercial and semi-private
swimming pools, child care facility, child care institution, public or
private youth soccer or baseball field, crisis center or shelter, skate park
or rink, public or private youth center, movie theater, bowling alley,
scouting facilities and Offices for Child Protective Services.



   DATABASE.  The Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender
Database or the Sex Offender Registration files maintained by the Sex
Offender Registration Officer of the Mount Pleasant Police Department.



   LOITER.  Means standing or sitting idly, whether the person is in a
vehicle or remaining in or around an area.



   PARK or PLAYGROUND.  One of the following:



      (1)   Any land, including improvements to the land that is
administered, operated, or managed by the city for the use of the general
public as a recreational area; or



      (2)   City recreational areas include, but are not limited to,
conservation area, jogging trail, hiking trail, bicycle trail, recreational
center, water park, swimming pool, soccer field or baseball field.



   PERMANENT RESIDENCE.  A place where the person abides, lodges, or
resides for 14 or more consecutive days.



   PLACES WHERE CHILDREN REGULARLY CONGREGATE.  Same as CHILD SAFETY ZONE.



   PUBLIC WAY.  Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, shopping
centers, parking lots, transportation facilities, restaurants, shops, and
similar areas that are open to the use of the public.



   SCHOOL.  A private or public pre-school, private or public elementary
school, or private or public secondary school.



   SEX OFFENDER.  An individual who has been convicted of or placed on
deferred adjudication for a sexual offense involving a person under 17 years
of age for which the individual is required to register as a sex offender
under Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, Ch. 62.



   TEMPORARY RESIDENCE.  A place where a person abides, lodges, or
resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate, during any calendar
year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the
person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more
consecutive or non-consecutive days in any month and which is not the
person's permanent residence.



(Ord. 2018-13, passed 12-4-18)



§ 131.03  SEX OFFENDER PROHIBITION.



   (A)   It is an offense for a sex offender to establish a permanent
residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of the real property
comprising a school, child care facility, child care institution, park or
play ground, or other places where children regularly congregate.



   (B)   It is an offense for a sex offender to knowingly enter a Child
Safety Zone.



   (C)   It is an offense for a sex offender to knowingly loiter on a
public way within 300 feet of a Child Safety Zone.



   (D)   A sex offender shall not, on each October 30th and 31st (or
any other date set by the city for trick-or-treaters), between the hours of
4:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m., leave an exterior porch light on or otherwise
invite trick-or-treaters to solicit the premises.



(Ord. 2018-13, passed 12-4-18)



§ 131.04  PROPERTY OWNERS PROHIBITED FROM RENTING REAL PROPERTY TO
REGISTERED SEX OFFENDERS.



   It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof,
manufactured home, trailer, or any other conveyance, with the knowledge that
it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person
prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence
pursuant to the terms of this chapter, if such place, structure, or part
thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance is located within
1,000 feet, as defined in § 131.05(D), from a Child Safety Zone.



(Ord. 2018-13, passed 12-4-18)



§ 131.05  EVIDENTIARY MATTERS.



   (A)   If a sex offender that is prohibited from being in a Child
Safety Zone is found in a Child Safety Zone by a police officer, the sex
offender is subject to punishment in accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be prima facie evidence that this section applies to
such a person if that person's record appears in/on the database and the
database indicates that the victim was less than 17 years of age.



   (C)   The distance of 300 feet from a Child Safety Zone shall be
measured on a straight line from the closest boundary of the Child Safety
Zone.



   (D)   The distance of 1,000 feet from a place where children
congregate shall be measured on a straight line from the closest boundary
line of the sex offender's residence to the closest boundary line of the
school, child care facility, child care institution, park or playground, or
other places where children regularly congregate.



   (E)   In the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring
from the nearest property line of the residences to the nearest property line
of the school, child care facility, child care institution, park or
playground, or other places where children regularly congregate.



   (F)   In cases of a dispute over measured distances, it shall be
incumbent upon the person(s) challenging the measurement to prove otherwise.



   (G)   A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be created by the
city and maintained by the Police Department. The city shall review the map
annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the Mount
Pleasant Police Department or available on the city website or the City
Police Department website.



(Ord. 2018-13, passed 12-4-18)



§ 131.06  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The person required to register in/on the database established
the permanent residence or temporary residence and residency prior to the
adoption of this chapter has been consistently maintained and the person has
complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas,
prior to the date of the adoption of this chapter.



   (B)   The place where children regularly congregate, as specified
herein, within 1,000 feet of the permanent or temporary residence of the
person required to register on/in the database was opened after the person
established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex
offender registration laws of the State of Texas.



   (C)   The information on/in the database is incorrect, and, if
corrected, this section would not apply to the person who was erroneously
listed on/in the database.



   (D)   The person required to register on/in the database was a minor
when he or she committed the offense requiring such registration and was not
convicted as an adult.



   (E)   The person required to register is required to serve a
sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility, or other correctional
institution located within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising a
school, child care facility, child care institution, park or play ground, or
other places where children regularly congregate.



   (F)   The person required to register is under 18 years of age or a
ward under a guardianship who resides with a parent or guardian.



   (G)   The person required to register has been exempted by a court
order from registration as a sex offender under Tex. Code of Criminal
Procedure, Ch. 62.



   (H)   The person required to register has had the offense for which
the sex offender registration was required reversed on appeal or pardoned.



   (I)   The person's duty to register on/in the database has expired.



   (J)   Nothing in this provision shall require any person to sell or
otherwise dispose of any real estate or home acquired or owned prior to the
conviction of the person as a sex offender.



   (K)   A registered sexual offender can apply for an exemption from a
provision of this chapter by making a request to the Chief of Police through
the Sexual Offender Registry Office. The Exemption request must be in
writing, citing the specific code section for the exemption; state why an
exemption should be granted; and must be signed by the person making the
request. A review and decision shall be conducted within 30 work days,
excluding weekends and city holidays. The decision of the Chief of Police,
based solely on the exemption request without further hearing, shall be
final. A copy of the decision shall be kept within the Sexual Offender
Registry Office.



(Ord. 2018-13, passed 12-4-18; Am. Ord. 2019-01, passed 2-5-19)



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation, agent, or employee thereof who violates
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof may be fined an amount not to exceed $2,000 as
allowed by law. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.



(Ord. 2018-13, passed 12-4-18)



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS





         151.   ELECTRICAL CODE





         152.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION





         153.   AIRPORT REGULATIONS AND ZONING





         154.   SUBDIVISIONS





         155.   ZONING CODE




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   150.001   International Property Maintenance Code adopted



   150.002   Building permits



   150.003   Drilling of oil and gas wells within 200 feet of any
building prohibited



   150.004   Signs and billboards



Unsafe Building Abatement Code



   150.015   Dangerous structures



   150.016   Right of entry



   150.017   Inspections



   150.018   Minimum standards for buildings



   150.019   Notice of public hearing



   150.020   Notice to be filed



   150.021   Public hearing



   150.022   Notice of order



   150.023   Noncompliance with order



   150.024   Diligent effort to notify



   150.025   Emergency measures for declaring a building or structure
unsafe



Building Code



   150.040   International Building Code adopted



   150.041   Trench safety; nonmunicipal projects



   150.042   Trench safety; municipal projects



   150.043   Enforcement



Small Wireless Facility Siting



   150.045   Small wireless facility siting



Mechanical Code



   150.055   International Mechanical Code adopted



   150.056   Amendments



Plumbing and Gas Code



   150.070   Short title



   150.071   Application of provisions



   150.072   Exemptions from provisions



   150.073   Plumbing license required



   150.074   Plumbing permit and inspection fees



   150.075   International Plumbing Code adopted



   150.076   Sewer required



   150.077   Independent systems



   150.078   Easement provision



   150.079   International Gas Code adopted



   150.080   Gas permit and inspection fees



Housemovers



   150.095   Notice to utilities and Police and Fire Departments



   150.096   Investigation of route



   150.097   Change of route upon request of city



   150.098   To be accompanied by police officer if required



   150.099   Flagmen; flares and lights; leaving building on public
property



   150.100   Requirements for buildings to be relocated within the city



   150.101   Liability for damage



   150.102   Mover shall secure permit



   150.103   Application



   150.104   Bond required of applicant



   150.105   Fee



   150.106   Owner to obtain building permit



   150.107   Issuance



   150.108   Form and conditions



   150.109   Term



   150.110   Transfer prohibited



Exterior Construction Requirements and Standards on Certain Roads and
Thoroughfares



   150.125   Title



   150.126   Definitions



   150.127   Construction standards



   150.128   Exceptions



   150.129   Exemptions



   150.130   Enforcement



   150.131   Appeals




Historic Preservation




   150.140   Definitions



   150.141   Declaration of policy



   150.142   Creating historic districts



   150.143   Designating historic landmarks



   150.144   Criteria for historic designation



   150.145   Uses not affected by historic designation



   150.146   Main Street established as Historic Preservation
Commission; functions of Commission



   150.147   Secretary of the Main Street Historic Preservation
Commission



   150.148   Meetings of Main Street Historic Preservation Commission



   150.149   Application process



   150.150   Role of Building Official in application process



   150.151   Recommendation of the Commission



   150.152   Criteria to be used by Commission in determining its
recommendation



   150.153   Demolition or removal



   150.154   Signs in historic districts



   150.155   Findings of the Commission concerning applications for
permits



   150.156   Action by Building Official after action by Commission



   150.157   Appeal from action of Commission concerning applications
for permits



   150.158   Duties of Building Official after City Council action



   150.159   Reapplication for building permit



   150.160   Non-fixtures in historic district



   150.161   Notification to owners of historic designation by City
Secretary



   150.162   Exemptions



 



   150.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.001  INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   Adoption. There is adopted for the City of Mount Pleasant the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, together with
amendments thereto as set forth in division (B) below.



   (B)   Amendments. Section 111 of the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, is amended so that any reference to Board of
Appeals shall hereafter mean the City Council.



(`87 Code, § 29-1) (Am. Ord. 1986-2, passed 2-18-86; Am. Ord. 1993-5, passed
3-16-93; Am. Ord. 2004-2, passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 2011-18, passed 10-18-11;
Am. Ord. 2014-5, passed 6-2-14)



§ 150.002  BUILDING PERMITS.



   (A)   Building permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person
to build, construct, erect, alter or repair any building or other structure
within the city without having first obtained a permit therefor from the city.



(`87 Code, § 29-4) (Ord. passed 2-15-49)



   (B)   Fees. The fees for building permits and inspection fees levied
and ordered collected before the issuance of any building permit shall be as
follows:



      (1)   A charge of $0.15 per square foot on the total number of
square feet of floor area plus $20.00;



(Am. Ord. 2002-19, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2004-4, passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord.
2011-17, passed 10-18-11)



      (2)   The painting, papering, roofing and other maintenance
repairs only of any dwelling shall not be subject to any charge or permit
required. The addition to any structure, dwelling or commercial, of any
porch, carport, room or any type of structure whereby the floor area is
increased shall be considered as new construction and a permit shall be
required and the fees paid as herein required.



(`87 Code, § 29-5) (Ord. passed 6-17-58; Am. Ord. 1981-10, passed 10-20-81)



   (C)   Drainage inspection required. Before issuing a building permit
or addition to a building permit, the Building Official shall inspect the
site, and if he or she finds that the site will be subject to flooding or
will stop a natural drain, he or she shall specify and require remedial
measures to be taken to prevent flooding or stoppage and which shall be a
part of the building permit.



(`87 Code, § 29-6) (Ord. 1980-12, passed 10-21-80)



   (D)   Effect of applicant’s error in reporting square feet of
structure. If the applicant for a building permit shall fail to correctly
state the number of square feet in the application or the type of
construction upon such being discovered, the Building Official shall promptly
issue a notice of balance due and shall, as a penalty, double the amount due.
If the deficiency and penalty are not paid within 20 days from billing, no
city utilities shall be connected to the premises until the same are paid;
and if city utilities are connected, the same shall be discontinued until the
fee is paid.



(`87 Code, § 29-7) (Ord. passed 6-17-58)



   (E)   Conformity. All buildings or structures built, constructed,
erected, altered or repaired within the city shall be in conformity to the
approved plans and specifications, the building permit and all applicable
provisions of this code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations.



(`87 Code, § 29-8) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.003  DRILLING OF OIL AND GAS WELLS WITHIN 200 FEET OF ANY BUILDING
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The drilling of any well for the purpose of exploring for and
producing oil or gas within 200 feet of any building, residential or
commercial, occupied or unoccupied, within the city limits of the City of
Mount Pleasant is prohibited.



   (B)   Prior to the drilling of any well for the purpose of exploring
for and producing oil or gas within the city limits, the person proposing to
drill said well shall make application to the Building Official for a permit,
which application shall be accompanied by a plat showing the location of the
proposed well. The applicant shall pay a fee of $50.00. The Building
Official, after making an examination of the proposed location and the
surrounding area, will issue a permit if the location complies with this
section.



   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine as provided in § 150.999.



(`87 Code, § 29-9) (Ord. 1980-3, passed 4-1-80) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.004  SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS.



   (A)   Sign contractor’s license.



      (1)   No person shall install, erect or maintain any sign, nor
contract for such service, until such person has applied to the Building
Official for a license to install, erect and maintain signs and until such
license has been approved and issued. The fee for such license shall be
$25.00 per year payable on the first day of January of each year and an
additional fee of $10.00 per year for each renewal thereof. An original
license taken out after the first day of January shall be prorated.



      (2)   The license of any sign contractor may be canceled by
the City Commission, upon the recommendation of the Building Official, when
such contractor persistently violates the requirements of this chapter.
Conviction, whether appealed or not, of three such violations over a period
of two calendar years shall constitute evidence of persistent violation. Any
license thus canceled shall not be renewed for such contractor or anyone
operating his or her shop until all such violations have been corrected. Upon
correction of the violation, the contractor’s license may be renewed upon
furnishing the bond required by division (B) of this section.



(`87 Code, § 33-1)



   (B)   Sign contractor’s bond and liability insurance. No license
for the installation, erection and maintenance of signs shall be issued to
any person nor shall any person install, erect or maintain any sign or medium
of display or advertising, electric or otherwise, until such person has filed
with the Building Official a surety bond in the sum of $2,000.00.



      (1)   Such bond shall be approved by the Building Official and
shall be conditioned for the installation and erection of signs in accordance
with the provisions of this code, ordinances of the city and the laws of the
state and shall provide for the indemnification of the city for any and all
damages or liability which may accrue against it by reason of faulty
installation, erection, demolition, repair, removal or defects in, or
collapse of, any sign for a period of one year after erection and for such
period of time that such sign is maintained or serviced by or under the
direction of the maker of such bond.



      (2)   Such bond shall further provide for the indemnification
of any person, who shall, while upon public property or in any public place,
incur damage for which the principal named in the bond is legally liable.



      (3)    When any sign contractor’s license has been canceled
as provided for by division (A) of this section, such license shall not be
renewed until the contractor furnishes an additional bond in the amount of
$2,000.00, guaranteeing compliance with the provisions of this chapter, which
bond shall be for a period of two years following renewal of the license.



      (4)   In addition to the above bond, each contractor shall
carry public liability and property damage insurance, in a company to be
approved by the City Council, in the sum of $10,000.00, covering its or his
or her operation hereunder.



(`87 Code, § 33-2) (Ord. 1968-9, passed 12-17-68)



   (C)   Erection of sign by owner. Any person may erect his or her own
signs with his or her regular employees which advertise his or her own
business or profession or product manufactured or sold by him or her without
the necessity of a license or bond, but all other provisions of the code
shall be complied with. The person erecting the sign shall keep it in good
operating condition and shall remove it at his or her expense when requested
by the city.



(`87 Code, § 33-3) (Ord. 1968-3, passed 5-7-68)



UNSAFE BUILDING ABATEMENT CODE



§ 150.015  DANGEROUS STRUCTURES.



   There is adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from unsafe and dangerous
structures the Tex. Local Gov't Code, §§ 214.001 et seq., Chapter 214,
Subsection A, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended.



(Ord. 1998-2, passed 4-7-98)



§ 150.016  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   (A)   The Building Official or his or her authorized representative
may enter any building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to make
an inspection or enforce any of the provisions of this code.



   (B)   When entering a building, structure or premise that is
occupied, the Building Official shall first identify himself or herself,
present proper credentials and request entry. If the building, structure or
premises is unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other persons having charge of the building and demand
entry. If entry is refused, the Building Official or his or her authorized
representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure
entry.



   (C)   No person, owner or occupant of any building or premises shall
fail, after proper credentials are displayed, to permit entry into any
building or onto any property by the Building Official or his or her
authorized agent for the purpose of inspections pursuant to this code. Any
person violating this section shall be prosecuted within the limits of the
law as established by the proper governing authority.



(Ord. 1998-2, passed 4-7-98)



§ 150.017  INSPECTIONS.



   The Building Official, the Fire Official and other authorized
representatives are authorized to make such inspections and take such actions
as may be required to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. The Building
Official shall inspect or cause to be inspected any building, structure or
portion thereof which is or may be unsafe. After the Building Official has
inspected or caused to be inspected a building, structure or portion thereof
and has determined that such building, structure or portion thereof is
unsafe, he or she shall initiate proceedings to cause the abatement of the
condition by repair, vacation or demolition or combination thereof.



(Ord. 1998-2, passed 4-7-98)



§ 150.018  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BUILDINGS.



   A dangerous building is any building or structure that has any of the
following conditions, such that the life, health, property or safety of its
occupants or the general public are endangered:



   (A)   Any means of egress or portion thereof is not of adequate size
or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic;



   (B)   Any means of egress or portion thereof, such as but not
limited to fire doors, closing devices and fire resistive ratings, is in
disrepair or in a dilapidated or nonworking condition such that the means of
egress could be rendered unsafe in case of fire or panic;



   (C)   The stress in any material, member or portion thereof due to
all imposed loads including dead load exceeds the stresses allowed in the
Standard Building Code for new buildings;



   (D)   The building, structure or portion thereof has been damaged by
fire, flood, earthquake, wind or other cause to the extent that the
structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior
to the damage and is less than the minimum requirement established by the
Standard Building Code for new buildings;



   (E)   Any exterior appendage or portion of the building or structure
is not securely fastened, attached or anchored such that it is capable of
resisting wind, seismic or similar loads as required by the Standard Building
Code for new buildings;



   (F)   If for any reason the building, structure or portion thereof
is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used;



   (G)   The building, structure or portion thereof as a result of
decay, deterioration or dilapidation is likely to fully or partially collapse;



   (H)   The building, structure or portion thereof has been
constructed or maintained in violation of a specific requirement of the
Standard Codes or of a city, county or state law;



   (I)   Any building, structure or portion thereof that is in such a
condition as to constitute a public nuisance;



   (J)   Any building, structure or portion thereof that is unsafe,
unsanitary or not provided with adequate egress, which constitutes a fire
hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life or, which, in relation to
existing use, constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment.



(Ord. 1998-2, passed 4-7-98)



§ 150.019  NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   After the Building Official has determined in his or her
opinion that a building structure or portion thereof is unsafe, a public
hearing shall be conducted by the City Council. A notice of hearing before
the City Council shall be served personally or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner, lienholder and/or mortgagee 14 days prior to
hearing date set before the City Council.



   (B)   The notice shall contain:



      (1)   The address and legal description of the building;



      (2)   A statement indicating the building has been declared
dangerous by the Building Official and a detailed report documenting the
conditions determined to have rendered the building dangerous under the
provisions of this subchapter;



      (3)    The date, time and location of hearing;



      (4)   A statement that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee will
be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may
be required to comply with this subchapter and the time it will take to
reasonably perform the work.



(Ord. 1998-2, passed 4-7-98)



§ 150.020  NOTICE TO BE FILED.



   A notice shall be filed with the County Clerk and contain the name and
address of the owner of the affected property, if that information can be
determined, legal description and information concerning the public hearing.



(Ord. 1998-2, passed 4-7-98)



§ 150.021  PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   In conducting a hearing, should the City Council find that
building structure or portion thereof is unsafe, the City Council shall
require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building to within 30 days:



      (1)   Secure the building from unauthorized entry; or



      (2)   Repair, remove or demolish the building, unless the
owner or lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot
reasonably be performed within 30 days.



   (B)   If the City Council allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee
more than 30 days to repair, remove or demolish the building, the Council
shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance
of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to secure
the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is
being performed, as determined by the Building Official.



   (C)   The City Council may not allow the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove or demolish the building or
fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner,
lienholder or mortgagee:



      (1)   Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work
at the hearing; and



      (2)   Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot
reasonably be completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of
the work.



   (D)   If the Council allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more
than 90 days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove or
demolish the building, the Council shall require the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the Council to demonstrate
that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules
established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may
require that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee appear before the Building
Official to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules.



   (E)   In a public hearing to determine whether a building complies
with the standards set out in this subchapter, the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that
may be required to comply with this chapter and the time it will take to
reasonably perform the work.



(Ord. 1998-2, passed 4-7-98)



§ 150.022  NOTICE OF ORDER.



   Within ten days after the date of the public hearing and order issued
by the City Council, the following shall be done:



   (A)    File a copy of the order with the City Secretary;



   (B)   Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a
notice containing the street address or legal description of the property,
the date of the hearing, a brief statement indicating the results of the
hearing and subsequent order issued and instruction stating where a complete
copy of the order may be obtained;



   (C)   Notice of order shall be mailed to the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the United States
Postal Service returns notice marked as “refused” or “unclaimed” the
validity of the notice is not affected and shall be deemed delivered.



(Ord. 1998-2, passed 4-7-98)



§ 150.023  NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ORDER.



   (A)   If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or
demolished or the occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the
city may vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the
occupants at its own expense.



   (B)   If the city incurs expenses under this section, the city may
assess the expenses on, and the city has a lien against, unless it is a
homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, the property on which the
building was located. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or
another person having an interest in the legal title to the property
reimburses the city for the expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the
property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the
office of the County Clerk. The notice must contain the name and address of
the owner, if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a
legal description of the real property on which the building was located, the
amount of expenses incurred by the city and the balance due.



   (C)   If the notice is given and the opportunity to relocate the
tenants of the building or to repair, remove or demolish the building is
afforded to each mortgagee and lienholder as authorized by this subchapter,
the lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens.



(Ord. 1998-2, passed 4-7-98)



§ 150.024  DILIGENT EFFORT TO NOTIFY.



   The city satisfies the requirements of this subchapter to make a
diligent effort, to use its best efforts or to make a reasonable effort to
determine the identity and address of an owner, a lienholder or a mortgagee
if the city searches the following records:



   (A)   County real property records of the county in which the
building is located;



   (B)   Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which
the building is located;



   (C)   Records of the Secretary of State;



   (D)   Assumed name records of the county in which the building is
located;



   (E)   Tax records of the city; and



   (F)   Utility records of the city.



(Ord. 1998-2, passed 4-7-98)



§ 150.025  EMERGENCY MEASURES FOR DECLARING A BUILDING OR STRUCTURE UNSAFE.



   When there exists an emergency, as defined in this section, certain
measures may be taken, notice which shall be given of the order therefor and
the procedures which shall be followed in carrying out said measures are as
follows:



   (A)   When it shall appear to the City Building Official and/or the
Fire Marshal that a building or structure in the city is a dangerous building
under the terms of this subchapter and that such building or structure or the
manner of use constitutes an immediate and serious danger to life or
property, the condition shall be deemed to justify the use of emergency
measures and upon being so advised by the City Building Official and the Fire
Marshal, the City Manager may order any of the following emergency measures
to be taken:



      (1)   Immediate vacation of such building or structure or of
adjoining building or structures;



      (2)   Vacation of the danger area around such building or
structure;



      (3)   Such emergency shoring up and bracing walls, roofs and
supports as are required to render such building or structure safe;



      (4)   The destruction of such walls, roofs and supports of the
entire structure or so much thereof as cannot be braced or made secure with
safety;



      (5)   Posting of notices on or near such building or structure
which notify the public of such orders and order all persons to keep out of
such building or structure and the area of danger surrounding it.



   (B)   The city shall give notice before the eleventh day after the
date such action is taken, to the owner by:



      (1)   Personally serving the owner with written notice;



      (2)   Depositing the notice in the United States mail
addressed to the owner at the owner’s post office address;



      (3)   Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day
period in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the
building is located if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner’s
post office address is unknown; and



      (4)   Posting the notice on or near the front door of the
building if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner’s post office
address is unknown.



   (C)   The notice must contain:



      (1)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal
description, of the building and the property on which it is located;



      (2)   A description of the violation of the municipal
standards that is present at the building;



      (3)   A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as
the case may be, the building; and



      (4)   An explanation of the owner’s entitlement to request a
hearing about any matter relating to the city’s securing of the building.



   (D)   The city shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may
testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter relating
to the city’s securing of the building if, within 30 days after the date
the city secures the building, the owner files with the city a written
request for the hearing. The city shall conduct the hearing within 20 days
after the date the request is filed.



   (E)   A city has the same authority to assess expenses under this
section as it has to assess expenses under § 150.021. A lien is created
under this section in the same manner that a lien is created under §
150.021. and is subject to the same conditions as a lien created under that
section.



(Ord. 1998-2, passed 4-7-98)



BUILDING CODE



§ 150.040  INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   There is adopted by the City of Mount Pleasant, Texas, the
International Building Code, 2012 Edition, and International Residential
Code, 2012 Edition, together with amendments to Chapter 3 of the
International Building Code, 2012 Edition, Section 311.2, Storage Group S-l,
to include aircraft hangar (repair only) and Section 311.3 Storage Group S-2,
aircraft hangar (storage only) along with  with subsequent amendments or
editions as published by the International Code Council, Falls Church,
Virginia.



(`87 Code, § 29-38) (Ord. 1993-8, passed 4-6-93; Am. Ord. 2002-19, passed
2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2004-4, passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 2011-17, passed 10-18-11;
Am. Ord. 2014-6, passed 6-2-14)



§ 150.041  TRENCH SAFETY; NONMUNICIPAL PROJECTS.



   (A)   On all public or private, nonmunicipal construction projects
within the city limits, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
city, in which trench excavation will exceed a depth of five feet, the bid
documents and the contract shall include:



      (1)   Detailed plans and specifications for adequate trench
safety systems that meet federal Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) standards; and



      (2)   A pay item for said safety systems.



   (B)   The requirements of this section shall not apply to persons
subject to the safety standards adopted under Tex. Utilities Code, §
121.201, et seq.



(`87 Code, § 29-40) (Ord. 1988-1, passed 3-1-88; Am. Ord. 2002-19, passed
2-19-02)



§ 150.042  TRENCH SAFETY; MUNICIPAL PROJECTS.



   (A)   On all construction projects for the city in which trench
excavation will exceed a depth of five feet, the bid documents and the
contract shall:



      (1)   Require the contractor to construct an adequate trench
safety system that meets federal Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) standards;



      (2)   Include a copy of the current OSHA standards for trench
safety systems;



      (3)   Require the apparent low bidder, after bid opening but
before formal execution of the contract, to submit a trench safety system
designed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the State of
Texas;



      (4)   Require the contractor to provide the soil borings and
soil analysis necessary to design the trench safety system;



      (5)   Require the contractor, prior to the issuance of a
start-work order, to submit a trench safety program that meets OSHA standards
governing the presence and activities of individuals working in and around
trench excavations;



      (6)   Include a separate pay item for the trench safety
systems and the trench safety program;



      (7)   Require the contractor to make daily inspections of the
trench safety system and trench safety program to ensure compliance with OSHA
standards and to maintain a permanent record of such daily inspections; and



      (8)   Provide that the contractor, not the city, is
responsible for ensuring the safety of those persons working in and around
the trench excavation and shall require the contractor to indemnify and hold
harmless the city, its employees and agents from any and all damages, costs
(including, without limitation, legal fees, court cost and the cost of
investigation), judgments or claims by anyone for injury or death of persons
resulting from the collapse or failure of trenches constructed under the
contract. The contractor shall acknowledge and agree that such indemnity
provision provides indemnity for the city in case the city is negligent
either by act or omission in providing for trench safety, including but not
limited to inspections, failure to issue stop-work orders and the hiring of
the contractor.



   (B)    The requirements of this section shall not apply to persons
subject to the safety standards adopted under Tex. Utilities Code, §§
121.201 et seq.



(`87 Code, § 29-41) (Ord. 1988-1, passed 3-1-88; Am. Ord. 2002-19, passed
2-19-02)



§ 150.043  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Building Official or his or her
authorized representative to report any apparent unsafe condition or
suspected violation of OSHA standards for trench safety systems and programs
to the contractor’s job superintendent and OSHA. A stop-work order shall be
issued only after an OSHA inspector has determined that an unsafe condition
or a violation of OSHA standards exists.



   (B)   Failure of the Building Official or his or her authorized
representative to detect and/or report any such unsafe condition or violation
of OSHA standards for trench safety systems shall not relieve the contractor
of the responsibility for same.



(`87 Code, § 29-42) (Ord. 1988-1, passed 3-1-88)



SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY SITING



§ 150.045  SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY SITING.



   (A)   Purpose and scope.  The purpose of this section is to
establish policies and procedures for the placement of node support poles in
the right-of-way and network nodes in the public right-of-way and on service
poles within the city's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefits and
will be consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and
visual qualities of the city public right-of-way and the city as a whole.



   (B)   Intent. In enacting this section, the city is establishing
uniform standards to address issues presented by network nodes, including
without limitation, ensuring that network nodes or node support poles do not
adversely affect:



      (1)   Use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other
public ways and places;



      (2)   Vehicular and pedestrian traffic;



      (3)   The operation of facilities lawfully located in public
right-of-way or public property;



      (4)   The ability of the city to protect the environment,
including the prevention of damage to trees;



      (5)   The character of residential and historic areas, and
city parks, in which network nodes may be installed; and



      (6)   The rapid deployment of network nodes to provide the
benefits of wireless services.



   (C)   Conflicts with other chapters. This section  supersedes all
chapters, parts of chapters or rules adopted prior hereto that are in
conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.



   (D)   Definitions.  For purposes of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.  All terms used in this section, not specifically defined
herein, have the meaning provided in Tex. Local Gov't Code, Chapter 284.



      APPLICABLE LAW. Tex. Local Gov't Code, Chapter 284.



      APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a network
provider.



      APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant:



         (a)   For a permit to collocate network nodes; or



         (b)   To install a transport facility; or



         (c)   Approve the installation, replacement or
modification of a pole.



      CITY CODE. Those ordinance provisions relevant to use of the
public right-of-way where compliant with applicable law.



      DAY. Calendar day.



      PERSON.  An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including
the city.



      ROUTINE MAINTENANCE.



         (a)   Work in the public right-of-way that does not
require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public
right-of-way;



         (b)   Replacing or upgrading a network node or pole with
a node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller and that does
not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public
right-of-way; or



         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance,
operation, or replacement of micro network nodes that are strung on cables
between existing poles or node support poles, in the public right-of-way.



      TECHNICAL GROUNDS. In light of prevailing industry and
engineering standards, reasons of insufficiency of capacity, safety,
reliability and/or generally applicable engineering purposes consistent with
applicable law and City Code.



   (C)   Permitted use; application and fees.



      (1)   Permitted use. Colocation of network nodes and the
placement of node support poles, meeting the parameters set forth in division
(E) below and in applicable law, shall be a permitted use. No zoning or land
use review shall apply, subject to the requirements in division (E) below.



      (2)   Permit required. No person shall place a network node,
transport facility or node support pole in the public right-of-way, without
first filing a permit application and obtaining a permit therefor, except as
otherwise provided in this section.



      (3)   Permit application. All permit applications filed
pursuant to this section shall be on a form, paper or electronic, provided by
the city. The applicant may designate portions of its application materials
that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information
as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such
materials accordingly.



      (4)   Application requirements. The permit application shall
be made by the network provider or its duly authorized representative and
shall contain the following:



         (a)   The applicant's name, address, telephone number,
and e-mail address;



         (b)   The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and
e-mail addresses of all consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the
applicant with respect to the filing of the application;



         (c)   Construction and engineering drawings and
information confirming that the construction will be consistent with City
Code.



      (5)   Routine maintenance and replacement. A permit
application shall not be required for:



         (a)   Routine maintenance; or



         (b)   For the replacement of a node with another node
that is substantially similar.



      (6)   Information updates. Any amendment to information
contained in a permit application shall be submitted in writing to the city
within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment.



      (7)   Application fees. All applications for permits pursuant
to this section shall be accompanied by a fee of $500 for up to five network
nodes addressed in the same application, $250 for each additional node in the
same application; and a fee of $1,000 for each node support pole.



   (D)   Action on permit applications.



      (1)   Review of applications. The city shall review
applications for network nodes, node support poles and transport facilities
in light of their conformity with applicable law and City Code and shall
issue such permits on nondiscriminatory terms and conditions subject to the
following requirements:



         (a)   Within 30 days of receiving an application for a
network node or node support pole, or ten days for a transport facility, the
city shall determine and notify the applicant whether the application is
complete; or if incomplete, the city must specifically identify the missing
information in such notification. There shall be no fee charged for
completion and resubmission of an application.



         (b)   The city shall make its final decision to approve
or deny a complete application no later than:



            1.   21 days after receipt of a complete
application for a transport facility;



            2.   60 days after receipt of a complete
application for a network node; and



            3.   150 days after receipt of a completed
application for a new node support pole.



         (c)   The city shall advise the applicant in writing of
its final decision, and, if denied, the basis for that denial, including
specific provisions of City Code or applicable law on which the denial was
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
city denies the application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies
identified by the city and resubmit the application within 30 days of the
denial without paying an additional application fee. The city shall approve
or deny the revised application within 90 days of receipt of the amended
application. The subsequent review by the city shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the original denial.



         (d)   If the city fails to act on an application within
the review period specified in this division (D), the application shall be
deemed approved.



         (e)   An applicant seeking to colocate network nodes
may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application and
receive permits for up to 30 network nodes. Provided however, the city's
denial of any node within a single application shall not affect other nodes
submitted in the same application. The city shall grant permits for any and
all nodes in a single application that it does not deny, subject to the
requirements of this section.



      (2)   Review of eligible facilities requests. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section, the city shall approve and may not deny
applications for eligible facilities requests within 60 days according to the
procedures established under 47 CFR 1.40001(c).



   (E)   Network nodes in the public right-of-way; maximum height;
other requirements.



      (1)   Maximum size of permitted use. Colocation of permitted
use network nodes in the public right-of-way shall be subject to the size
limitations specified in Tex. Local Gov't Code. § 284.003.



      (2)   Undergrounding provisions. A network provider shall
comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements, zoning
regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or
private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a
public right-of-way without first obtaining zoning or land use approval. This
requirement or restriction shall not be interpreted to prohibit a network
provider from replacing an existing structure.



      (3)   Historic areas and design districts. Subject to the
permit application approval time frames in division (D) above, a network
provider must obtain advance approval from the city before colocating new
network nodes or installing new node support poles in any areas zoned or
designated as a historic district or as a design district if the district has
decorative poles. Such installations shall be subject to the design and
aesthetic standards of such areas.



      (4)   Installation in municipal parks and residential areas.



         (a)   A network provider may not install a new node
support pole in a public right-of-way without the city's discretionary,
nondiscriminatory, written consent of the City Manager or his designee if the
public right-of-way is located in a municipal park or is adjacent to a street
or thoroughfare that is:



            1.   Not more than 50 feet wide; and



            2.   Adjacent to single-family residential lots or
other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for
residential use by zoning or deed restrictions.



         (b)   A network provider shall comply with private deed
restrictions and other private restrictions when installing network nodes in
parks and residential areas.



      (5)   Zoning. A network provider seeking to construct, replace
or modify a pole or node in the public right-of-way that exceeds the height
or size limits contained in this section, shall be subject to applicable
zoning requirements.



   (F)   Effect of permit.



      (1)   Authority granted. A permit from the city authorizes an
applicant to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this
section, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the
applicant to impinge upon the rights of others who may already have an
interest in the public right-of-way.



      (2)   Time of installation. A network provider shall begin the
installation for which a permit is granted not later than six months after
final approval and shall diligently pursue the installation to completion.
Provided, however, the city may place a longer time limit on completion or
grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the network provider.



      (3)   Right to occupy. Once a network provider has collocated
a network node or placed a node support pole pursuant to a permit, the
provider shall be permitted to continue to maintain such collocation or such
pole unless required to remove or relocate under the terms of this section.



      (4)   Interference with network nodes. City will not grant a
permit to any person to install any network node or other wireless facility
if the city knows or has reason to know that such person's use of such
network node of other wireless facility may in any way adversely affect or
interfere with the use and operation of an existing and operational network
node for which the city has previously issued a permit.



   (G)   Removal, relocation or modification of network nodes in the
right-of-way.



      (1)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the
city, a network provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support,
temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the
position of any network node or node support pole within the public
right-of-way whenever the city has determined that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair,
maintenance, or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the
operations of the city in or upon, the public right-of-way.



      (2)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city
retains the right and privilege to disconnect or move any network node
located within the public right-of-way of the city, as the city may determine
to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or
safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the city shall notify the network
provider and allow the network provider an opportunity to move its own
facilities prior to the city disconnecting or removing a facility and shall
notify the network provider after disconnecting or removing a network node or
node support pole.



      (3)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a network
node or node support pole within the public right-of-way, the network
provider shall notify the city within 90 days. Following receipt of such
notice, the city may direct the network provider to remove all or any portion
of a network node or node support pole if the city, or any of its
departments, determines, subject to City Code, that such removal is necessary
to protect public health, safety and welfare.



   (H)   Public right-of-way rate.



      (1)   Annual rate. Once a network provider has installed and
made operational a network node in the public right-of-way, network provider
shall pay to the city compensation for use of the public right-of-way in the
amount of $250 annually per node in the city public right-of-way.



      (2)   Cease payment. A network provider is authorized to
remove its facilities at any time from the public right-of-way and cease
paying the city compensation for use of the public right-of-way following
removal and notification to the city of such removal.



   (I)   Attachment to service poles in the public right-of-way.  A
network provider shall be permitted to attach network nodes to city-owned
service poles, consistent with applicable law and City Code and subject to
the requirements specified herein.



      (1)   Permits. A network provider shall obtain a permit,
pursuant to the terms of this section, prior to collocating network nodes on
service poles.



      (2)   Make ready. Network provider shall be responsible for
costs for make ready work on city service poles to which provider seeks to
place a network node.



      (3)   Technical limitations. In the event the city determines,
based upon technical grounds, that inadequate space exists on a service pole
to accommodate the proposed network node, such pole may be replaced by
network provider, at the network provider's expense, with a service pole with
adequate space to accommodate the proposed network node.



      (4)   Facilities rearrangements. If another provider would
have to rearrange or adjust any of its facilities to accommodate a new
network node, the city shall use reasonable efforts to work with the affected
providers to coordinate such activity. All make ready work shall comply with
NESC, and other applicable codes. The applicant shall not be responsible for
any third-party costs, including those of other network providers, to adjust
existing attachments that are non-compliant with the NESC and other
applicable codes at the time of the application.



      (5)   Service pole attachment fee. The rate to collocate a
network node on a service pole in the public right-of-way shall be $20 per
pole per year. Subject to the provisions of division (J) below, such
compensation together with the application fee and the public right-of-way
rate specified in division (H) above shall be the sole compensation that the
network provider shall be required to pay to the city.



      (6)   Cease payment. A network provider is authorized to
remove its facilities at any time from a service pole in the public
right-of-way and cease paying the attachment fee to the city upon
notification to the city that the facilities have been removed.



   (J)   Transport facilities.  Installation of transport facilities,
including applicable compensation to the City for such facilities, shall be
governed by Tex. Local Gov't Code, § 284.055.



   (K)   Design Manual.  A network provider shall comply with the
city's Design Manual, if any, in place on the date a permit application is
filed in relation to work for which the city has approved a permit
application. The city's Design Manual may not conflict with applicable law
and must be competitively neutral.



(Ord. 2017-15, passed 10-17-17)



MECHANICAL CODE



§ 150.055  INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   There is hereby adopted by the City of Mount Pleasant the International
Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, together with subsequent amendments or
editions as published by the International Code Council, Falls Church,
Virginia, including the amendments as set forth in § 150.056.



(`87 Code, § 31-1) (Ord. 1983-11, passed 11-15-83; Am. Ord. 2002-20, passed
2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2004-5, passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 2011-15, passed 10-18-11;
Am. Ord. 2014-7, passed 6-2-14)



§ 150.056  AMENDMENTS.



   The International Mechanical Code adopted in § 150.055 is amended as
follows:



   (A)   Mechanical permit fees.



      (1)   Minimum permit fee:   $20.00



      (2)   Reinspection fee:   $25.00




      (3)   Regular permit fee:   $15.00 + $0.02 per square foot
of conditioned space of structure




   (B)   Exemption from permit fees.



      (1)   Federal owned construction projects.



      (2)   State owned construction projects.



      (3)   Titus County owned construction projects.



      (4)   City of Mount Pleasant Housing Authority projects.



      (5)   City of Mount Pleasant municipal projects.



(`87 Code, § 31-2) (Ord. 1983-11, passed 11-15-83; Am. Ord. 2002-20, passed
2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2004-5, passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 2011-15, passed 10-18-11)



PLUMBING AND GAS CODE



§ 150.070  SHORT TITLE.



   Sections 150.070 through 150.078 shall be known as the “Plumbing Code
of the City of Mount Pleasant” and may be cited as such.



(`87 Code, § 32-1)



§ 150.071  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all plumbing within the
boundaries of the city. Any plumbing outside the boundaries of the city,
connecting to either the city water or sewerage systems, shall meet all the
requirements of this chapter as to methods of installation and materials and
shall be inspected by the City Plumbing Inspector.



(`87 Code, § 32-2)



§ 150.072  EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to that work done by
authorized employees of the city in the laying of city water mains and
services and city sewer mains and services, nor to the installation of gas
distributing mains and services in the streets and alleys by authorized
employees of any gas distributing company.



(`87 Code, § 32-3)



§ 150.073  PLUMBING LICENSE REQUIRED.



   All persons who engage in or work at the actual installation,
alteration, repair and renovating of plumbing shall possess either a master
or journeyman plumber’s license in accordance with the provisions of the
Plumbing License Law of 1947.



(`87 Code, § 32-4)



§ 150.074  PLUMBING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.



   The permit and inspection fees set forth below shall be paid to the
city before the issuance of a permit and before any work is started:




   Each fixture   $5.00





   Water line   $15.00





   Sewer line   $15.00





   Reinspection   $25.00





   Minimum permit fee   $20.00




(`87 Code, § 32-41) (Ord. 1981-10, passed 10-20-81; Am. Ord. 1983-13, passed
1-15-83; Am. Ord. 2002-23, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2004-3, passed 1-20-04;
Am. Ord. 2011-16, passed 10-18-11)



Cross-reference:



   Sewers, see Ch. 51



   Water, see Ch. 52



§ 150.075  INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.



   There is hereby adopted by the City of Mount Pleasant the International
Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, together with subsequent amendments or editions
as published by the International Code Council, Falls Church, Virginia.



(`87 Code, § 32-51) (Ord. 1983-13, passed 11-15-83; Am. Ord. 2002-23, passed
2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2004-3, passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 2011-16, passed 10-18-11;
Am. Ord. 2014-8, passed 6-2-14)



§ 150.076  SEWER REQUIRED.



   Every building in which plumbing fixtures are installed shall have a
connection to a public or private sewer; provided, however, when there is no
sewer available within 150 feet, an approved private sewage disposal system
may be used.



(`87 Code, § 32-52)



§ 150.077  INDEPENDENT SYSTEMS.



   The drainage system of each new building and of new work installed in
existing buildings shall be separate and independent from that of any other
building and, when available, shall have an independent connection with a
public sewer. Provided, however, when one building stands in the rear of
another building on an interior lot and these buildings are on one parcel of
land under one owner, then the building sewer may be extended to serve the
rear building.



(`87 Code, § 32-53)



§ 150.078  EASEMENT PROVISION.



   A house sewer may not cross another lot unless an easement or
right-of-way is provided to protect all property owners.



(`87 Code, § 32-54)



§ 150.079  INTERNATIONAL GAS CODE ADOPTED.



   There is hereby adopted by the City of Mount Pleasant the International
Gas Code, 2012 Edition, together with subsequent amendments or editions as
published by the International Code Council, Falls Church, Virginia.



(`87 Code, § 32-61) (Ord. 1983-12, passed 11-15-83; Am. Ord. 2002-23, passed
2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2004-3, passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 2011-16, passed 10-18-11;
Am. Ord. 2014-8, passed 6-2-14)



§ 150.080  GAS PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.



   The following gas fees shall be charged:




   Gas minimum permit fee   $20.00





   Reinspection fee   $25.00





   Gas pressure test   $20.00





   Gas pipe, 1 to 4 outlets   $20.00





   Each gas outlet over 4, each   $3.00




(`87 Code, § 32-62) (Ord. 1983-12, passed 11-15-83; Am. Ord. 2004-3, passed
1-20-04; Am. Ord. 2011-16, passed 10-18-11)



HOUSEMOVERS



§ 150.095  NOTICE TO UTILITIES AND POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS.



   No person shall move any house, building or other structure over any
street, alley or other way without first notifying all public utilities and
the Police and Fire Departments of the proposed route to be taken and the
proposed time of such moving.



(`87 Code, § 29-50)



§ 150.096  INVESTIGATION OF ROUTE.



   Prior to moving any house on the public streets and after the same has
been loaded for moving, the person responsible for moving the same shall
notify the Chief of Police. The Chief shall go to the location and measure
the house as to width, length and height. If he or she is of the opinion that
the house cannot safely be moved without damage to city or private property,
then the person responsible for moving such house shall not be permitted to
move the same over the public streets. If the Chief of Police, after
measuring the house, is of the opinion that it can be safely moved without
damage to public or private property, then he or she shall authorize its
being moved.



(`87 Code, § 29-51) (Ord. passed 6-20-67)



§ 150.097  CHANGE OF ROUTE UPON REQUEST OF CITY.



   The route proposed to be used by any person in moving any building,
house or other structure shall be changed, if requested by the Police, Fire
Department or the Director of Public Works.



(`87 Code, § 29-52)



§ 150.098  TO BE ACCOMPANIED BY POLICE OFFICER IF REQUIRED.



   No building, house or other structure shall be moved unless accompanied
by a police officer, if required by the Building Official.



(`87 Code, § 29-53)



§ 150.099  FLAGMEN; FLARES AND LIGHTS; LEAVING BUILDING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   When any moving of a house, building or other structure is commenced,
flagmen must be posted ahead of and behind such moving to give proper
warning. In the event it becomes necessary to leave the building or structure
on public property, there shall be placed around the same and all equipment
used therefor red lights, flares or other warning devices; provided that, no
building or structure shall be allowed to remain stationary on and in the
streets and ways for more than 24 hours, except on weekends. Any moving at
night must be accompanied by sufficient lights and flares continually burning
for the protection of the public.



(`87 Code, § 29-54)



§ 150.100  REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS TO BE RELOCATED WITHIN THE CITY.



   (A)   Permit required. Any person desiring to relocate an existing
house, building or other structure to property inside the city shall obtain a
permit so to do from the Building Official. A fee of $50.00 shall be paid on
the issuance of such permit. Such permit is in addition to the permit
required by §§ 150.097et seq.



(`87 Code, § 29-55)



   (B)   Prerequisites. No person shall move any house, building or
other structure and relocate the same within the city, unless the following
conditions exist:



      (1)   The existing structure is structurally sound and all
windows, doors and trim are in place or will be replaced before occupancy and
use;



      (2)   Any structure intended for residential occupancy has or
will have interior sanitary toilet facilities (flush toilet, lavatory,
bathtub or shower), hot and cold water facilities and kitchen sink with hot
and cold water with all sewerage and waste discharge connected to the
sanitary sewer system of the city, or if a sanitary sewer main is not
accessible to the property or within 150 feet, then to an approved septic
tank;



      (3)   That the building, plumbing, electrical, heating and air
conditioning in or to be constructed in the relocated structure complies with
all applicable provisions of this code, state law and city ordinances, rules
and regulations;



      (4)   That the structure shall not be deemed to be substandard
or dilapidated within the meaning, intent or purpose of the Housing Code of
the city.



(`87 Code, § 29-56)



   (C)   Compliance. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy and
use any existing house, building or structure that has been moved and
relocated on property inside the city, unless the provisions of this
subchapter have been fully complied with and final approval has been issued
by the Building Official. No utilities may be connected to any such house,
building or structure until and unless the provisions of this subchapter have
been complied with.



(`87 Code, § 29-57) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.101  LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE.



   The person moving a house under the provisions of this subchapter shall
be responsible in damages to the city for all damages occasioned to the
public streets or city property, as well as responsible in damages to public
utilities and individuals for such damages as may have been occasioned by the
moving of the house. The City Building Official shall determine after the
moving if there has been any damage to any public or private property; and if
so, make an estimate of the amount and furnish a copy to the mover and the
person whose property has been damaged. The person moving the house shall pay
the same within 30 days after notice thereof, and in the event of failure to
pay such damages, the City Building Official will not issue further permits
to such person until such time as the said damages are paid.



(`87 Code, § 29-58) (Ord. passed 6-20-67)



§ 150.102  MOVER SHALL SECURE PERMIT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to move a house, building
or other structure from one location to another within the city limits, to
move a house, building or other structure without the city limits to a
location within the city or to move a house, building or other structure
within the city to a point without the city without the mover first securing
a permit from the Building Official.



   (B)   This section shall not be applicable to the mover of a mobile
home when the same is moved on wheels attached to the home.



(`87 Code, § 29-64) (Ord. passed 6-20-67; Am. Ord. 6-1976, passed 4-20-76)
Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.103  APPLICATION.



   Application for a permit required by this subchapter shall be filed
with the Building Official on a form provided for that purpose.



(`87 Code, § 29-65)



§ 150.104  BOND REQUIRED OF APPLICANT.



   Each applicant for a permit under the provisions of this subchapter
shall furnish a good and sufficient indemnity bond in the sum of $5,000.00
with corporate surety payable to the city and conditioned that the temporary
use of the streets, alleys and ways of the city will be used in accordance
with the conditions set forth in the application for the permit. Such bond
shall be filed with and approved by the City Secretary.



(`87 Code, § 29-66)



§ 150.105  FEE.



   At the time of filing the application for a permit required by the
provisions of this subchapter, the applicant therefor shall pay a fee of
$50.00 for each load to be moved.



(`87 Code, § 29-67) (Ord. passed 6-20-67; Am. Ord. 1981-10, passed 10-20-81)



§ 150.106  OWNER TO OBTAIN BUILDING PERMIT.



   Before any permit is issued under the provisions of this subchapter,
the owner of the building to be moved, or his or her agent, shall apply for
and receive a building permit.



(`87 Code, § 29-68) (Ord. passed 6-20-67)



§ 150.107  ISSUANCE.



   The Building Official shall issue the permit applied for under the
provisions of this subchapter upon payment of the required fee and filing of
the required bond if the Building Official finds that the moving contemplated
by the application can be accomplished in accordance with this subchapter and
that the building, when relocated, will meet the requirements of this
subchapter.



(`87 Code, § 29-69)



§ 150.108  FORM AND CONDITIONS.



   A permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be in
such form and contain such conditions as the City Council may, from time to
time, prescribe and require; provided that each such permit, whether
expressly stated therein or not, shall be issued on the condition that the
permit holder will pay all damage done to any city street, alley or way or
any other public or private property, directly or indirectly.



(`87 Code, § 29-70)



§ 150.109  TERM.



   A permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be valid
for a maximum period of five days only. Any use of the streets and ways of
the city in excess of such period of time shall be upon a rental basis of
$50.00 per day, at the city’s discretion.



(`87 Code, § 29-71)



§ 150.110  TRANSFER PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person securing a permit under the
provisions of this subchapter to lend, rent or transfer such permit or for
any other person to make use of such permit.



(`87 Code, § 29-72) Penalty, see § 150.999



EXTERIOR CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS ON CERTAIN ROADS AND
THOROUGHFARES



§ 150.125  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as "Exterior
Construction Requirements and Standards on Certain Roads and Thoroughfares."



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 2004-21, passed 11-16-04)



§ 150.126  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, ACCEPTABLE EXTERIOR WALL
CONSTRUCTION is defined as and shall include the following materials:



   (A)    Stone material: Masonry construction using stone material may
consist of granite, marble, limestone, slate, river rock, and other hard and
durable naturally occurring all weather stone. Cut stone and dimensioned
stone techniques are acceptable.



   (B)   Brick material: Brick material used for masonry construction
shall be hard-fired (kiln fired) clay or slate material. Unfired or
underfired clay, sand, or shale brick are not permitted.



   (C)   Concrete masonry units: Concrete masonry units used for
exterior masonry construction shall have an indented, hammered, split face,
or other similar architectural finish. Lightweight concrete block or cinder
block construction is not acceptable masonry wall construction.



   (D)   Concrete panel construction: Concrete finish or pre-cast panel
(tilt wall) construction shall be painted, fluted, exposed aggregate, or
other similar architectural concrete finish. Smooth or untextured concrete
finishes are not acceptable.



   (E)   Cellulose fiber-reinforced cement building board products,
e.g. Hardi-Board products or other cement building products approved by a
nationally recognized building products evaluation service are acceptable.



   (F)   Code approved exterior wood panels and wood siding.



   (G)   Stucco or similar exterior finishing system is acceptable.



   (H)   Exterior Insulating Finishing System (EIFS) is acceptable.



   (I)   Glass wall construction: Glass walls shall include glass
curtain walls or glass block construction. "Glass curtain wall" shall be
defined as an exterior wall which carries no structural loads, and which may
consist of the combination of metal, glass, or other surfacing material
supported in a metal framework.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 2004-21, passed 11-16-04)



§ 150.127  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   The standards and criteria contained within this section are deemed to
be minimum standards. All building materials and exterior coverage
percentages shall be noted and described on the building plans and
application.



   (A)   Location. The requirements of this section shall apply to all
new, altered or repaired construction of all buildings and structures
constructed in MF Multi-Family, NS-Neighborhood Service, GR-General Retail,
CB-Central Business District, C-Commercial, PD-Planned Development and
FD-Future Development zoning districts where the lot, tract or parcel abuts
or fronts one or more of the following streets:



      (1)   Interstate Highway 30;



      (2)   All Interstate Highway 30 Service Roads;



      (3)   US Highway 67 also known as 16th Street;



      (4)   State Highway 49 also known as Ferguson Road;



      (5)   US Highway 271 Business also known as Jefferson Avenue,
Loop 419 and Madison Avenue;



      (6)   US Highway 271 also known as Highway 271 By Pass and
West Ferguson Road;



      (7)   FM 2152 also known as Greenhill Road;



      (8)   FM 1402 also known as Harts Bluff Road;



      (9)   FM 899 also known as West First Street;



      (10)   FM 1734 also known as North Edwards Avenue;



      (11)   FM 127 also known as Monticello Road; and



      (12)   Any future road built and maintained by the Texas
Department of Transportation inside current or future city limits.



   (B)   Exterior wall construction. Exterior wall construction shall
consist of the following:



      (1)   The front of the building shall consist of at least 90%
of acceptable exterior wall construction excluding doors and windows, and
shall be constructed in accordance with the city's building code and fire
prevention code.



      (2)   When a lot, tract or parcel abuts or fronts one or more
streets or rights-of-way in addition to the designated state maintained
street, then each side or portion of the building which abuts or fronts any
additional street shall consist of not less than 50% of acceptable exterior
wall construction, exclusive of doors and windows and shall be constructed,
in accordance with the city's building code and fire prevention code.



      (3)   Exterior metal walls. Exterior metal walls shall include
profiled panels, deep ribbed panels, and concealed fastener systems. Exterior
finish shall be film laminated or baked on enamel painted to the wall
manufacturer's standards. The use of corrugated metal, plastic, or fiberglass
panels is prohibited. The use of galvanized, aluminum coated, zinc-aluminum
coated, or unpainted exterior metal finish is prohibited.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 2004-21, passed 11-16-04)  Penalty,
see § 150.999



§ 150.128  EXCEPTIONS.



   The City Planner may approve a waiver or exception to the requirements
of this subchapter for additions to existing buildings that were previously
in place prior to the adoption of this subchapter as follows: The City
Planner may grant an exception if the size of such addition does not exceed
50% of the size of the existing structure.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 2004-21, passed 11-16-04)



§ 150.129  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following are exempt from the provisions of this subchapter:



   (A)   Residential accessory buildings except those covered by a
private restriction.



   (B)   Barns and farm accessory buildings if such buildings are used
solely for agricultural purposes.



   (C)   Manufactured or mobile homes otherwise lawfully existing under
the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.



   (D)   Remodeling activities that result in less than 25% of the
modification or replacement of the existing front or side exterior walls as
defined in this subchapter.



   (E)   Temporary buildings used for construction offices and
permitted for a limited period of time by the Building Official.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 2004-21, passed 11-16-04)



§ 150.130  ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be administered by the City
Planner. All building materials and exterior coverage percentages shall be
noted and described on the building plans submitted for building permit
application. A record of such application and plat shall be kept in the
office of the Building Official. Prior to the issuance of any building
permit, the City Planner shall determine that the application and
improvements to be constructed comply with the requirements and provisions of
this subchapter.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 2004-21, passed 11-16-04)



§ 150.131  APPEALS.



   Appeals from the decision of the City Planner may be made to the Board
of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall consider such appeals to this
subchapter in the same manner as other appeals within its jurisdiction as
found in § 155.62.



   (A)   Application and fee. An application for an appeal shall be
completed and signed by the owner of the property or his or her authorized
agent. The application shall be accompanied by all building plans and site
plans required for building permit approval. A fee of $250.00 shall be
charged to defray the cost of processing an application for an appeal.



   (B)   Procedure.



      (1)   The appeal is scheduled for a public hearing before the
Board of Adjustment at their next regular meeting.



      (2)   Fifteen days prior to the hearing, a notice of public
hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city and all
property owners within 200 feet of the subject property shall be notified.



      (3)   The Board of Adjustment shall approve, approve
conditionally, or deny each application for a request for an appeal.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 2004-21, passed 11-16-04)



HISTORIC PRESERVATION



§ 150.140  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALTERATION. Any act or process which changes one or more of the
exterior architectural features of a structure designated for preservation or
any structure in a district designated for preservation.



   AWNING SIGN.  Any sign painted or applied to the face, valance, or
side panels of an awning.



   DEMOLITION.  Any demolition, removal or razing of any designated
historic landmark or building within a historic district for which a permit
shall be issued or denied in accordance with § 150.153.



   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE. The architectural style, design,
general arrangement, and components of all of the outer surfaces or an
improvement as distinguished from the interior surfaces enclosed by said
outer surfaces, including but not limited to the texture of the building
material, color, and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs,
and other fixtures appurtenant to such improvement.



   HANGING SIGN.  Any sign suspended from an awning or canopy.



   HISTORIC DISTRICT.  An area which has outstanding historical,
architectural, archaeological or cultural significance in the state, region,
or community, within which the buildings, structures, accessory buildings,
fences, or other appurtenances are of basic and vital importance for the
development of culture and tourism because of their association with history,
and which the City Council determines shall be protected, enhanced, and
preserved in the interest of culture, prosperity, education, and welfare of
the people.



   HISTORIC LANDMARK. A place which has outstanding historical,
architectural, archaeological or cultural significance in the state, region,
or community. The designation historic landmark recognizes that the historic
place, or the building(s), structure(s) accessory building(s), fences or
other appurtenances at the place are of basic and vital importance for the
preservation of culture and the development of tourism and which the City
Council determines shall be protected, enhanced, and preserved in the
interest of culture, prosperity, education, and welfare of the people.



   MODIFICATION. Any alteration, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
relocation, restoration, or any other construction, alteration, painting, or
work of any kind on or to a historic landmark or building, wall, fence, light
fixture, sign, steps, paving, sidewalks or other appurtenant fixture within a
historic district or historic landmark or affecting an exterior architectural
feature.



   PEDESTRIAN SIGN.  Any sign oriented to pedestrian or street level
visibility (including window signs, awning signs, hanging signs, nameplates,
and plaques).



   PROJECTING SIGN.  Any sign attached to and placed perpendicular to a
building facade.



   RECONSTRUCTION. The reconstruction process involves the re-creation of
a replica of a building or facility that no longer exists on its original
site based on archaeological, historical, documentary, and physical evidence.
Both modern construction techniques and traditional methods may be used in a
reconstruction project.



   REHABILITATION. This process involves modifications or changes to an
existing building. Rehabilitation extends the useful life or utility of the
building through repairs or alterations, sometimes major, while the features
of the building that contributed to its architectural, cultural, or
historical character are preserved.



   RELOCATION.  Relocation as a result from changes in land use and
redevelopment programs involves the disassembly, relocation on a different
site, and reassembly of a building.



   RESTORATION.  The restoration process involves the careful and
meticulous return of a building, usually on its original site, to its
appearance at a particular period of time by removal of later work or
replacement of missing earlier work.



   SIGNBOARD. Any flat sign mounted or applied to a building facade.



   WINDOW SIGN. Any sign painted or applied to window glass.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.141  DECLARATION OF POLICY.



   The City Council hereby finds and declares as a matter of public policy
that the protection, enhancement, preservation and use of historic districts
and landmarks is a public necessity and is required in the interest of the
culture, prosperity, education, and welfare of the people. The purposes of
this subchapter are:



   (A)   To protect, enhance and perpetuate historic landmarks which
represent or reflect distinctive and important elements of the city's
cultural, social, economic, political, archaeological and architectural
history;



   (B)   To safeguard the city's historic and cultural heritage, as
embodied and reflected in such historic landmarks;



   (C)   To stabilize and improve property values in such locations;



   (D)   To foster civic pride in the beauty of noble accomplishments
of the past;



   (E)   To protect and enhance the city's attractions to tourists and
visitors and provide incidental support and stimulus to business and industry;



   (F)   To strengthen the economy of the city; and



   (G)   To promote the use of historic landmarks for the culture,
prosperity, education and welfare of the people of the city and visitors to
the city.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.142  CREATING HISTORIC DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The City Council may from time to time, designate certain
areas in the city as historic districts, and define, amend, or eliminate the
boundaries of same. Such districts shall bear the suffix "historic" in their
zoning designation and property therein shall continue to bear its use
designation as provided in the general zoning provisions. The Historic
Preservation Commission shall make recommendations to the City Council. In
like manner, the City Council shall give notices, follow the publication
procedure, hold hearings, and make its determination in the manner as
provided in the Code of Ordinances.



   (B)   The following described tract or parcel of land located in the
City of Mount Pleasant is hereby established as a historic district pursuant
to this section.



      (1)   Block Number(s): 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18, 21, 22, 23, 24, 27, 28, 29, 30, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40,
41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 54, 55, 125, 127, 128.



      (2)   All in Mount Pleasant, Titus County, Texas.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.143  DESIGNATION HISTORIC LANDMARKS.



   The City Council may from time to time designate certain places in the
city as historic landmarks. Such places shall bear the suffix "historic" in
their zoning designation and shall continue to bear their use designations as
provided in the general zoning provisions. All zoning maps shall reflect such
"historic" designation. In designating historic landmarks, Historic
Preservation Commission and the City Council shall follow the procedures set
forth for creating historic districts.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.144  CRITERIA FOR HISTORIC DESIGNATION.



   In making a designation for a historic district or landmark, the City
Council shall consider one or more of the following criteria:



   (A)   Character, interest or value as part of the development,
heritage or cultural characteristics of the City of Mount Pleasant, Titus
County, State of Texas, or the United States;



   (B)   Location as the site of a significant historic event;



   (C)   Identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the culture and development of the city;



   (D)   Exemplification of the cultural, economic, social or
historical heritage of the city;



   (E)   Portrayal of the environment of a group of people in an era of
history characterized by a distinctive architectural style;



   (F)   Embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural type or specimen;



   (G)   Identification as the work of an architect or master builder
whose individual work has influenced the development of the city;



   (H)   Embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail,
materials or craftsmanship which represent a significant architectural
innovation;



   (I)   Relationship to other distinctive buildings, sites or areas
which are eligible for preservation according to a plan based on historic,
cultural or architectural motif;



   (J)   Unique location of singular physical characteristics
representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood,
community or the city;



   (K)   Archaeological value in that it has produced or can be
expected to produce data affecting theories of historic or prehistoric
interest;



   (L)   Value as an aspect of community sentiment or public pride.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.145  USES NOT AFFECTED BY HISTORIC DESIGNATION.



   Nothing contained in this subchapter or in the designation of property
as being in a historic district or historic landmark shall affect the present
legal use of property. Use classifications as to all property which may be
included in a historic district or historic landmark shall continue to be
governed by the general zoning provisions and the procedures therein
established. In no case, however, shall any use be permitted which requires a
modification or demolition so as to adversely affect the character of the
historic district or historic landmark, except upon compliance with the terms
of this subchapter. No provision herein shall be construed as prohibiting a
property owner from continuing to use property for a nonconforming use.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.146  MAIN STREET ESTABLISHED AS HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION;
FUNCTIONS OF COMMISSION.



   (A)   Main Street Established as Commission.  There is hereby
created a Main Street Advisory Board which will serve as the Historic
Preservation Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "Commission") for
historic districts and landmarks, consisting of nine members. The members
thereof shall be appointed by the City Council.



   (B)   Terms of appointment.  The members shall serve a three-year
term set forth in Article IV, Advisory Board, Section 4.01 of the Bylaws of
the Mount Pleasant Main Street Program. Vacancies shall be filled for an
unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to
be made. Any Commission member who misses three consecutive meetings except
because of illness or disability shall forfeit his position and his
replacement will be appointed by the City Council to fill the unexpired term.



   (C)   Qualifications. To the extent possible, the City Council shall
appoint members to the Commission who have background in architecture, urban
design, history, art, real estate planning and development,
business/representative of business in designated area or other related
professions. Each member appointed shall be considered upon his or her
interest in the city, knowledge of the history of the community, education
and interest in the historical and cultural preservation.



   (D) Chairman of Commission.  The Chairman of the Commission shall be
the elected President of the Mount Pleasant Main Street Committee elected by
a majority of the members in accordance of the Bylaws of the Mount Pleasant
Main Street Program.



   (E)   Functions of Commission.



      (1)   The Commission shall act in an advisory capacity only,
and shall have no power to bind the city by contract or otherwise. It shall
be the function of the Commission to familiarize itself with the buildings,
land, areas, and districts within the city which may be eligible for
designation as historic landmarks and shall prepare a Historic Landmark
Preservation Plan (hereinafter referred to as the "Preservation Plan") which
shall:



         (a)   Identify and catalog buildings, land, areas and
districts of historical, architectural, archaeological or cultural value
along with statements of fact which verify their significance;



         (b)   Identify guidelines to be used in determination of
whether to grant or deny certificates of appropriateness for proposed
alterations to the exterior of a designated historic landmark;



         (c)   Formulate a program for private and public action
which will state the role of various city agencies in the preservation of
historic landmarks;



         (d)   Suggest sources of funds for preservation and
restoration activities for all acquisitions, including federal, state,
municipal, private and foundation sources; and



         (e)   Recommend incentives for preservation and adoption
of policies.



      (2)   The Preservation Plan shall be presented to the City
Council for inclusion in the Comprehensive Plan of the city.



      (3)   The Commission shall recommend to the City Council that
certain buildings, land, areas and districts in the city be designated as
historic landmarks. Each recommendation shall include:



         (a)   Those premises, lots or tracts to be designated;



         (b)   Any additional uses to be permitted in specific
historic districts;



         (c)   Specific criteria for the required preservation of
the exteriors of the premises within the designated district.



      (4)   If the Commission finds that certain buildings, land,
areas or districts cannot be preserved without acquisition, the Commission
may recommend to the City Council that the fee or a lesser interest in the
property be acquired by gift or purchase, using funds available for
preservation or restoration.



      (5)   Where there are conditions under which the required
preservation of a historic landmark would cause undue hardship to the owner
or owners, use changes may be recommended by the Commission. Such changes
shall be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this subchapter.



      (6)   The Commission shall make reports at least annually to
the City Council of the status of designated historic districts and landmarks
and include such report in the minutes of the Commission.



      (7)   The Commission shall, with staff advice and support,
determine a suitable emblem for marking buildings, structures, and sites
within historic-districts and for designated landmarks, both public and
private. This emblem shall be submitted for approval to the Texas Historical
Commission and then recommended for approval to the City Council, along with
a list of locations and sites and estimates as to cost, for approval by the
City Council.



      (8)   The designation of a historic district or landmark may
be amended or removed using the same procedure as provided in this subchapter
for the original designation.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.147  SECRETARY OF THE MAIN STREET HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.



   The Main Street Manager (as currently designated in the city) or
designated representative shall act as Secretary of the Commission and shall
attend and keep the minutes of all meetings. The Manager shall act only in an
advisory capacity and shall participate in its discussions, and shall have no
right to vote. The Secretary of the Commission shall also serve as the Local
Preservation Officer and fulfill all the duties as may be required under any
certified local government agreement with the Texas Historical Commission.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.148  MEETINGS OF MAIN STREET HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.



   The Commission shall meet at regular intervals with advance notice
posted according to the Texas Open Meeting Law. Additionally, meetings may be
called upon request of the Chairman, or upon written request of three
members, or upon notice from the Secretary of the Commission that a matter
requires the consideration of the Commission. Applications for a building
permit for a modification in a historic district or historic landmark shall
be submitted to the Commission at least 14 days before the Commission's next
scheduled meeting. The Commission shall take action on the application within
14 days of the scheduled meeting. If action thereon is not taken within 14
days of the scheduled meeting, it shall be deemed to have been recommended
for approval, and a certificate showing the meeting date and the failure to
take action on the application within 14 days shall be issued by the
Commission on demand. The applicant may withdraw the application before the
14-day period expires and may resubmit it at a later time if additional time
is required for the preparation of information or for research required by
the Commission. A majority of the voting members shall constitute a quorum,
and action taken at a meeting shall require the affirmative votes of a
majority of the appointive members in attendance.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.149  APPLICATION PROCESS.



   An application shall be filed in duplicate with the Building Official
for a building permit for any modification or demolition. The applicant shall
include two copies of all detailed plans, elevations, perspectives,
specifications and other documents pertaining to the work to the Building
Official, who shall forward such application to the Commission Secretary
within three days of receipt thereof. Any applicant may request to appear
before the Commission at a scheduled meeting before submitting an application.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.150  ROLE OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL IN APPLICATION PROCESS.



   (A)   (1)   The Building Official shall not take action upon a
permit for:



         (a)   A modification until he has received a report from
the Commission or certificate from the Commission showing failure to take
action as provided in § 150.148; or



         (b)   A demolition until he has received a report from
the Commission or City Council as provided for in § 150.153.



      (2)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit in the
historic district or historic landmark, the Building Official shall act in
accordance with the procedures presently being followed in that office except
as those procedures are necessarily modified by the following requirements:



         (a)   Within three business days, he shall forward to
the Secretary of the Commission one of the duplicate copies of the complete
application for a building permit, together with a copy of the plat plan and
the building plans, specifications, and all other documents filed by the
applicant.



         (b)   He shall maintain in his office a record of all
such applications and of his handling and final disposition of the same,
which shall be in addition to and appropriately cross-referenced to his other
records.



         (c)   He shall require applicants to submit a sufficient
number of additional copies of material required to be attached to an
application for a building permit in compliance with § 150.149.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.151  RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMISSION.



   Upon receipt from the Building Official by the Commission of the
application for a building permit for a modification, the Commission shall
meet in accordance with § 150.148 to consider the recommendation which the
Commission will give to the Building Official. The person applying for the
permit shall be advised of the time and place of said meeting and be invited
to appear to explain his/her reasons. The Commission may invite such other
persons or groups as it desires to attend its meetings. The Commission may
hold any additional meetings it considers necessary to carry out its
responsibilities as enumerated in this subchapter.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.152  CRITERIA TO BE USED BY COMMISSION IN DETERMINING ITS
RECOMMENDATION.



   (A)   Historic districts.  In determining the recommendation to be
presented to the Building Official concerning the issuing of a permit for a
modification or demolition within a historic district, the Commission shall
consider the following matters:



      (1)   The effect of the proposed change upon the general
historic, cultural, architectural and archaeological nature of the district;



      (2)   The appropriateness and consistency of exterior
architectural features with the spirit and purpose of this subchapter,
including but not limited to parking and loading spaces, paving and
sidewalks, which can be seen from a public street, alley or walkway;



      (3)   The general design, arrangement, texture, material and
color of the building or structure and the relation of such factors to
similar features of buildings or structures in the district. The criterion
shall not be the aesthetic appeal to the Commission of the structure or the
proposed remodeling but rather its conformity to the general character of the
particular historic area involved;



      (4)   Signs which are out of keeping with the character of the
historic district in question or not in compliance with § 150.154 shall not
be permitted;



      (5)   The value of the historic district as an area of unique
interest and character shall not be impaired;



      (6)   In all of its determinations of architectural
appropriateness and historical integrity in the design and construction of
buildings or signs in historic districts the Commission shall consult the
Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation for guidance.



   (B)   Historic landmarks.  In determining the recommendation to be
presented to the Building Official concerning the issuing of a permit for a
modification or demolition of all or part of any designated historic
landmark, the Commission shall consider those items which gave rise to the
original request for the designation of the place as a historic landmark as
well as the following matters:



      (1)   The effect of the proposed change upon the historic,
architectural, archaeological, or cultural nature of the landmark;



      (2)   The appropriateness and consistency of exterior
architectural features with the spirit and purpose of this subchapter,
including but not limited to parking and loading spaces, paving and
sidewalks, which can be seen from a public street, alley or walkway;



      (3)   The general design, arrangement, texture, material and
color of the building or structure site and the similarity, contrast or other
relation of such factors to other landmarks built at or during the same
period, as well as the uniqueness of such features, considering the remaining
examples of architectural, historical and cultural values;



      (4)   Signs which are out of keeping with the character of the
historic landmark or not in compliance with § 150.154 shall not be permitted;



      (5)   The value of the historic landmark as a place of unique
interest or character shall not be impaired;



      (6)   In all of its determinations of architectural
appropriateness and historical integrity in the design and construction of
buildings or signs in historic landmarks the Commission shall consult the
Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation for guidance.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.153  DEMOLITION OR REMOVAL.



   If an application is received by the Building Official for demolition
or removal of any designated historic landmark or designated building within
a historic district as provided for in this subchapter, the Commission shall
hold a hearing within 30 days after the application is initially filed and
forwarded to the Commission. The Commission shall hear all other interested
parties. The Commission shall consider the state of repair of the building,
the reasonableness of the cost of restoration or repairs, taking into account
the purpose of preserving the designated historic landmark, the character of
the neighborhood, and all other factors which it finds appropriate. If the
Commission approves, the application to demolish shall be granted. If the
Commission recommends the disapproval of the application, the structure shall
not be demolished, and the application shall be suspended for a period not
exceeding 90 days from the date of application filed with the Building
Official. Within the suspension period, the Commission shall refer their
decision to the City Council, and may request an extension of the suspension
period by the City Council. If the City Council, after notice to the
applicant and public hearing, determines that there is reasonable ground for
preservation, the application may be denied. The City Council may extend the
suspension period for an additional period not exceeding 120 days, to a total
of not more than 240 days from the date of application for demolition. During
the period of suspension of the application, no permit shall be issued for
such demolition or removal nor shall any person demolish or remove the
building or structure. If no action is taken by the City Council within 240
days from the date of application, the demolition permit shall be issued and
the Building Official shall so advise the applicant.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.154  SIGNS IN HISTORIC DISTRICT.



Signs shall be in keeping with the character of the historic district. The
following is an outline of sign recommendations.



   (A)   Number of signs.



      (1)   Each building may have one signboard or projecting sign
oriented to its primary or entrance frontage.



      (2)   A building located at a corner may also have one
signboard oriented to its secondary or side street entrance.



      (3)   Awning signs on awning faces may be used in lieu of a
signboard or projecting sign.



      (4)   In addition to a signboard, projecting sign, or awning
face sign, a building may have one pedestrian sign oriented to each street on
which the premises have frontage, relating to the occupancy within the
building.



      (5)   Buildings with public rear entrances may also have one
pedestrian sign oriented to the rear of the building, relating to each
occupancy within the building.



   (B)   Location of signs.



      (1)   Awning signs shall be allowed when such signs are
painted or attached to the awning surface.



      (2)   Hanging signs shall be allowed when such signs have a
minimum clearance of seven feet from the sidewalk and do not extend beyond
the awning or canopy projection.



      (3)   Projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance from the
sidewalk of ten feet, and shall not project more than 60 inches, or one half
of the sidewalk width, whichever is less.



   (C)   Size of signs.



      (1)   Signboard maximum size shall be based on the following:



         (a)   For every one linear foot of the building primary
or entrance frontage, two square feet of sign area shall be allowed.



         (b)   Signboards on secondary or side street frontage
shall not exceed the size of signboards on the primary or entrance frontage.



      (2)   Window signs shall cover no more than 40% of the total
glass of the window on which they are placed. The sign coverage shall be
determined by an imaginary square or rectangle that encompasses the window
sign graphics.



      (3)   Each face of a hanging sign shall be no more than eight
square feet in size.



      (4)   Awning sign size shall not exceed the surface of the
awning.



      (5)   Projecting signs shall be no more than 15 square feet in
size, with a maximum sign height of three feet.



   (D)   Material.



      (1)   Interior illumination for signs shall not be allowed.



      (2)   Plastic shall not be allowed for sign faces.



      (3)   No fluorescent materials and/or paints shall be allowed.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.155  FINDINGS OF THE COMMISSION CONCERNING APPLICATIONS FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   If the Commission decides to recommend against the granting of
a permit, it shall indicate to the applicant the changes in plans and
specifications, if any, which in the opinion of the Commission, would protect
the distinctive historical character of the historic district or historic
landmark. The Commission shall withhold its report to the Building Official
for a period of five days following its discussion to allow the applicant to
decide whether or not to make the suggested changes in his plans and
specifications. If the applicant determines that he will make the suggested
changes, he shall so advise the Commission within such five-day period.



   (B)   The Commission, after the meeting provided for in § 150.151
and after the making of any changes in the plans and specifications as
provided in division (A) above, shall submit to the Building Official, in
writing, its recommendation concerning the issuance of a permit for a
modification or demolition. The written report shall include the opinion and
recommendation of the Commission as stated in divisions (B)(7) and (8) below
and may include all or any part of the matters stated in divisions(B)(1)
through (6) below:



      (1)   The exact location of the area or place in which the
work is to be done;



      (2)   The exterior changes to be made or the exterior
character of the structure to be erected;



      (3)   A list of the surrounding structures with their general
exterior characteristics;



      (4)   The effect of the proposed change upon the general
historic and architectural nature of the district or landmark;



      (5)   The appropriateness of the exterior architectural
features which can be seen from a public street, alley, trail, or walkway;



      (6)   The general design, arrangement, texture, material, and
color of the building or structure and the relation of such factors to
similar features of buildings or structures in a district, or to the general
period of construction in a district or landmark;



      (7)   The opinion of the Commission, including any dissent, as
to the appropriateness of the work proposed as it will affect, preserve or
destroy the historic aspect and nature of the district or landmark;



      (8)   The specific recommendation of the Commission.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.156  ACTION BY THE BUILDING OFFICIAL AFTER ACTION BY COMMISSION.



   The recommendation of the Commission shall be binding upon the Building
Official, and upon receipt of the report of the Commission, the Building
Official shall within ten days notify the applicant in writing of the
approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the application and a copy
shall be provided to the Commission.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.157  APPEAL FROM ACTION OF COMMISSION CONCERNING APPLICATION FOR
PERMITS.



   (A)   An applicant for a permit dissatisfied with the action of the
Commission relating to issuance or denial of a permit for a modification or
demolition shall have the right of appeal to the City Council within 15 days
after receipt of notification of such action. Such appeal shall be in writing
to the City Secretary. The applicant shall be advised by the City Secretary
of the time and place of the hearing at which his appeal will be considered
and shall have the right to attend and be heard as to his reasons for filing
the same. In determining whether or not to certify to the appropriateness of
a modification or demolition, the City Council shall consider the same
factors as the Commission as set forth in § 150.152 and the report of the
Commission and any other matters presented at the hearing on the appeal. If
the City Council disapproves the application by a majority of the members
voting, it shall direct the Building Official not to issue such permit. Such
disapproval shall indicate what changes in the plans and specifications would
meet the conditions for protecting the distinctive historical character of
the district.



   (B)   Substantial evidence standard of review for appeals. The City
Council shall give deference to the Historic Preservation Commission decision
and may not substitute its judgment for the Landmark Commission's judgment.



      (1)   The City Council shall remand the matter back to the
Historic Preservation Commission if it determines that there is new testimony
or evidence that was not available at the Historic Preservation Commission
meeting.



      (2)   The City Council shall affirm the Historic Preservation
Commission decision unless it finds that it:



         (a)   Violates a statutory or ordinance provision;



         (b)   Exceeds the Historic Preservation Commission's
authority; or



         (c)   Was not reasonably supported by substantial
evidence considering the evidence in the record.



   (C)   Judicial review of decisions. The final decision of the City
Council regarding an appeal of a Historic Preservation Commission decision
may be appealed to the state District Court. The appeal to the state District
Court must be filed within 30 days after the decision of the city Planning
Commission. If no appeal is made to the state District Court within the
30-day period, then the decision of the City Council is final and
unappealable. An appeal to the state District Court is limited to a hearing
under substantial evidence rule.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.158  DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL AFTER CITY COUNCIL ACTION.



   Upon receipt of the written decision of the City Council, the Building
Official shall forthwith so notify the applicant and the Commission within
ten days in writing.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.159  REAPPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT.



   In the case of an application's disapproval by the City Council, the
application shall not be resubmitted for consideration until one year has
elapsed from the date of disapproval unless the indicated changes in the
plans and specifications required to meet the conditions for protecting the
district or landmark have been incorporated into the reapplication.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.160  NON-FIXTURES IN HISTORIC DISTRICT.



   No soft drink machines, trash cans, banners, sidewalk signs, moveable
signs, or any other item or object not affixed to a building and not
otherwise allowed in this subchapter shall be permitted in a historic
district unless approved by the Commission or City Council.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.161  NOTIFICATION TO OWNERS OF HISTORIC DESIGNATION BY CITY SECRETARY.



   Upon passage of any historic district or historic landmark designation,
the City Secretary shall send a notice of the fact of the designation to the
owner or owners of affected property by mail.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.162  EXEMPTIONS.



   Ordinary repair or maintenance which does not involve changes in
architectural and historic value, style, or general design, color, or
appearance is exempt from the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of §§ 150.001 through 150.003 or §§ 150.40et seq. shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the
City of Mount Pleasant, Texas, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the
sum of $1,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day said violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.



   (C)   (1)   Any person or corporation who shall violate any of
the provisions of §§ 150.125 - 150.131 or fail to comply with any of the
requirements, or who shall build or alter any building or use in violation of
any detail or plan submitted and approved hereunder, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than $200.00, and each
day shall constitute a separate offense.



      (2)   The owner of any building or premises where anything in
violation of §§ 150.125 - 150.131 shall be placed or shall exist, and any
architect, engineer, surveyor, builder, contractor, agent, persons or
corporation employed in connection therewith, and who may have assisted in
the commission of such violations, shall be guilty of a separate offense and,
upon conviction, shall be fined as herein provided.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to perform any modification or
demolition, or maintain any building, structure, accessory building, fence,
wall, light fixture, steps, sidewalks or paving or other appurtenance in a
historic district or historic landmark in violation of the provisions of §§
150.140 - 150.162. In addition to other remedies, proper city officials, or
their duly authorized representatives may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful modification or demolition to restrain,
correct, or abate such violation, to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business, or maintenance in and about such premises.



   (E)   Any person who violates any provision of §§ 150.140 -
150.162 shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof
during which any such violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each
offense shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00.



(`87 Code, § 29-3) (Am. Ord. 1986-2, passed 2-18-86; Ord. 1993-5, passed
3-16-93; Am. Ord. 2004-10, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 2004-21, passed 11-16-04;
Am. Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-5-13)



CHAPTER 151:  ELECTRICAL CODE



Section



General Provisions



   151.001   Definitions



   151.002   Purpose of code



   151.003   Scope of code



   151.004   Enforcement



   151.005   Applicability to public utilities



Inspectors



   151.020   Chief Electrical Inspector



   151.021   Employing assistants; qualifications of inspectors



   151.022   Prohibited interest



   151.023   Liability



   151.024   Duties



   151.025   Authority



   151.026   Passing upon questions



Permits and Inspections



   151.040   Permits required for each job



   151.041   To whom permit issued



   151.042   Obtaining permits by home owners



   151.043   Application for information



   151.044   Payment of fees



   151.045   Part jobs



   151.046   Time limitations



   151.047   Revocation



   151.048   Service of notices and orders



   151.049   Inspection; certificate of approval before connecting



   151.050   Rough inspection, faulty work



   151.051   Final inspection



Licenses



   151.065   Reciprocal agreements



   151.066   Reciprocal licensing



   151.067   Registration required; unauthorized use of terms



   151.068   Application for examination



   151.069   Persons not to be licensed



   151.070   Classification



   151.071   Bond of contractor and electrician



   151.072   Fees, bond amounts



   151.073   Registration; transfer



   151.074   Altering registration



   151.075   Display certificate of registration



   151.076   Suspension; revocation



   151.077   Registration card



   151.078   Duplicates



   151.079   Place of business



Technical Requirements



   151.095   Responsibility for safe work



   151.096   Supervision of work



   151.097   Leaving work open



   151.098   Removal of abandoned wire



   151.099   Altering equipment



   151.100   Inspection and approval before reconnection



   151.101   Installation standards



   151.102   Equipment standards



   151.103   Extension cords



   151.104   Electric fences



   151.105   Electrical sign standards



   151.106   Conformity to national code required



   151.107   Amendments to the National Electrical Code



 



   151.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APARTMENT RENTAL UNIT. Either:



      (1)   A space in a building which is occupied by a bona fide
tenant (who is independent of the owner of the building), which has an
electrical circuit independent of other electrical circuits in the building
and which is occupied by a tenant as his or her dwelling; or



      (2)   A building which is occupied by a bona fide tenant (who
is independent of the owner of the building) and which is occupied by the
tenant as his or her dwelling.



   APPROVED or APPROVAL. Approved by the City Electrical Inspector.
National, state and city standards shall be the basis of such approval.



   AUTHORIZED PERSON. An individual or authorized representative of a firm
or corporation who is licensed under the provisions of this code to do the
work as permitted under the specific provisions of this code.



   BUSINESS RENTAL UNIT. A space in a building which is occupied by a bona
fide tenant who is independent of the owner of the building, which has an
electrical circuit independent of other electrical circuits in the building
and in which a business enterprise (other than the rental of dwelling
apartments) is conducted.



   CHANGE OF SERVICE. That the books of the utility company reflect that
service formerly rendered to one customer at a particular location is now
being rendered to another customer at the same location.



   CITY. The territory within the corporate limits of the City of Mount
Pleasant or the legally constituted governing body thereof; its agents and
its officers.



   COMMERCIAL BUILDING. Any building in which a business enterprise (other
than the rental of dwelling apartments) is conducted.



   CONDUCTOR. A wire or cable or other form of metal suitable for carrying
electrical current or potential.



   ELECTRICAL CONSTRUCTION. All work and material used in the installing,
maintaining and extending of a system of electrical wiring and all
appurtenances, apparatus and equipment used in connection therewith, inside
or attached to any building or structure, lot or premises.



   ELECTRICIAN. One of the following:



      (1)   MASTER ELECTRICIAN. Any person engaged in or carrying on
the business of electrical contracting who is by training, experience and
education competent to lay out, design and install a system of wiring for
light, heat and power.



      (2)   LIMITED ELECTRICIAN (SIGN). Any person who is engaged in
the business of manufacturing or installation of electric signs. Sign
contractors who employ registered electricians may connect signs to outlets
provided by master electricians.



      (3)   JOURNEYMAN ELECTRICIAN. Any person who is employed to do
electrical work for wages and who does not furnish any materials or supplies
in the performance of his or her work. He or she shall have a minimum of four
years experience as an apprentice electrician.



      (4)   MAINTENANCE ELECTRICIAN. An electrician regularly
employed on a permanent basis by any person and who performs work only in the
confines of the building or in or on the premises where he or she is
regularly employed on a permanent basis and who does electrical work
(maintenance) as defined herein.



   EQUIPMENT. Conductors, materials, fittings, devices, appliances,
fixtures, sign apparatus, motors and the like, used as a part of or in
connection with any electrical installation.



   CHIEF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR. Person holding the position of Building
Official, having all the duties and powers of an electrical inspector as
described herein.



   ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.  An individual who has been designated by the
city, under the provisions of this code, as an electrical inspector. Also
referred to as INSPECTOR.



   EXAMINING BOARD. The examining and supervisory Board of Electricians.



   MAIN LINE DISCONNECT. A rain-tight device of a design approved for
electrical service and for the prevailing conditions under which it will be
used and which is capable of disconnecting all energized conductors from a
building’s sources of electrical supply.



   MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR. The act of keeping in a state of safe operating
condition any conductor or piece of equipment used inside or outside,
attached or connected to any building electrical system, by replacement of
units or elements thereof, but shall not include extensions of or additions
to an existing system or branch thereof.



   OUTSIDE ELECTRICAL WORK. The installing, maintenance, altering,
repairing or erecting of any electrical wiring apparatus, devices,
appliances, fixtures or equipment located outside of and separate from
buildings and on poles, towers or other structures designed or constructed to
be used exclusively for the support of such electrical wiring, apparatus,
devices, appliances, fixtures or equipment for which a permit is required
under the terms of this code, except that overhead conductors may be attached
to buildings.



   OUTSIDE OF A BUILDING. Beyond the limits of a building’s walls or
porches, whether open or closed.



   REGISTERED. That person who has made application to the Examining Board
and has satisfied the Board that he or she is qualified to do the work stated
in the application, that he or she has paid the necessary registration fees
to date and that his or her name is carried on the records of the Electrical
Inspector as a person authorized to do electrical work as defined in this
code; and also means and includes any person who has been issued a master
electrician certificate in accordance with the provisions of this code.



(`87 Code, § 30-1)



§ 151.002  PURPOSE OF CODE.



   The purpose of the code is practical safeguarding of persons and
buildings and their contents from electrical hazards arising from the
improper use of electricity for light, heat, power, radio, signaling and for
other purposes.



(`87 Code, § 30-2)



§ 151.003  SCOPE OF CODE.



   (A)   The provisions of this code shall apply to all installations
of and work done on electrical conductors, fittings, devices, motors,
controls, appliances, fixtures, electronic devices, signs and gaseous tubing,
hereinafter referred to as “electrical equipment,” within or on public
and private buildings and premises, with exceptions as provided herein.



   (B)   On all installations of electrical conductors or equipment
hereafter made and all existing installations which are altered or for which
the use has changed, all work shall be done in a manner that will conform
with the requirements for a sufficient and safe electrical structure and
system under this code.



   (C)   Repair and maintenance work shall be such that if any
electrical conductor or equipment is removed and later replaced, same shall
be replaced in accordance with the provisions of this code.



(`87 Code, § 30-3)



§ 151.004  ENFORCEMENT.



   The administration and enforcement of the Electrical Code is assigned
to and shall be the responsibility of the Building Official of the city.



(`87 Code, § 30-4)



§ 151.005  APPLICABILITY TO PUBLIC UTILITIES.



   (A)   The provisions of this code shall not apply to installations
used by or made for electricity supply or communication agencies in the
generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or for the operation
of signals of the transmission of intelligence and located within or on
buildings or premises used exclusively by such agency or on public
thoroughfares or to installations by communication agencies and their
employees or to those engaged in making installations for communication
agencies in connection with the operation of said agencies and the rendition
of communication and signal service to the public. All such installations
when done according to the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code
will be prima facie evidence that such installations conform to the
provisions of this code, provided however, that such agencies excepted are
operating under a valid franchise agreement with the city.



   (B)   Any franchised electric utility company may adopt reasonable
rules and regulations for the conduct of its business; provided, such rules
and regulations shall be applicable to all customers alike; and further
provided that where any provisions of such rules and regulations are in
conflict with the provisions of this code, this code will prevail.



(`87 Code, § 30-5)



INSPECTORS



§ 151.020  CHIEF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.



   The Building Official shall be designated as the Chief Electrical
Inspector.



(`87 Code, § 30-11)



§ 151.021  EMPLOYING ASSISTANTS; QUALIFICATIONS OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   The Chief Electrical Inspector, with the approval of the City
Manager, may appoint assistants and inspectors as shall be authorized from
time to time.



   (B)   The Electrical Inspector and Assistant Electrical Inspectors
shall have such executive ability as is required for the performance of their
duties; shall have a thorough knowledge of the standard materials and methods
used in the installation of electrical conductors and equipment; they shall
be well versed in approved methods of construction for safety to persons and
property and in the provisions of the National Electrical Code.



(`87 Code, § 30-12)



§ 151.022  PROHIBITED INTEREST.



   It shall be unlawful for City Electrical Inspectors to engage in the
business of the sale, installation or maintenance of electrical conductors,
devices, appliances, apparatus, fixtures or other electrical equipment,
either directly or indirectly, and they shall have no financial interest in
any concern engaged in such business at any time while in the employ of the
city as electrical inspectors.



(`87 Code, § 30-13) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.023  LIABILITY.



   Where action is taken by the Electrical Inspector or any Assistant
Electrical Inspector to enforce the provisions of this code, such action
shall be in the name and on behalf of the city, and the inspectors in so
acting for the city shall not render themselves personally liable for any
damage which may accrue to persons or property as a result of an action
committed in good faith in the discharge of their duties, and any suit
brought against any inspector by reason thereof shall be defended by the City
Attorney until final determination of the proceedings contained therein.



(`87 Code, § 30-14)



§ 151.024  DUTIES.



   The Electrical Inspector shall have the following duties:



   (A)   Enforce the provisions of this code;



   (B)   Upon application, grant permits for the installation,
extension or alteration of electrical work as provided in this code;



   (C)   Make inspections of all electrical work as provided in this
code;



   (D)   Keep on file a copy of the National Electrical Code, which
shall be accessible for public reference during regular office hours.



(`87 Code, § 30-15)



§ 151.025  AUTHORITY.



   Electrical inspectors shall have the right to enter any building at
reasonable times as may be necessary to perform the inspections described in
§§ 151.049 through 151.051. In order to perform any inspection not provided
for in such sections, the Electrical Inspector shall first obtain written
consent from the owner of the premises to be inspected or his or her duly
authorized agent, which instrument shall specify location, purpose and time
of inspection. Without such written consent, the Electrical Inspector shall
procure a proper warrant from a magistrate before entering upon premises for
inspection purposes.



(`87 Code, § 30-16)



§ 151.026  PASSING UPON QUESTIONS.



   The Electrical Inspector shall have power, and it shall be his or her
duty, subject to the provisions of law and of this code, to pass upon any
question relative to the design, mode, manner of construction or materials to
be used in electrical installations hereafter constructed, enlarged, altered,
moved, repaired or converted within the city, which are affected by the
provisions of this code or of any existing law applicable to the city
relative to electrical installations and to require that such design mode,
manner of construction or materials shall conform to the true intent and
meaning of the several provisions of this code.



(`87 Code, § 30-17)



PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS



§ 151.040  PERMITS REQUIRED FOR EACH JOB.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, cause to be installed
or permit to be installed any electrical wiring, fixtures or equipment or to
make any alterations, additions, changes or repairs within the scope of this
code without first procuring a permit as prescribed herein.



(`87 Code, § 30-25) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.041  TO WHOM PERMIT ISSUED.



   Permits shall be issued to master electricians qualified to secure
permits as set forth in this code.



(`87 Code, § 30-26)



§ 151.042  OBTAINING PERMITS BY HOME OWNERS.



   Any person shall be permitted to do electrical work on such property
occupied by him or her as a home or on premises owned by him or her and used
by him or her as a home and shall not be required to obtain a permit through
a master electrician, but he or she shall have the right to apply in person
for such permit without being qualified as an electrician. The exception
mentioned hereinabove shall not relieve any person attempting to perform work
or do certain acts under this section from applying in person for a permit
prior to the beginning of work; and further provided that all work and
service done under this section shall at all times be subject to the
inspection and approval by the electrical inspectors, in accordance with the
terms of all valid city ordinances, laws, rules and regulations; further
provided that such person operating under this section shall comply with the
ordinances, laws, rules and regulations as to types of material, quantity and
quality thereof as required by all inspections. Any person mentioned in this
section shall be required to pay under the Electrical Code and Building Code
of the city; provided however, no person may exercise the exception mentioned
in this section, save and except on his or her own premises as was mentioned
in this section. If any person commences any work on a building or structure
before obtaining the necessary permit from the city, the permit fees shall be
doubled.



(`87 Code, § 30-27)



§ 151.043  APPLICATION FOR INFORMATION.



   (A)   Application by master electrician.



      (1)   A master electrician shall make application for permits
in writing upon the forms provided by the Electrical Inspector for that
purpose. An applicant must describe the character and kind of work to be done
and furnish a detailed description of such work, including the following
information:



         (a)   Name and address of electrical contractor, firm or
person desiring a permit;



         (b)   Name of owner of premises where work is to be done;



         (c)   Street and house number of said premises;



         (d)   Kind of building;



         (e)   Description of electrical fixtures and appliances
to be installed.



      (2)   If the Electrical Inspector determines that a permit
should be issued, the permit shall be written upon the day the application is
made.



   (B)   Application by home owner.



      (1)   Application by a home owner for permits shall be made in
writing upon the forms provided by the Electrical Inspector for that purpose.
With such application there shall be filed a diagram or plan showing clearly
the character and kind of wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment
work to be done. The plan or diagram shall show the manner in which the
electrical installation is to be made, or the character of any repairs to any
existing electric installation. Said application shall include the following
information:



         (a)   Street and house number;



         (b)   Name of owner;



         (c)   Kind of building;



         (d)   List of electrical fixtures and appliances to be
installed.



      (2)   The diagram or plans and application shall be referred
to the Electrical Inspector, who shall have the authority to issue or refuse
to issue a permit.



(`87 Code, § 30-28)



§ 151.044  PAYMENT OF FEES.



   (A)   Payment of fees by master electrician. Fees by the master
electrician shall be due and payable to the city before proceeding with the
work covered by a permit.



   (B)   Payment of fees by home owner. Before proceeding with the work
covered by a permit, the home owner doing the work shall pay the fees for the
permit as provided hereinafter. Home owners shall also pay the inspection
fees as provided hereinafter.



   (C)   Schedule for permit and inspection fees.



      (1)   Permit fees for all electrical work shall be computed in
accordance with the following schedule:



         (a)   Service
(each):               $20.00;



         (b)   Service change               $20.00;



         (c)   Minimum permit               $20.00;



         (d)   Reinspection                  $25.
00;



         (e)   Electrical sign
                  $25.00;



         (f)   Swimming pool               $50.00;



         (g)   Residential construction per sq. ft. total



            building area under
roof:            $00.04;



         (h)   Commercial construction per sq. ft.



            total building area under
roof:            $00.04;



         (i)   Warehouse or storage per sq. ft. total



            area under roof:               $00.02.



(`87 Code, § 30-29) (Ord. 1993-11, passed 6-1-93; Am. Ord. 2002-22, passed
2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2011-19, passed 10-18-11)



§ 151.045  PART JOBS.



   When one master electrician completes the rough work, in whole or in
part, on any electrical wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment, and
a second master electrician is called upon to complete the work, a separate
permit is required, for which regular fees shall be paid for work to be done.
The Electrical Inspector shall inspect the subject premises before a second
or subsequent permit is issued to determine whether the work previously
performed meets all applicable standards. If the Electrical Inspector finds
defects or substandard work or wiring, such defects or substandard work or
wiring shall be corrected before new work may begin under a second or
subsequent permit. Upon issuance of the second or subsequent permit, the
Electrical Inspector shall seek to notify any previous permittee of such
second or subsequent permit. No refund of fees shall be allowed in cases
where multiple permits are issued.



(`87 Code, § 30-30)



§ 151.046  TIME LIMITATIONS.



   If electrical wiring, equipment work or installation of fixtures is not
initiated within 30 days of the issuance of a permit to perform such work,
the permit shall become void. Thereafter, no work shall be performed until a
new permit is issued and fees paid for such new permit in accordance with §
151.044. Under no circumstances shall permit fees be refunded on any permit
which becomes void under this section.



(`87 Code, § 30-31)



§ 151.047  REVOCATION.



   The Electrical Inspector shall have the right to declare void or
suspend any permit issued as provided herein for the following reasons:



   (A)   Willful misrepresentation(s) of fact in acquiring said permit;



   (B)   Upon written request from the property owner;



   (C)   After a continuous 30-day period without substantial work
performed under said permit, without reasonable excuse by the permittee or
owner;



   (D)   When it appears that work is not in substantial compliance
with applicable standards.



(`87 Code, § 30-32)



§ 151.048  SERVICE OF NOTICES AND ORDERS.



   (A)   Stop-work orders. Any order to discontinue work, or other
stop-work order as provided in this code shall, when practicable, be
delivered in person to the electrician on the premises or to the owner or his
or her agent. All such orders shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on
the subject premises. Such posting upon the subject premises shall constitute
service of notice upon all interested parties.



   (B)   Other orders, denials, revocation notices, suspension notices
and the like. Service of any other order, denial of permit, notice of
revocation or suspension of registration or other written notice required
under the provisions of this code shall be perfected by delivering said
written notice, or a copy thereof, in person to the person or persons
required to be notified. In cases where such personal service is either
impracticable or impossible, the notice shall be sent by registered mail or
certified mail to the most recent known address of the person or persons
required to be notified. If such service by mail is unsuccessful or
impossible, the notice shall be by publication on two separate days within
seven consecutive days in the official newspaper of the city and return
thereof made in conformity with the provisions of the state statutes
governing service of citation by publication.



(`87 Code, § 30-33)



§ 151.049  INSPECTION; CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL BEFORE CONNECTING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make connections from a source
of electrical energy to any electrical wiring, devices or equipment or an
installation for which a permit is required, as set forth in this code, until
a certificate of approval has been issued by the Electrical Inspector
authorizing such connection and the use of such wiring, devices or equipment.



(`87 Code, § 30-34) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.050  ROUGH INSPECTION, FAULTY WORK.



   (A)   Notice, attaching card. When the rough wiring or installation
work is completed on any premises, the person responsible therefor shall
notify the Electrical Inspector that the job is ready for inspection, giving
proper identification of the work, address and permit number. The Electrical
Inspector shall then make an inspection of the electric installation within
24 hours from the time of notification (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and
legal holidays). If said wiring or installation work has been installed in
accordance with the terms and provisions of this code, the Electrical
Inspector shall sign the inspection card, noting thereon the date of approval
of the work. More than one rough inspection may be made without charge when
the progress of construction requires such inspections.



   (B)   Notice to make work conform. If the electric wiring or
installation of fixtures or equipment is found to be faulty, incorrectly or
defectively installed, the Electrical Inspector shall notify the responsible
person who installed such work of the changes necessary to be made in order
that the work may conform to this code.



   (C)   Rectification of faulty work. The master electrician shall,
within 48 hours from the time of notification, make or start to make the
changes ordered and shall proceed with the work until the same is completed.
Upon completion thereof and payment of the re-inspection fee, he or she shall
notify the Electrical Inspector to the effect that faulty work has been
corrected. The latter shall then cause the re-inspection to be made, and if
said work is found to comply with this code he or she shall sign the
inspection card, noting thereon the date of approval of the work. If the
Electrical Inspector shall again find the work incorrectly installed, he or
she shall notify the responsible master electrician of the necessary changes
and shall collect an additional re-inspection fee. If the responsible master
does not make the required changes within a reasonable time, the Electrical
Inspector shall refuse to issue to any such person any further permits until
said work in question is corrected and approved.



   (D)   Prefabricated construction. In case of prefabricated
construction, the following requirements shall apply:



      (1)   The applicant shall file design, specification and test
date where required by the Building Official;



      (2)   The applicant shall furnish for each prefabricated unit
to be placed in the city an affidavit from the manufacturer stating that
materials and design for each unit conform to the design and specifications
filed with the city;



      (3)   If it is not practicable for the Building Official to
perform all or any part of the electrical inspections, the Building Official
may accept an affidavit from a licensed electrical engineer for at least five
continuous years and who has qualified for a city license as a journeyman or
higher classified grade of electrician, either of whom shall be subject to
the approval of the Building Official and has entered into a satisfactory
agreement with the Building Official to perform the inspections required,
that he or she has inspected the electrical installations and wiring during
manufacture and/or assembly and that these installations and wiring in the
complete unit conform to the design and specifications filed with the city.
Provided, that the applicant shall in any event reimburse the city, to be
included with the building permit fee, for the cost of such inspection
services;



      (4)   Not applicable when inspections are made by a department
of the state.



(`87 Code, § 30-35)



§ 151.051  FINAL INSPECTION.



   Upon the completion of all electrical wiring or installation of
fixtures or equipment in any building or on any premises, the electrician in
charge shall notify the Electrical Inspector that the work is ready for final
inspection, giving the electrical permit number and street address, and the
Electrical Inspector shall then cause inspection to be made within 24 hours
from the time of receipt of notification (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and
legal holidays), and if any faulty or defective wiring or equipment is found,
the electrician in charge shall be notified of the changes to be made in
order that such work shall conform to this code. If such work is found to be
correctly installed, replaced or repaired, the Electrical Inspector shall
endorse his or her approval upon the inspection certificate stating that the
wiring or installation work has been installed in accordance with the
provisions of this code. For each and every final inspection requested by
master electricians in charge of a job, after the first has been made, the
final inspection fee shall be paid as hereinbefore provided.



(`87 Code, § 30-36)



LICENSES



§ 151.065  RECIPROCAL AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   The City of Mount Pleasant may enter into a reciprocal
electrician license agreement with other cities inside the State of Texas
upon the recommendation of the Building Official. The Building Official shall
prepare a form or agreement not inconsistent with the terms of this chapter.
Such reciprocal electrical license agreement shall allow a master electrician
or journeyman electrician with a currently valid license or certificate of
registration from his or her home city to be registered by the City of Mount
Pleasant, without being re-examined by the City of Mount Pleasant, if the
following conditions are met:



      (1)   The license or certificate of registration was issued by
the home city under regulations and examination at least as restrictive and
demanding as those required by the City of Mount Pleasant, Texas, Electrical
Code;



      (2)   The city with which a reciprocal electrician license
agreement is contemplated must agree to grant reciprocal privileges to
electricians whose home city is Mount Pleasant.



   (B)   A reciprocal license agreement may be canceled by either city
for any reason upon a written notice to the opposite city by certified mail,
with return receipt requested. Any electrician working in the City of Mount
Pleasant, by virtue of a reciprocal license from another city, may otherwise
qualify himself or herself in accordance with the requirements of the code of
the City of Mount Pleasant. Electricians not so re-qualifying shall not be
permitted to work in Mount Pleasant after a 180-day period. Notice of any
such cancellation shall be sent by the Building Official of Mount Pleasant,
by mail to individual electricians from the home city whose reciprocal
agreement has been canceled.



   (C)   Persons from other home cities and from Mount Pleasant who
request that a reciprocal electrician license agreement be established
between the two cities shall be required to pay the expenses of the City of
Mount Pleasant in establishing such an agreement. An initial administration
fee of $50.00 shall accompany each such request.



   (D)   The Building Official of the City of Mount Pleasant shall keep
accurate and current records of the names of all cities located within the
State of Texas which have a reciprocal agreement with the city and of
compliance by each such city with the provisions set out in this chapter
regarding reciprocal electrician license agreements.



(`87 Code, § 30-42)



§ 151.066  RECIPROCAL LICENSING.



   Electricians with whose home city the City of Mount Pleasant has a
reciprocal agreement and who have a valid license or certificate or
registration from such home city may apply for and receive a similar license
or certificate or registration in this city without taking an examination,
provided the following conditions are complied with:



   (A)   The applicant shall submit and present a letter from the
Electrical Inspector or the Board of Electricians of his or her home city
attesting to the fact that he or she has successfully passed an appropriate
written examination to the Building Official of the City of Mount Pleasant,
when application is being made. The applicant will be required to pay $50.00
which is the application review fee;



   (B)   The applicant shall pay all license fees required and shall
comply with all requirements of the City of Mount Pleasant, Texas, Electrical
Code for electricians working as such within the city;



   (C)   The applicant can only receive a Mount Pleasant reciprocal
electrician license or certificate of registration on the basis of his or her
home city license or certificate of registration;



   (D)   The applicant shall have been licensed or shall have had his
or her certificate of registration for three years in his or her home city in
order to receive a reciprocal electrician license or certificate of
registration from the City of Mount Pleasant.



(`87 Code, § 30-43)



§ 151.067  REGISTRATION REQUIRED; UNAUTHORIZED USE OF TERMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
installing, maintaining, altering or repairing of any wiring, fixtures or
equipment used for the conducting of electricity for which a permit is
required by this code, unless such person has been issued a certificate of
registration as required by this code. It shall be unlawful for any person to
falsely represent himself or herself as a registered electrician of any class
set forth in this code or to use the words “electrical contractor,”
“master electrician,” “electrician” or words of similar import or
meaning on signs, cards, stationery or by any other manner whatsoever, unless
said person is properly registered within the meaning of this code.



(`87 Code, § 30-44) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.068  APPLICATION FOR EXAMINATION.



   Any person desiring a master or journeyman electrician’s license
shall make application in writing to the designated testing agency of the
City of Mount Pleasant, Texas, who will be solely responsible for all
examinations of these licenses. The fees provided for in the agency’s
application forms shall accompany applications.



(`87 Code, § 30-45) (Am. Ord. 1999-3, passed 4-21-99)



§ 151.069  PERSONS NOT TO BE LICENSED.



   The Building Official shall not issue a license to any person:



   (A)   As a journeyman who is under the age of 18 years;



   (B)   As a journeyman who has less than four years of experience;



   (C)   As a master who is under the age of 21 years;



   (D)   As a master who has less than ten years experience.



(`87 Code, § 30-47)



§ 151.070  CLASSIFICATION.



   (A)   There shall be three classes of electrical registration which
shall be listed herein from highest to lowest classification and are set
forth as follows:



      (1)   Master electrician (highest classification);



      (2)   Journeyman electrician;



      (3)   Apprentice.



   (B)   Contractors who hold the old Restricted Master shall be able
to do installation, repair and maintenance of any and all work which have
service 50 KVA single phase or 85 KVA three phase or smaller.



(`87 Code, § 30-48)



§ 151.071  BOND OF CONTRACTOR AND ELECTRICIAN.



   All master electricians and restricted master electricians registered
under this code shall be required to furnish and to keep in force each year
during the life of their certificate of registration a surety bond to the
city in the sum specified in § 151.072. The bond shall be conditioned that
the holder thereof will indemnify and hold the city harmless against all
cost, expenses, damages and injuries sustained by the city by reason of the
carelessness or neglect of said person in operating under this code. All such
bonds shall be approved by the City Attorney as to form and shall be filed
with the Chief Electrical Inspector.



(`87 Code, § 30-49)



§ 151.072  FEES, BOND AMOUNTS.



   The fees of registration and required surety bond of qualified
electricians of all classes shall be payable to the city, as set out below.
The registration fee shall be paid to the city and evidence of surety
provided before the issuance of certificate of registration and only after
the person has been issued a certificate of competency by the Building
Official. Annual renewal of certificate of registration card for all
classifications shall be required as herein set forth and in compliance with
the regulations of this code.




Fees and Bonds





   Classification    Annual Registration Fee   Surety





   Master electrician    Original Fee $250.00 - Annual Fee $50.00
   $ 2,000.00





   Restricted master    (Renewal Only) - Annual Fee $50.00    $
2,000.00





   Journeyman electrician    Original Fee $5.00 - Annual Fee $5.00
   None





   Apprentice    Original Fee $1.00 - Annual Fee $1.00    None




(`87 Code, § 30-50)



§ 151.073  REGISTRATION; TRANSFER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to lend, rent or transfer his or
her certificate of registration or any rights thereunder to any other person
or for any person to make use of such rights which are not actually his or
her own.



(`87 Code, § 30-51) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.074  ALTERING REGISTRATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or change in any manner
any instrument of registration as set forth herein.



(`87 Code, § 30-52) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.075  DISPLAY CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   Every holder of a certificate of registration shall display his or her
certificate in a conspicuous place in his or her principal place of business
or employment.



(`87 Code, § 30-53)



§ 151.076  SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Building Official (Chief Electrical Inspector) shall have
the power to initiate proceedings to suspend or revoke the certificate of
registration of any electrician for the following reasons:



      (1)   Fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining such certificate
of registration;



      (2)   Taking out electrical permits in one’s own name to do
electrical work and thereafter permitting a person without proper
certification to do the work;



      (3)   Gross negligence or incompetence in performance of
electrical work under this code;



      (4)   Any willful violation of any provision of this code.



   (B)   The Building Official shall perfect notice of proceedings
under this section in the manner provided in § 151.048. Such notice shall
also inform the electrician of the proposed suspension or revocation and of
the basis for such proceedings.



(`87 Code, § 30-54) (Am. Ord. 2002-22, passed 2-19-02)



§ 151.077  REGISTRATION CARD.



   (A)   A registration card of identification shall be issued to each
registrant, as set out in the three classifications listed in § 151.070. The
registration card as issued shall bear the signatures of the Electrical
Inspector and the holder, provided that the registrant has paid to the city
the required annual registration fee for his or her classification as set
forth in § 151.072.



   (B)   Each registration card shall expire at midnight on December 31
of each year, and a new card shall be issued each year to the registrant, as
specified in § 151.072; and provided further that he or she has complied
with all rules and regulations of this code. Every holder of a registration
card shall carry his or her registration card on his or her person at all
times while doing electrical work and shall produce and exhibit it when
requested by any Electrical Inspector or proper official of the city.



(`87 Code, § 30-56) (Am. Ord. 2002-22, passed 2-19-02)



§ 151.078  DUPLICATES.



   Registration cards lost or destroyed during the year for which they are
issued shall be reissued by the Electrical Inspector in accordance with the
rules and regulations of this code, provided satisfactory evidence has been
presented by this registrant of such loss or destruction, and provided the
registrant pay to the city the sum of $5.00 to cover costs of duplication for
each such evidence of his or her registration as he or she is required to
have for his or her identification.



(`87 Code, § 30-57)



§ 151.079  PLACE OF BUSINESS.



   Every master electrician shall have and maintain an established place
of business and shall have at such place of business a means of receiving
telephone messages during regular business hours.



(`87 Code, § 30-58)



TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS



§ 151.095  RESPONSIBILITY FOR SAFE WORK.



   The electrical regulations of this code shall not be construed to
relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any person owning,
operating or installing electrical conductors, devices, appliances, fixtures,
apparatus, motors or equipment for damages to persons or buildings caused by
any defect therein by reason of the inspection herein authorized or the
certificate of approved inspection issued by the electrical inspection
section as herein provided; nor shall the city be held liable for any damages
by reason of the enforcement of this code.



(`87 Code, § 30-66)



§ 151.096  SUPERVISION OF WORK.



   (A)   In the actual work of installing, maintaining, altering or
preparing of any electrical conductors or equipment for which a permit is
required by this code, there shall be in direct supervision a qualified
electrician of the proper classification. It shall be required that a master
electrician be liable and responsible for layout and technical supervision of
any work which requires the securing of a permit, and a journeyman or higher
classified grade electrician shall be in direct “on the job” supervision
of work carried on; except in work falling under the classification of
limited electrician (sign), which work shall be performed by or directly
supervised by the person holding such certificate of registration.



   (B)   Should it come to the notice of the Electrical Inspector or
his or her assistant that such supervision and control are not being
maintained, the Inspector may order the work to be discontinued by posting a
stop-work order in the manner provided in § 151.048, and the person, firm or
corporation to whom the permit has been issued shall discontinue further work
until supervision has been supplied.



(`87 Code, § 30-67)



§ 151.097  LEAVING WORK OPEN.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cover or cause to be covered any
part of a wiring installation with flooring, lath wallboard or other material
until the Electrical Inspector shall have approved the wiring installation,
in part or as whole, except as herein set forth.



(`87 Code, § 30-68) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.098  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED WIRE.



   It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to cause all abandoned
dead wire, unused poles or electrical apparatus on the outside of the
building or in streets or alleys to be removed at the expense of the owners
thereof by giving said owners written notice.



(`87 Code, § 30-69)



§ 151.099  ALTERING EQUIPMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to, in any manner,
change or alter electrical conductors or equipment in or on any building. If,
in the course of the erection of a building or structure, electrical
conductors of equipment have previously been installed in such position as to
interfere with the erection or completion of the structure, notice shall be
immediately given the authorized person or firm using the electrical
conductors or equipment, and he or she shall be required to accomplish this
needed change in accordance with this code.



(`87 Code, § 30-70) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.100  INSPECTION AND APPROVAL BEFORE RECONNECTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make connections from a
source of electrical energy to any electrical wiring, device or equipment
which has been disconnected by order of the Electrical Inspector or the use
of which has been prohibited for reasons herein set forth, until a
certificate of approval has been issued by him or her authorizing the
reconnection and use of such wiring, devices or equipment.



   (B)   Whenever the service has been discontinued in any commercial
building, the service shall not again be connected until a certificate of
compliance has been issued for the premises by the Electrical Inspector,
certifying that same has been wired so as to conform to applicable standards.



   (C)   Whenever a building permit is issued, pursuant to the city’s
currently effective building code for any work done to the structure of any
building the use of the wiring in the building shall be prohibited until
there is compliance with the provisions of division (A) of this section.



   (D)   All installations made in accordance with previous ordinances
of the city shall not be disturbed while in good condition, and safe and
proper maintenance, repair and reasonable extension thereof shall be
permitted when same can be done without hazard to life and property.



(`87 Code, § 30-71) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.101  INSTALLATION STANDARDS.



   All installations of electrical wiring and equipment shall be
reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with the provisions
of this code, applicable statutes of the state and any rules or regulations
by authority thereof.



(`87 Code, § 30-72)



§ 151.102  EQUIPMENT STANDARDS.



   All electrical equipment installed or used shall be reasonably safe to
persons and property and in conformity with the provisions of this code,
applicable statutes of the state and any rules or regulations issued by
authority thereof.



(`87 Code, § 30-73)



§ 151.103  EXTENSION CORDS.



   Extension cords shall be no longer than eight feet, except those used
for portable tools and trouble lights.



(`87 Code, § 30-74)



§ 151.104  ELECTRIC FENCES.



   The installation and use of any type of electric fence is prohibited
within the city.



(`87 Code, § 30-75)



§ 151.105  ELECTRICAL SIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   All electrically illuminated or electrically powered outdoor
and indoor signs and displays shall be reasonably safe to persons and
property and in conformity with the provisions of this code.



   (B)   Conformity of all types of electrical signs with applicable
standards of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. and the National Electrical
Code, National Electrical Safety Code or electrical provisions of other
safety codes which have been approved by the American Standards Association
shall be prima facie evidence that such installations are reasonably safe to
persons and property.



   (C)   Conformity of construction, erection, foundation and means
support of all such signs with the Building Code shall be approved by the
Building Official before permits for electrical inspection shall be issued
under the authority of this code.



(`87 Code, § 30-76)



§ 151.106  CONFORMITY TO NATIONAL CODE REQUIRED.



   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the City of Mount Pleasant the
National Electric Code, 2014 Edition, together with subsequent amendments or
editions as published by the National Fire Protection Association, Quincy,
Massachusetts, including the amendments as set forth in § 151.107.



   (B)   Conformity of electrical installations with the applicable
standards set forth in the National Electrical Code, National Electrical
Safety Code or electrical provisions of other safety codes which have been
approved by the American Standards Association shall be prima facie evidence
that such installations are reasonably safe to persons and property.



(`87 Code, § 30-77) (Ord. 1993-11, passed 6-1-93; Am. Ord. 2002-22, passed
2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2011-19, passed 10-18-11; Am. Ord. 2014-9, passed 6-2-14)



§ 151.107  AMENDMENTS TO THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.



   All reference to the use of aluminum conductors, except minimum 100 amp
aluminum conductor for service entrance may be used for single-family,
two-family and multi-family occupancy between service disconnect and panels
shall be deleted from the electric code.



(`87 Code, § 30-78)



§ 151.999  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation or association who violates any of the
provisions of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in § 10.99, and each and
every day of continued violation thereof shall constitute a distinct and
separate offense. Violation of any of the terms or provisions of this code by
any corporation or association shall subject the officers and agents actively
in charge of the business of such corporation or association to the penalty
herein provided.



(`87 Code, § 30-79) (Ord. 1985-29, passed 11-19-85)



CHAPTER 152:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   152.01   Statutory authorization



   152.02   Findings of fact



   152.03   Statement of purpose



   152.04   Methods of reducing flood losses



   152.05   Definitions



   152.06   Lands to which chapter applies



   152.07   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard



   152.08   Establishment of development permit



   152.09   Compliance



   152.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   152.11   Interpretation



   152.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability



Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction



   152.25   General standards



   152.26   Specific standards



   152.27   Standards for subdivision proposals



   152.28   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones)



   152.29   Floodways



Administration



   152.40   Designation of Floodplain Administrator



   152.41   Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator



   152.42   Permit procedures



   152.43   Variance procedures



 



   152.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control
Insurance Act, Tex. Water Code, § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of
local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood
losses.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)



§ 152.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-19-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)



§ 152.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Protect human life and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in floodplains;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future
flood blight areas; and



   (G)   Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in
a flood area.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)



§ 152.04  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.



   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety
or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase flood damage;



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)



§ 152.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial
fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by
high-velocity flows, active processes of erosion, sediment transport and
deposition and unpredictable flow paths.



   APEX. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the
flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and
alluvial fan flooding can occur.



   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.



   AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD. The land area that would be
inundated by the 1% annual chance (100 year) flood based on future conditions
hydrology.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH or VO zone
on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% chance or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM).
After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication
of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99,
AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.



   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for
Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface
elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or
exceeding that level in any given year, also called the BASE FLOOD .



   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.



   CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved and unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.



   ELEVATED BUILDING. For insurance purposes, a non-basement building,
which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective
date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM's effective before that
date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as "existing structures."



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by
a community.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of
flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or
an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow)
and/or flood-related erosion hazards.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). See FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY.



   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of FLOODING).



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in a combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.



   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which
funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with
sound engineering standards.



   FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOODWAY. See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory or historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:



         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.



   LEVEE. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.



   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program,
the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which
base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projections;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.



   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD .



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. (For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)),
includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements, see Section 60.6 of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)



   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications or other evidence of compliance required in Section
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)



§ 152.06  LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the
jurisdiction of the city.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)



§ 152.07  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled,
"The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Titus County Texas and Incorporated
Areas," dated September 29, 2010 with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps
dated September 29, 2010, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)



§ 152.08  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)  Penalty, see
§ 152.99



§ 152.09  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its
use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)  Penalty, see
§ 152.99



§ 152.10  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)



§ 152.11  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)



§ 152.12  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 152.25  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are
required for all new construction and substantial improvements:



   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;



   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;



   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;



   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;



   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;



   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and



   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)  Penalty, see
§ 152.99



§ 152.26  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data
has been provided as set forth in §§ 152.07, 152.27 or 152.41(H), the
following provisions are required:



   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation. A
registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this
division as proposed in § 152.42(A)(1) is satisfied.



   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to one foot
above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice as outlined in this section. A record of such certification which
includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain
Administrator.



   (C)   Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:



      (1)   A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;



      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade;



      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves
or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.



   (D)   Manufactured homes.



      (1)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within
Zone A on a community’s FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.



      (2)   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or
substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s
FIRM on sites:



         (a)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;



         (b)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;



         (c)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision; or



         (d)   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a
result of a flood, be elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.



      (3)   Require that manufactured homes be placed or
substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM that are
not subject to the provisions of division (D) of this section be elevated so
that either:



         (a)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
one foot above the base flood elevation; or



         (b)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength
that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.



   (E)   Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles
placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM
either:



      (1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;



      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or



      (3)   Meet the permit requirements of § 152.42(A), and the
elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in division (D)
of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on
its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)  Penalty, see
§ 152.99



§ 152.27  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   (A)   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with this
chapter.



   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including
the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet
Floodplain Development Permit requirements of §§ 152.08, 152.25et seq. and
152.42.



   (C)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development, including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or
five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to §
152.07 or § 152.41(H).



   (D)   Base flood elevation data, with the establishment of a
floodway, shall be generated by a detailed engineering study for all Zone A
areas, within 100 feet of the contour lines of Zone A areas, and other
streams not mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the community's FIRM.



   (E)   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (F)   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)  Penalty, see
§ 152.99



§ 152.28  STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES).



   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
152.07 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply:



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
one foot above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM
(at least one foot if no depth number is specified).



   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures:



      (1)   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
one foot above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM
(at least one foot if no depth number is specified); or



      (2)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities
be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or
below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.



   (C)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in § 152.42, are satisfied.



   (D)   Require with in Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)  Penalty, see
§ 152.99



§ 152.29  FLOODWAYS.



   (A)   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
152.07 are areas designated as floodways.



   (B)   Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion
potential, the following provisions shall apply:



      (1)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other development within the
adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge;



      (2)   If division (B)(1) of this section is satisfied, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of this subchapter.



      (3)   Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12
of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit
encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an
increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first
completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)  Penalty, see
§ 152.99



ADMINISTRATION



§ 152.40  DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Building Official is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator
to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other
appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance -
National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)



§ 152.41  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:



   (A)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records
pertaining to the provisions of this chapter;



   (B)   Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that
the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured
homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding;



   (C)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development
permits required by adoption of this chapter;



   (D)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
government agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is
required;



   (E)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation;



   (F)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the
State Coordinating Agency, which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB)
and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;



   (G)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;



   (H)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in
accordance with § 152.07, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of §§ 152.25et seq.;



   (I)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the
Floodplain Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial
improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within
Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that
the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within
the community;



   (J)   Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in Zones A1-30, AE and AH on the community's FIRM which increases
the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided
that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section
65.12.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)



§ 152.42  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be
presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her
and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape
alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of
manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of
special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:



      (1)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;



      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;



      (3)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of § 152.26(B);



      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or
natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development;



      (5)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance
with § 152.41(A).



   (B)   Approval or denial of a Floodplain Development Permit by the
Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this
chapter and the following relevant factors:



      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and
bridges and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems;



      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;



      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location,
where applicable;



      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject
to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)



§ 152.43  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Appeal Board, as established by the community, shall hear
and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal
only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.



   (C)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal
Board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.



   (E)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the
procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.



   (F)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of ½ acre or less in size contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in § 152.42(B) have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the ½ acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.



   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent
of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting
of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of
this chapter.



   (H)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.



   (I)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.



   (J)    Prerequisites for granting variances:



      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief;



      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances;



      (3)   Any application to which a variance is granted shall be
given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with
the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost
of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting
from the reduced lowest floor elevation.



   (K)   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction
and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:



      (1)   The criteria outlined in divisions (A) through (I) of
this section are met; and



      (2)   The structure or other development is protected by
methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.



(Ord. 1999-1, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this court
order and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this
court order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
court order or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
conviction thereof be fined not more than $ 2,000 for each violation, and in
addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day a
violation occurs is a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. 2010-8, passed 6-15-10)



CHAPTER 153:  AIRPORT REGULATIONS AND ZONING



Section



General Provisions




   153.001   General purpose





   153.002   Definitions




Airport Board



   153.005   Airport Board created



   153.006   Composition



   153.007   Appointment of members



   153.008   Terms of members



   153.009   Compensation of members



   153.010   Removal of members from office



   153.011   Filling of vacancies



   153.012   Ex officio member



   153.013   Meetings



   153.014   Rules of procedure, record of proceedings



   153.015   Quorum



   153.016   Powers and duties



   153.017   Recommendations subject to City Council



General Regulations




   153.020   General regulations





   153.021   Ground operations





   153.022   Fueling of aircraft





   153.023   Tiedown of aircraft





   153.024   Running aircraft engines





   153.025   Damage to runway lights





   153.026   Taxiing aircraft





   153.027   Parking aircraft





   153.028   Loading/unloading aircraft





   153.029   Takeoff and landing rules





   153.030   Emergency locator transmitter (ELT)





   153.031   Takeoffs on apron or taxiways





   153.032   Takeoffs allowed





   153.033   Traffic pattern altitude





   153.034   Student training and practice flying





   153.035   Special procedures





   153.036   Flying model airplanes





   153.037   Fire regulations




Lease of Airport Property




   153.045   Lease of airport property




Fixed Base Operators (FBO)




   153.060   Fixed base operator





   153.061   Authorized services





   153.062   Requirements





   153.063   City’s rights and obligations





   153.064   Payment and fees





   153.065   Insurance





   153.066   Solicitation and conduct





   153.067   Use and use conflict





   153.068   Unauthorized use





   153.069   Rules




Airport Zoning Regulations



   153.085   Short title



   153.086   Definitions



   153.087   Zones



   153.088   Height limitation



   153.089   Land use restrictions



   153.090   Nonconforming uses



   153.091   Permits and variances



   153.092   Enforcement



   153.093   Board of Adjustment



   153.094   Appeals



   153.095   Judicial review



   153.096   Remedies



   153.097   Conflicting regulations



   153.098   Duties of Joint Airport Zoning Board




   153.998   Knowledge of rules implied









   153.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.001  GENERAL PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these rules, regulations and standards is to set forth
the manner in which those who use the Mount Pleasant Regional Airport are to
conduct themselves and their operations while on airport property; establish
an Airport Board; provide general rules and regulations for the use of the
airport; regulate air and ground traffic; regulate use of aircraft; and
establish fees and other obligations associated with the privilege of
conducting business at the airport.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIRCRAFT.  Anything used or designed to be used for navigation through
air.



   AIRPORT.  The Mount Pleasant Regional Airport.



   AIRPORT MANAGER.  The employee of the city appointed to that position.



   CFI.  Certified Flight Instructor.



   CITY.  The City of Mount Pleasant, Texas.



   CTAF.  Common Traffic Advisory Frequency.



   FAA.  The Federal Aviation Administration.



   FIXED BASE OPERATOR (FBO).  A person, firm, or corporation based at
the Mount Pleasant Regional Airport and performing any of the functions,
furnishings, or services listed herein on a commercial basis.



   TENANT.  A person, firm, or corporation leasing or using property at
the airport solely for the purpose of storing an aircraft, not engaged in or
providing any aviation related commercial activity or service at the airport.
An airport tenant is not authorized to function as or provide the services of
a fixed base operator.



   ULTRALIGHT VEHICLE. An aeronautical vehicle operated for sport or
recreational purposes which does not require FAA registration, an
airworthiness certificate, nor pilot certification in accordance with Federal
Aviation Regulations (103).



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



AIRPORT BOARD



§ 153.005  AIRPORT BOARD CREATED.



   There is created in and for the city an administrative department to be
designated as the “Airport Board.”



(`87 Code, § 3-17) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



Statutory reference:



   Airport zoning regulations, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 46e-1 et seq.



§ 153.006  COMPOSITION.



   The Airport Board shall be composed of seven members.



(`87 Code, § 3-18) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Ord. 1987-17, passed 10-6-87; Am.
Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03; Am. Ord. 2005-1, passed 2-15-05)



§ 153.007  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.



   The members of the Airport Board shall be appointed by a majority vote
of the City Council. Each member of the Airport Board shall be a resident of
the city, unless such citizenship shall be waived by a majority vote of the
City Council.



(`87 Code, §§ 3-19, 3-20) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2003-8, passed
8-19-03)



§ 153.008  TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   The term of office of the members of the Airport Board shall commence
on February 1, except for the filling of vacancies. The members shall be
appointed for a term of two years, with the exception of two members whose
terms shall expire on January 31, 2003. Thereafter, all members shall be
appointed for terms of two years.



(`87 Code, § 3-21) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.009  COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.



   The members of the Airport Board shall serve without compensation.



(`87 Code, § 3-22) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.010  REMOVAL OF MEMBERS FROM OFFICE.



   Any member of the Airport Board shall be subject to removal from office
by the City Council for any cause deemed by the Council sufficient therefor
in the interest of public service.



(`87 Code, § 3-23) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.011  FILLING OF VACANCIES.



   All vacancies occurring in the membership of the airport shall be
filled by appointment by a majority vote of the City Council for the
unexpired term of the vacancy.



(`87 Code, § 3-24) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.012  EX OFFICIO MEMBER.



   One member of the City Council, appointed by the Council, shall serve
on the Airport Board as an ex officio member.



(`87 Code, § 3-25) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.013  MEETINGS.



   The members of the Airport Board shall hold such meetings as the Board
may determine or shall meet at the request of the City Council or the City
Manager.



(`87 Code, § 3-27) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.014  RULES OF PROCEDURE, RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS.



   The Airport Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a
record of its proceedings. A copy of such record shall be filed with the City
Secretary.



(`87 Code, § 3-28) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.015  QUORUM.



   A simple majority of the members of the Airport Board shall constitute
a quorum of the Board for the transaction of all business.



(`87 Code, § 3-29) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.016  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the Airport Board shall be as follows:



   (A)   To review all construction on airport property to assure
compliance with the Airport Layout Plan and rules, regulations, and standards
set forth by the city, Texas Department of Transportation-Aviation Division
and Federal Aviation Administration;



   (B)   To make recommendations relative to rates to be charged for
the various uses of the airport;



   (C)   To consider and make recommendations to the City Council on
such matters as the Board deems pertinent for the efficient maintenance,
expansion and use of the airport and its various facilities;



   (D)   To encourage the development and advancement of the airport;
and



   (E)   To consider such other items as may be referred to it by the
Council pertaining to the airport.



(`87 Code, § 3-30) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.017  RECOMMENDATIONS SUBJECT TO CITY COUNCIL.



   All recommendations of the Airport Board shall be subject to
modification or veto by the City Council.



(`87 Code, § 3-31) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 153.020  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Use of airport restricted. No person, partnership,
association, corporation or entity, incorporated or otherwise, shall use the
airport for any commercial activity, unless approved in writing by the city
council. No person shall occupy the roads or walks in such a manner as to
hinder or obstruct their proper use by others. No person shall drive any
vehicle across or upon any lawn or grass area, sidewalk or curb except by
permission of the Airport Manager on duty or except as necessary to service
or maintain airport facilities. No person shall travel on the airport other
than on the roads, walks or places provided for the use of that particular
class of traffic.



   (B)   Federal air traffic rules. Rules of the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) for aircraft operated within the United States, and
presently or hereafter effective, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part hereof as though fully set forth and incorporated herein.



   (C)   Safeguard of persons and property. The Airport Manager shall
at all times have authority to take necessary and legal actions to safeguard
any person, aircraft, equipment, or property at the airport.



   (D)   Hangars. Buildings or structures owned by the city may be
leased to private individuals, companies, or corporations on a monthly or
yearly basis for the storage of aircraft and ancillary aircraft equipment or
to conduct a commercial fixed base operation (FBO).



   (E)   Through the fence operations prohibited.  No private
individual, partnership, FBO, company, corporation, or political entity shall
be permitted direct ground access to the airport by their aircraft,
customers' aircraft, or private vehicle from property adjacent to or in the
immediate vicinity of the airport. Furthermore, no private individual,
partnership, company, corporate, political entity, or customers' aircraft or
vehicle shall be permitted direct ground access to property from the airport
- a practice commonly known as a "through the fence operation." Under
extenuating circumstances, the City Council may allow certain through the
fence operations on a case-by-case basis.



   (F)   Unauthorized signs and equipment. No signs, nonaeronautical
equipment, portable buildings, or trailers may be erected, moved in, or
installed on the airport property, except as may be specifically authorized
by the Airport Manager.



   (G)   Surreptitious activities. Any person observing suspicious,
unauthorized or criminal activities should report such activities immediately
to the Airport Manager, local police, officers of the Texas Department of
Public Safety, or other police officers.



   (H)   Wrecked aircraft.  Every aircraft owner, pilot, or agent
shall be responsible for notifying the FAA, when required by Federal Air
Regulations or the National Transportation Safety Board and shall promptly
remove disabled or wrecked aircraft from the operational areas of the
airport, under the direction of the Airport Manager. Upon notification and
demand by the Airport Manager, either orally or in writing, to the owner or
operator of any motor vehicle, aircraft or disabled equipment or parts left
on the airport, it shall be the duty of the owner or operator to remove the
same at his/her own expense. If, after such demand, the owner or operator
fails or refuses to remove such property within a reasonable time as
determined by the Airport Manager under the circumstances and conditions
created by the presence of such property, the Airport Manager may cause the
same to be impounded and/or stored. The cost of such removal, impound,
storage, and any parking fees due at the time of removal shall be a charge
against the owner of such property; and upon the payment of the charge, the
property shall be released and possession shall be restored to the owner or
operator. If the owner cannot be determined, the city shall have the right to
dispose of the property by sale or otherwise.



   (I)   Repairs to aircraft. 



      (1)   No aircraft shall be repaired on any part of the landing
or takeoff area. All outside repairs shall be made only at places designed by
the Airport Manager for such purpose. Major engine, airframe, or avionics
repairs shall be conducted by a properly licensed, paid mechanic within a
hangar or building rented, leased, or owned for such commercial purposes. Any
preventive maintenance authorized by FAR Part 43 may be made by the owner or
operator of any aircraft, but only within a hangar leased or owned by that
aircraft owner or operator or at places designated by the Airport Manager for
such purpose; or



      (2)   Repairs to an aircraft or any aeronautical equipment
shall not be performed in any area of the airport other than that
specifically designated for such purposes except: (1) that minor adjustments
may be made while the aircraft is on a loading ramp preparatory to departure;
or (2) that a private aircraft owner may make minor adjustments as long as
all FAA requirements are met; or (3) when adjustments are necessary to remove
a disabled aircraft within the safety area of a runway or creating a hazard
or obstruction for other airport traffic.



   (J)   Agricultural spraying operations.  Agricultural (Ag) spraying
operations will be conducted in accordance with procedures approved by the
Airport Manager and made known to all persons conducting agricultural
spraying operations. Said operations shall be conducted only on the
designated airport areas and shall not include reckless flying or careless
chemical handling. Chemicals used in agricultural operations shall be
dispersed, maintained and stored and the dispensing area shall be cleaned
with all empty chemical containers stored and promptly disposed of in
accordance with the label directions. Washing of the Ag aircraft and flushing
of Ag aircraft spray tanks or hoppers will be accomplished in accordance with
the standards of the Environmental Protection Agency and the Texas Commission
on Environmental Quality in an area so designated by the Airport Manager.
Each Ag operation shall carry liability insurance in the amount of $500,000,
payable to the city for cleanup of any hazardous chemical spills on airport
property caused by the Ag operator. Ag aircraft operators shall not exceed
the maximum gross hopper weight stamped on the Ag aircraft's hopper by the
aircraft manufacturer or listed in the aircraft's specifications. Ag aircraft
shall not take off or land down wind. Takeoff and landing procedures in
accordance with § 153.029, Takeoff and Landing Rules, contained herein will
be observed at all times. NOTE: Because of the hazard of such agricultural
spraying operations, the City Council may require each agricultural spray
operator to post a bond, the amount to be determined by the City Council
considering the financial risk to which the city could be exposed by an Ag
operator accident resulting in environmental damage, the number of Ag
aircraft owned or leased and used by the Ag operator, etc.



   (K)   Damage to airport.  Any person, individual, or corporation or
the owner of any aircraft causing damage of any kind to the airport, whether
through violation of any of these rules, through vandalism, or any act of
negligence, shall be liable therefore in and to the city.



   (L)   Improper conduct.



      (1)   No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage upon any
portion of the airport, or become intoxicated, commit any disorderly, obscene
or indecent act, or conduct or engage in any form of gambling on the airport.



      (2)   No person shall dispose of garbage paper, refuse or
other material on the airport except in the receptacles provided for that
purpose.



   (M)   Injury to person.  Persons entering upon airport property by
aircraft, automobile, other vehicular conveyance, or pedestrian traffic do so
at their own risk and with no liability incurring to the city for any injury
or damage to person or property. Further, any person desiring to use the
airport shall observe and obey all valid laws, resolutions, orders, rules,
and regulations promulgated and enforced by the city, FAA or by any other
authority having jurisdiction over the conduct and operation of the airport.



   (N)   Licensed pilots and aircraft.  No person shall operate any
aircraft within or over the airport unless such person has first been issued
an airman certificate by the Federal Aviation Administration and unless such
aircraft shall have first received a certificate of airworthiness which is
still in effect, from the Federal Aviation Administration. The limitation
shall not apply to students in training under the supervision of a licensed
instructor; to public aircraft of the federal government or of a state,
territory, or political subdivision thereof; or to aircraft licensed by a
foreign government with which the United States has a reciprocal agreement
covering the operation of such licensed aircraft. Note: Use of the airport by
ultralight aircraft shall be subject to approval by the City Council and
shall be in accordance with FAR Part 13 and any other rules established by
the city.



   (O)   Registration.  Each person owning an aircraft based at the
airport, employed, or receiving instructions at the airport shall register at
the office of the Airport Manager their name, address, telephone number,
aircraft model, aircraft registration "N" number, and the name, address and
telephone number of their next of kin or person to be notified in case of an
accident or emergency.



   (P)   Intoxicants and narcotics prohibited.  No person under the
influence of any intoxicant, narcotic, or other illicit drug shall operate or
fly in any aircraft upon or from the airport. Such prohibition shall not
apply to a passenger under the care of a medical doctor and accompanied by a
doctor, nurse or caretaker.



   (Q)   Foreign objects.  No foreign objects, including bottles,
cans, scrap, nuts, bolts, nails, or any object that may cause damage to an
aircraft, shall be left upon the floor of any building or upon any part of
the surface area of the airport. Individuals are encouraged to pick up such
foreign objects when observed and place them in a trash receptacle.



   (R)   Maintenance of airport.  The city at all times retains the
right to establish rules, regulations, and procedures regarding the use of
the airport, and to otherwise perform those acts the city deems necessary to
maintain the airport in a safe and serviceable condition. Prior approval
shall be obtained from the Airport Manager before any survey, repair or
construction activity of any kind is commenced on any city-owned property at
the airport. Prior to the commencement of any construction, an airspace study
on FAA Form 7460-1 shall be completed except for construction within an
existing structure. In the event construction equipment will be used which is
higher than the structure being erected under a granted permit, the operator
of the equipment must contact the Airport Manager, keep the equipment in a
lowered position to the maximum extent possible, and install appropriate
hazard marking and/or lighting on the top extremity of the equipment.



   (S)   Establishment and collection of fees.  The city shall at all
times have the right to establish and collect fees and other charges for the
use of the airport for commercial and non- commercial purposes, including,
but not limited to, lease of hangar space, office space, T-hangar space,
aircraft or auto parking areas, fuel flowage fees, tie-down fees, concession
fees, and other fees related to the privilege of operating a business through
the use of public property. To the extent required by federal and state laws
and regulations, such fees and charges shall be levied on a
non-discriminatory basis as between similar types of users; however, the mere
fact that a fee or charge has some adverse economic impact on the person or
entity obligated to pay the fee or charge, or has a greater impact on one
user as opposed to a similar type of user, does not make the fee or charge
discriminatory.



   (T)   Runway safety.  The city shall at all times have the right to
take any actions necessary, without notice, to protect the safety and
usability of the airport and the approach surfaces of the runway.



   (U)   Compliance with laws. All users of the airport, including but
not limited to all FBO's and airport tenants, must comply with all applicable
federal, state, and local laws, rules, regulations, and ordinances while
conducting operations on or otherwise using the airport. Such compliance is
required whether or not such use and/or operations are authorized pursuant to
these regulations or a written agreement or certificate of operation. In
addition to such criminal or civil penalties as may be assessed pursuant to
these regulations, the city may file such action in district court as may be
necessary to enjoin the offending user from violating these regulations.



   (V)   Conflicts between rules and regulations.  In the event of
irreconcilable conflict between any provisions of this chapter  and any FAR,
the latter shall prevail. In the event of irreconcilable conflict between any
provision of this chapter  and any city ordinance applicable to the same
subject matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall prevail
unless such other ordinance or order clearly indicates to the contrary or
unless such ordinance or order directly amends or repeals a provision of this
chapter.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.021  GROUND OPERATIONS.



   All vehicular traffic on the airport shall be confined to streets,
roads, and avenues of passage designated and provided for that purpose and
shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 30 miles per hour. Official
vehicles only will be driven on the landing area. Such official vehicles will
have a ground to air radio transceiver tuned to the local UNICOM frequency
and Common Traffic Advisory Frequency (CTAF) and a flashing beacon light
mounted on the roof of the vehicle or a checkered orange and white flag
mounted on the front bumper of the vehicle. Special use vehicles such as an
ambulance, hearse, or delivery van may be driven on the apron with the
permission of the Airport Manager. An aircraft owner who rents, leases, or
owns a hangar must park their automobile in the hangar or in a designated
parking space while on a trip in their aircraft. The Airport Manager may
prohibit aircraft landing and taking off any time and under any circumstances
when he deems such operation likely to endanger persons or property, except
for emergency landings. In addition, no aircraft shall be operated on the
surface of any public landing area, public cargo ramp and apron area or
public aircraft parking and storage area: (1) in a careless or negligent
manner; or (2) in disregard of the rights and safety of others; or (3)
without the due caution and circumspection; or (4) at a speed or in a manner
which endangers persons or property; or (5) while the pilot, or other person
aboard, controlling any part of the operation thereof is under the influence
of intoxicating liquor, any narcotic or dangerous drug or controlled
substance; or (6) if such aircraft is so constructed, equipped or loaded as
to unreasonably endanger or to be likely to unreasonably endanger persons or
property. No person shall park an aircraft or leave the same standing on a
public landing area, public aircraft ramp and apron area, public passenger
ramp and apron area, public cargo ramp or operational area, public parking
and storage area, or operational area of any terminal except at such places
as may be prescribed or permitted by the Airport Manager. Upon notification
by the Airport Manager, the operator of any aircraft parked or stored at any
terminal shall move such aircraft from the place where it is parked or stored
to any other designated place. If the operator refuses to comply with such
direction, the Airport Manager may remove or cause to be removed such
aircraft to such designated place at the operator's expense, and without
liability for any damage which may result in the course of such moving.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.022  FUELING OF AIRCRAFT.



   (A)   Aircraft shall not be fueled while the engine is running or in
an enclosed place, except that an Ag spray aircraft, when time is of the
essence, may be fueled and loaded with chemicals with the aircraft engine
idling if the Airport Manager has provided written authority to the Ag
operator, the pilot remains at the controls, the aircraft's wheels are
chocked, there are at least two 20# type B fire extinguishers within 50 feet
of the aircraft being serviced, and a qualified ground crew member is present
during the fueling operation.



   (B)   Prior to making any fueling connection to an aircraft, the
fueling equipment (fuel pump, hydrant servicer, fuel truck) shall be bonded
to the aircraft by use of a cable suitable for that purpose and approved by
the local Fire Marshal. The bond shall be made prior to fueling and
maintained until fueling is completed and fuel connections have been removed.
In addition, when fueling overwing, the fueling nozzle shall be bonded with a
nozzle bond cable having a clip or male plug to a metallic component of the
aircraft that is metallically connected to the aircraft fuel tank filler port
or a female receptacle designed to accommodate the male. If there is no plug
receptacle or means for attaching a clip, the operator shall touch the filler
cap with the nozzle spout before removing the cap so as to equalize the
static electrical potential between the nozzle and filler port. The nozzle
spout shall be kept in contact, it shall be kept in contact with the filler
neck as well as the fuel spout or the fuel supply container to avoid the
possibility of a spark at the fill opening. Only metal funnels shall be used
for fueling. Bonding and fueling connections shall be disconnected in the
reverse order of connections after fueling is completed.



   (C)   Fueling trucks shall not be parked within any building or
hangar or within 50 feet of any building, hangar or parked aircraft, except
when refueling aircraft.



   (D)   Aircraft fuel storage tanks for below-ground or above-ground
use will be constructed and installed, registered as required, monitored for
leakage, operated and maintained in accordance with federal and state
statutes, rules and regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection
Agency and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.



   (E)   Aviation or auto fuels shall not be stored within an aircraft
hangar.



   (F)   Public sale of automobile gas for use in aircraft will not be
permitted on the airport without written approval of the Airport Manager.
Aircraft authorized by the FAA to use auto gas may be privately fueled by the
owner in a location designated by the Airport Manager in accordance with all
the rules appertaining to aircraft fueling and fire safety contained herein.



   (G)   All aircraft fueling, fuel equipment and procedures will be in
accordance with Manual 407 “Aircraft Fueling Servicing, 1990” (or as
revised), published by the National Fire Protection Association.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.023  TIEDOWN OF AIRCRAFT.



   (A)   All aircraft not hangared shall be tied down and the wheels
chocked at night and during inclement weather.



   (B)   All aircraft owners or their agents are responsible for the
tiedown or security of their aircraft at all times and particularly during
inclement weather.



   (C)   Aircraft parked overnight on the transient apron shall pay a
tie down fee as established by City Council.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.024  RUNNING AIRCRAFT ENGINES.



   (A)   Aircraft not equipped with adequate brakes shall not be
started until the wheels have been set with chocks attached to ropes or other
suitable means of removal.



   (B)   No aircraft shall be hand propped, started or left running
without a qualified person at the controls.



   (C)   No aircraft engine shall be started or run inside any building
or hangar.



   (D)   No engine shall be started, run up or warmed up until and
unless the aircraft is in such position that the propeller stream or jet
blast will clear all buildings, other aircraft and groups of people.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.025  DAMAGE TO RUNWAY LIGHTS.



   Any person damaging any runway or taxiway light or fixture by
operations of an aircraft, or otherwise, shall immediately report such damage
to the Airport Manager. Persons causing damage to runway and taxiway lights
as a result of negligent operation of an aircraft or willful acts will be
liable for replacement cost of the light(s) and/or fixture(s) and may be
charged with a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.026  TAXIING AIRCRAFT.



   (A)   No person shall taxi an aircraft until the pilot has
reasonably ascertained there will be no danger of collision with any person
or object in the immediate area.



   (B)   Aircraft will be taxied at a safe and prudent speed and in
such manner as to be under the control of the pilot at all times.



   (C)   Aircraft not equipped with adequate brakes will not be taxied
near buildings or parked aircraft unless an attendant (wing-walker) is at a
wing of the aircraft to assist the pilot.



   (D)   Aircraft shall not taxi onto the runway from the ramp and
taxiway area if there is an aircraft approaching to land or on the ground in
takeoff position. Aircraft waiting on the taxiway for another aircraft to
take off or land will remain behind the runway holding position markings.



   (E)   Aircraft shall not be taxied by engine power into or out of a
hangar or T-hangar.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.027  PARKING AIRCRAFT.



   (A)   Unoccupied aircraft shall not be parked or tied down within
any protected area (object fee area, safety area, etc.) as described in FAA
AC 150/5300-13 and all aircraft not hangared shall be parked in the areas
designated by the Airport Manager for that purpose.



   (B)   Aircraft shall not be parked within 50 feet of an aircraft
fuel pump or fuel service truck parking area, unless aircraft is being
refueled.



   (C)   Aircraft shall not be parked in such a manner as to hinder the
normal movement of other aircraft and traffic unless specifically authorized
by the Airport Manager as an emergency measure.



   (D)   It is the responsibility of the pilot, when leaving a parked
aircraft unattended, to see that the brakes are set and/or it is properly
chocked and/or tied down.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.028  LOADING/UNLOADING AIRCRAFT.



   Pilots are prohibited from loading or unloading aircraft with the
engine running, except as stated in § 153.022(A).



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.029  TAKEOFF AND LANDING RULES.



   (A)   Authority to suspend operations.  The Airport Manager may
suspend or restrict any or all operations whenever such action is deemed
necessary in the interest of safety, provided operations under the instrument
meteorological conditions may be continued by properly instrument-rated
pilots following appropriate flight rules.



   (B)   Active runway.  If winds are calm or at a 90 degree crosswind
to Runway 17/35, the preferred runway is Runway 35.



   (C)   Unicom.  All pilots with radio equipped aircraft shall call
on the local UNICOM frequency 122.7 to determine the active runway and to
announce their position and intentions for takeoff or landing.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.030  EMERGENCY LOCATOR TRANSMITTER (ELT).



   (A)   Immediately after takeoff and after landing prior to engine
shut down, pilots should tune their aircraft radios to the emergency
frequency (121.5 or 243.0) and listen to determine if their aircraft's
emergency locator transmitter (ELT) is broadcasting. If the ELT turned on and
transmitted after a takeoff or landing, as soon as possible after turning it
off, advise the FAA Automated Flight Service Station for the area of
telephone number 1-800-WX-BRIEF, that your ELT accidentally turned on at the
approximate time and coordinates, if known.



   (B)   If a pilot lands their aircraft at the airport, parks and
locks or hangars the aircraft with the ELT transmitting and the Airport
Manager determines such has occurred, the Airport Manager shall take
immediate action to telephone and/or locate the pilot of the aircraft, advise
of the situation, and request that they return to the airport immediately and
turn off the ELT. Should the airport manager be unable to locate the pilot or
if the pilot is unable to return to the airport within a reasonable time to
turn off the ELT, the Airport Manager shall take the necessary action to turn
off the ELT, provided the action does not result in damage to the aircraft.
The aircraft owner shall be responsible for all charges associated with
turning off the ELT.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.031  TAKEOFFS ON APRON OR TAXIWAYS.



   Takeoffs or landings shall not be made on the apron, parking ramp, or
taxiway by fixed- wing, rotary-wing, or ultra light aircraft except by
special permission of the Airport Manager.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.032  TAKEOFFS ALLOWED.



   Touch and go landings may be made at the discretion of the pilot.
Pilots remaining in the pattern making touch and go landings should broadcast
on the UNICOM or the Common Traffic Advisory Frequency (CTAF 122.7) their
pattern turns and their touch and go intentions after turning final. Before
taxiing into takeoff position, all departing aircraft shall broadcast on CATF
122.7 their intentions and visually check for other traffic.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.033  TRAFFIC PATTERN ALTITUDE.



   Traffic pattern elevation at the airport is 1,000 feet above ground
level (AGL), which is 1,400 feet above mean sea level (MSL) elevation.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.034  STUDENT TRAINING AND PRACTICE FLYING.



   (A)   Flight instructors shall inform students and themselves of all
rules and regulations in effect at the airport.



   (B)   By notices posted at the terminal, the Airport Manager may
designate limited areas of the airport and local areas approved by the FAA
for practice flying and training of students.



   (C)   Aircraft shall not be permitted to remain on the landing or
takeoff areas for the purpose of instruction.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.035  SPECIAL PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Airport Manager may, in the interest of safety, designate
special traffic procedures for certain operations, such as helicopters, air
shows, agricultural operations, gliders, ultra lights, etc. The Airport
Manager shall issue a NOTAM if such change warrants.



   (B)   Parachute jumping on the airport property shall not be
permitted without the approval of the Airport Manager.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.036  FLYING MODEL AIRPLANES.



   Engine powered model airplanes, cable or radio controlled, or model
gliders shall not be permitted to operate, takeoff or be launched from, flown
over, flown in the terminal area, or land at the airport without the approval
of the Airport Manager.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.037  FIRE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Every person going upon or using the airport or its facilities
in any manner shall exercise the greatest care and caution to avoid and
prevent fire.



   (B)   Smoking or open flame within 50 feet of any fuel tank, fuel
pump, or fuel truck is prohibited.



   (C)   Compressed flammable gas shall not be kept or stored upon the
airport, except at such place as may be designated by the Airport Manager.



   (D)   No flammable substance shall be used for the cleaning of any
aircraft part or other thing inside a hangar, T-hangar, or other building
upon the airport.



   (E)   No one shall smoke or ignite a match or lighter in any
building or hangar, except in posted “Designated Smoking Areas”
identified by the Airport Manager.



   (F)   Hangar entrances shall be kept clear at all times.



   (G)   The floors in all buildings shall be kept clean and free of
oil. Volatile, flammable substances shall not be used for cleaning floors.



   (H)   No boxes, crates, cans, bottles, paper, tall grass, weeds,
unusable airplane parts or wreckage, scrap wood or metal, discarded airplane
or automobile tires, trash, or other litter shall be permitted to accumulate
in or about a hangar, building, or other leased space. If such trash and
litter is permitted to accumulate around a privately owned, rented, or leased
hangar/building, the Airport Manager shall notify the hangar/building owner,
renter, or lessee by certified mail to remove the offending litter. If within
15 working days after receipt of the letter the hangar/building owner,
renter, or lessee has not removed the trash and litter as directed, the
Airport Manager may have the area cleaned and the cost for such cleaning
shall be charged to the hangar/building owner, renter, or lessee.



   (I)   Prior to the fueling of any aircraft, the aircraft shall be
bonded to the fuel pump or hydrant service/fuel truck to equalize the static
electrical potential between the fueler and the aircraft. Bonding shall be
accomplished in the interest of fire safety as described in § 153.022(A).



   (J)   A sufficient number, rating, and size of fire extinguishers
shall be available whenever aircraft are being refueled.



   (K)   Aircraft fuel service trucks shall have a minimum of two 20#
type B fire extinguishers located at the rear of and on each side of such
truck.



   (L)   Aircraft fuel service trucks shall have an “Emergency
Cut-Off” valve which shall be clearly identified and painted red.



   (M)   All aviation and fuel nozzles shall have “dead man”
controls which will shut off the fuel flow when the nozzle hand control is
released. Nozzles with mechanical hold open devices will not be permitted for
fueling aircraft.



   (N)   The pilot and all passengers will exit the aircraft and the
aircraft will be unoccupied during fueling operations, except as provided in
§ 153.022(A).



   (O)   In all matters related to aircraft fueling safety, the
provisions of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), Manual 407
“Aircraft Fuel Servicing, 1990” (or as resided), available from the
National Fire Protection Association, shall prevail.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



LEASE OF AIRPORT PROPERTY



§ 153.045  LEASE OF AIRPORT PROPERTY.



   The city may lease property within the building area or other portions
of the airport for the storage of aircraft, the construction of hangars,
buildings, aprons, taxiways, and auto parking lots in accordance with an
approved Airport Master Plan/Airport Layout Plan. Aviation related use must
be given priority in the use of all leased or privately owned property,
building, or structures. If the aviation needs of the airport are
sufficiently met, the city may authorize non- aviation use of any portion of
the airport or any building on the airport on a case by case basis.
Application of such non-aviation use shall be made to the City Council.



   (A)   The Mayor, or his designated representative, shall have the
authority to execute all lease agreements.



   (B)   Leases shall contain, among other provisions adopted by City
Council, the following provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   No ground lease for a private hangar shall be written for an
initial period in excess of 20 years. Thereafter, the lease shall be renewed
for a subsequent five year term, upon written notice by the tenant at least
60 days prior to termination of the written lease. At the end of term the
tenant may remove the structure or request subsequent lease terms upon
written notice by the tenant at least 60 days prior to termination of the
lease. The City Council must approve all leases extending beyond a 25 year
term. All lease renewals will require execution of a new lease agreement.



   (D)   The ground lease shall provide an annual payment payable to
the city on or before the tenth day of January each year. If commencement of
lease is not the first day of January, the tenant shall pay a prorata of the
annual lease.



   (E)   T-hangars are leased on a monthly basis, as available. Lease
payments may be made monthly, quarterly, or annually. The T-hangar lease
shall be payable on or before the tenth day of each succeeding month,
quarter, or year. Either party may terminate the lease without cause by
giving at least 30 days written notice.



   (F)   All lease fees shall be subject to approval by the City
Council. Rental adjustments shall be effective on January 1, 2005 and subject
to review and adjustment each January 1 thereafter. Adjustments shall be
based on the Consumer Price Index for the Urban Consumers (CPI-U) for the
closest geographical region to the airport, as compiled by the U.S.
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics and shall be based on the
previous 12 months accumulative index multiplier.



   (G)   The City Council shall adopt certain architectural
requirements that shall become a part of any ground lease agreement.



   (H)   Any leased premises may be used for aviation purposes only.
Tenant shall not use leased premises for the sale of goods and/or services to
the public without prior written consent of the City Council.



   (I)   If the tenant deserts or vacates a private hangar, the city
may enter upon and take possession in order to protect the structure from
deterioration and continue to demand from the tenant rental due, and/or the
city may elect to re-let property.



   (J)   If the tenant's aircraft is not situated in a city owned
T-hangar for 120 consecutive days (except for the time period when the
aircraft is being repaired, altered, or otherwise maintained), the city may
enter upon and take possession in order to protect property from
deterioration and continue to demand from the tenant monthly rental, and/or
the city may elect to re-let property.



   (K)   Leased T-Hangars cannot be sublet, assigned or transferred by
the tenant. Ground leases may be sublet by the tenant only with written
approval of City Council.



   (L)   All construction must be authorized by the City Council and
must comply with any and all city building codes, airport compatible and use
or zoning ordinances, the approved Airport Layout Plan and any architectural
requirements set forth by the City Council.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



FIXED BASE OPERATORS (FBO)



§ 153.060  FIXED BASE OPERATOR.



   A fixed base operator (FBO) is a person, firm, or corporation
performing any of the functions, furnishings, or services listed herein on a
commercial basis. No person, firm or corporation may act in the capacity of
an FBO without a valid contract with the city authorizing such activity at
the airport.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.061  AUTHORIZED SERVICES.



   An FBO is authorized to offer or perform any or all of the following
services or functions to or for the aviation public. The guidelines for each
service or function are as listed.



   (A)   Airframe and power plant repair: sufficient hangar space, FAA
certified mechanic on duty.



   (B)   Aircraft sales and/or rental: sufficient office space,
aircraft display area, telephone, and aircraft inventory.



   (C)   Avionics: shop area, office space with telephone and
restrooms, and trained and certified personnel on duty.



   (D)   Air taxi and charter: FAA Part 135 certification, aircraft
with sufficient hangar, T- hangar, or tie down space, office with telephone,
and aircraft loading and unloading area.



   (E)   Agricultural spraying operation: qualified pilot, aircraft
designed for such purpose, qualified personnel on duty to properly handle
dangerous chemicals, secure area to store chemicals, and properly designed
and constructed wash down pad.



   (F)   Others as agreed upon by contract: other services may be
provided as contracted between the city and FBO.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.062  REQUIREMENTS.



   An FBO is required to perform the following functions or abide by the
following rules:



   (A)   Install, operate, maintain, repair, and store all equipment
necessary for the conduct of the FBO's business subject to approval of the
city.



   (B)   Use, with others so authorized, any common areas or equipment
on the airport including but not limited to the runways, taxiways, public
aircraft and auto parking, aprons, roadways, and navigational aids.



   (C)   Upon termination of the lease, return any leased property to
their city in the same condition as it was at the start of the lease, normal
wear excluded. Any improvements or additions made to real property during the
term of the lease will become the property of the city at the termination of
the lease.



   (D)   Will not prevent any person, company, or employee of a company
from servicing, maintaining, or fueling their own aircraft, which might be
parked or hangared at the airport.



   (E)   Make its business open to all forms and classes of
aeronautical use.



   (F)   Submit to and abide by periodic safety inspections by the
city, the FAA, and/or the Texas Department of Transportation--Aviation
Division.



   (G)   Maintain all leased areas and the interior and exterior of any
leased or constructed buildings to an acceptable standard.



   (H)   Remove and properly dispose of any trash from the leased
property.



   (I)   Notify and gain approval of the city of any intended reduction
of services which are included in the FBO's lease agreement.



   (J)   Furnish all applicable services in a fair, equal, and
nondiscriminatory manner to all airport users.



   (K)   Abide by any and all rules, requirements, or mandates placed
upon the city by the FAA or the State of Texas including, but not limited to,
the Grant Assurances of FAA grants and the Terms and Conditions of State of
Texas Grants.



   (L)   An FBO does not have the right to perform any service or
business on the airport unless such service or business is included in a
current contract and/or lease agreement with the city.



   (M)   An FBO's rights do not supercede the city's rights and
obligations.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.063  CITY’S RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS.



   The city retains the right and/or obligation to do the following:



   (A)   Perform any or all of the functions of an FBO. If so inclined,
the city may retain a proprietary right to offer any or all FBO services
and/or products and allow no FBO to offer the same services or products at
the airport.



   (B)   Enter into contracts with other FBO's to operate similar or
competitive businesses at the airport without regard to the wishes or desires
of existing FBO's. Any new contracts will be written to standards applicable
at that time. If a new contract agreement gives an economic advantage to the
new FBO, the city may renegotiate its contract with the disadvantaged FBO;
however, under no circumstances will the city be held liable or be required
to pay damages for services, equipment, or any other obligations which were
required by past or current contracts.



   (C)   Approve an FBO's placement of buildings, parking areas, and/or
equipment to assure such development is accomplished in an orderly fashion
and does not impede the future development or expansion of the airport as
shown on the approved Airport Master Plan/Airport Layout Plan.



   (D)   Maintain the airport in a safe and serviceable condition.



   (E)   Collect all fees for the use of the airport; these fees
include lease of hangar space, office space, T-hangar space, and aircraft or
auto parking areas. The city may charge these fees as long as such fees are
fair and appropriate and not intended to discriminate for or against any FBO
or airport user or type of user.



   (F)   Increase or decrease the fee or required services of a FBO at
any time the FBO's contract or lease is renegotiated or at any such time as
authorized by the contract and/or lease agreement.



   (G)   Impound any personal property, tools, furniture, aircraft or
equipment located on the leased property and hold or liquidate such until all
fees and taxes due the city are paid subject to a court judgment.



   (H)   Reserve the right to take any actions necessary to protect the
safety and usability of the airport and the approach surfaces to all runway
ends.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.064  PAYMENT AND FEES.



   (A)   Service charge.  An FBO must pay all responsible fees or
charges in a timely manner. The city retains the right to assess a service
charge for any late payments due to the city.



   (B)   Bond.  An FBO must show proof of financial responsibility or
be properly bonded with the city listed as beneficiary in the event the FBO
cannot or will not return the property to an acceptable condition after the
term of the contract and/or lease or if the contract and/or lease is
prematurely terminated.



   (C)   Utilities.  An FBO must arrange for water and waste water,
gas, electricity, telephone and any other utilities it uses on the airport
and pay all responsible charges in a timely manner throughout the term of the
contract and/or lease agreement.



   (D)   Taxes.  An FBO will pay all responsible taxes in a timely
manner.



   (E)   Other bills.  An FBO will pay all responsible bills in a
timely manner.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.065  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Each FBO, or ground lease holder (Corporate Airpark) shall
have in full force and effect one or more of the following types of insurance
during the entire period of tenancy at the airport.



      (1)   General liability insurance.  Each FBO or ground lease
holder (Corporate Airpark) shall be required to have general liability
insurance, in not less than the following amounts:



$300,000 for injuries to or death of any one person.



$500,000 for any one accident or disaster.



$100,000 for damage or destruction to property.



      (2)   Hangar keepers liability insurance.  If an FBO keeps or
stores aircraft or other property owned by a third party on airport property
leased by the FBO, the FBO must maintain not less that $500,000 per
occurrence of hangar keepers insurance, unless similar coverage exists under
the required general liability policy.



      (3)   Automobile liability coverage.  Automobile liability
coverage on all motor vehicles owned and/or operated by an FBO or its
employees on the airport property in amounts of not less than $500,000
combined single limit or equivalent; provided, however, separate automobile
coverage shall not be required if such coverage is provided under the FBO's
general liability policy.



   (B)   Each CFI (Certified Flight Instructor) shall have in full
force and effect the following type of coverage in not less than the
following amount:



      (1)   Flight instruction coverage.  If flight instruction is
offered by an FAA approved CFI (Certified Flight Instructor) at the airport,
the CFI must have instruction and rental liability coverage not less than
$500,000 combined single limit, or equivalent.



      (2) Cancellation; Certificates of Insurance.  The insurance
required shall not be subject to cancellation or material alteration until at
least 30 days written notice has been provided to the city. All FBO's, ground
lease holders (Corporate Airpark), and CFI's (Certified Flight Instructors),
shall furnish to the city, annually, Certificates of Insurance showing the
city as an additional insured and evidencing that all of the herein stated
requirements have been met. Any changes to or waivers of required coverage
must have prior written approval of the city.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.066  SOLICITATION AND CONDUCT.



   (A)   An FBO will not engage in the solicitation of its services on
or about the airport in a loud, offensive, or objectionable manner. In the
event of such questionable conduct, the city will be the sole judge in
determining if said conduct is a violation of the contract and/or lease
agreement and take any and all necessary steps to eliminate the undesirable
condition, up to and including termination of the FBO's contract and/or lease
agreement.



   (B)   An FBO will conduct business on the airport in such a manner
as to maintain a friendly and cooperative, though competitive, relationship
with other operators engaged in similar businesses on the airport. An FBO
will not engage in open public disputes, disagreements, or conflicts which
would tend to deteriorate the quality of service of either party involved or
which would be incompatible with the best interest of the public or the
airport. The city has the right to resolve all such disputes, disagreements,
or conflicts and the city's determination will be binding upon all FBO's
operating at the airport.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.067  USE AND USE CONFLICT.



   Any land, building, paved area, and other infrastructure leased to an
FBO are to be used and occupied solely for the purpose of operating a Fixed
Base Operation and no other. The leased airport property cannot be sublet or
divided, except for parking aircraft in hangars, T-hangars, or tie down
spaces, without the written permission of the city. Should the FBO become
deceased, be adjudged to be incompetent, or his business declared bankrupt or
become insolvent, the leased property and the executed lease contract shall
not be considered as a part of the FBO's estate or an asset of any appointed
or assigned guardian, trustee, or receiver. In such cases, the FBO's lease
will immediately terminate and all rights and property returned to the city.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.068  UNAUTHORIZED USE.



   An FBO may not park vehicles, trailers, motor homes, mobile homes, or
any other vehicle or trailer on airport property without the approval of the
city.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.069  RULES.



   An FBO must abide by all laws, rules, regulations, guidelines, terms,
and conditions of the city, the Texas Department of Agriculture, the
Environmental Protection Agency, the National Fire Protection Association,
the local and State Fire Marshals, the Texas Department of Transportation,
the Federal Aviation Administration, and any other applicable agencies in
regard to the use and storage of pesticides or other dangerous chemicals, the
storage and dispensing of aircraft fuel, the storage, dispensing, and
disposal of engine oil, the maintenance and upkeep of airport facilities, the
operation of the FBO's business, and the general safety and operation of the
airport.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS



§ 153.085  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Mount
Pleasant Municipal Airport Hazard Zoning Ordinance.”



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 9-18-00)



§ 153.086  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY. The appropriate office of a political
subdivision which is responsible for the administration and enforcement of
the zoning regulations prescribed by this subchapter. The office of the City
Manager of Mount Pleasant, Texas is the ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY as set forth in
§ 153.092.



   AIRPORT. The new Mount Pleasant Municipal Airport, FAA Site Number
2437.03A.



   AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD. A board which advises the Administrative Agency
on airport and aeronautical matters.



   AIRPORT ELEVATION. The established elevation of the highest point on
the usable landing area, either existing or planned, measured in feet above
mean sea level (MSL). The AIRPORT ELEVATION of the airport is planned to be
363.4 feet above mean sea level (MSL).



   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure, tree or use of land that obstructs the
airspace required for the flight of aircraft or obstructs or interferes with
the control, tracking and/or data acquisition in the landing, takeoff or
flight of aircraft at the airport or any installation or facility relating to
flight, tracking and/or data acquisition of an aircraft, is hazardous to,
interferes with or obstructs such landing, takeoff or flight of aircraft or
is hazardous to or interferes with tracking and/or data acquisition
pertaining to flight or flight vehicles.



   AIRPORT HAZARD AREA. An area of land or water upon which an airport
hazard might be established if not prevented as provided by this subchapter.



   AIRSPACE DRAWING. The Mount Pleasant Municipal Airport Airspace Drawing
consisting of one sheet, prepared by the Texas Department of Transportation,
Aviation Division, and dated August 16, 2000, which is made a part hereof.



   APPROACH SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway centerline, extending outward and upward from each end of the primary
surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope
set forth in § 153.088.  In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface
coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.



   APPROACH, CONICAL, HORIZONTAL AND TRANSITIONAL ZONES. These zones are
set forth in § 153.087.



   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. A board so designated or appointed by the City
Council of Mount Pleasant, Texas, as provided by Tex. Loc. Gov’t. Code, §
241.032.



   CONICAL SURFACE. A surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 feet horizontally for
each one foot vertically for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.



   HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION. An obstruction or use of land determined to
have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of
navigable airspace.



   HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones
set forth in this subchapter and shown on the Airspace Drawing, the datum
shall be height above mean sea level (MSL) elevation as measured in feet.



   HORIZONTAL SURFACE. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established
airport elevation which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the
horizontal zone.



   LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller driven aircraft greater than 12,500 pounds maximum gross
weight and jet powered aircraft. Runway 17-35 at the airport is considered as
a larger than utility runway.



   MOUNT PLEASANT MUNICIPAL AIRPORT. The new Mount Pleasant Municipal
Airport, Mount Pleasant, Texas, FAA Site Number 24387.03A.



   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE, TREE OR USE. Any pre-existing structure,
object of natural growth or use of land which is inconsistent with the
provisions of this subchapter as of the effective date of this subchapter.



   NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT (NPI) RUNWAY. A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance or area type navigation equipment or a runway for which a
nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.



   OBSTRUCTION. Any structure or tree which exceeds a limiting height set
forth in § 153.088.



   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or body politic and includes a trustee,
receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian or other representative.



   PRIMARY SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When a
runway has an existing or planned specially prepared hard surface, the
primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. The width of
the primary surface will be that width prescribed in the Federal Aviation
Regulations (FAR), Part 77 for the most precise approach, exiting or planned,
for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary
surface is the same as the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width
of the primary surface at the airport is 500 feet.



   RUNWAY. A defined area on an existing or planned airport prepared for
the landing and taking off of aircraft along its length. The zoned length of
Runway 17-35 at the airport is 5,500 feet as shown on the Airspace Drawing.



   STRUCTURE. An object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including but not limited to antennas, buildings, towers,
cranes, smokestacks, earth formations and overhead transmission or power
lines.



   TRANSITIONAL SURFACES. Surfaces extending outward at 90-degree angles
from the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of
seven feet horizontally for each one foot vertically from the sides of the
primary surface and the approach surfaces to where they intersect the
horizontal surface.



   TREE. Any object of natural growth.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 9-18-00)



§ 153.087  ZONES.



   (A)   In order to carry out the provisions of this subchapter, there
are created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying
beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surface and
conical surface as they apply to the airport. Such surfaces are shown on the
Airspace Drawing, which is made a part hereof. An area located in more than
one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more
restrictive height limitation.



   (B)   The various zones are established and defined as follows:



      (1)   Approach zones. Approach zones are established beneath
the approach surfaces of both ends of Runway 17-35 at the airport for a
larger than utility runway with ultimate nonprecision instrument landings and
takeoffs. Each approach zone shall have an inner edge width of 500 feet,
which coincides with the width of the primary surface at a distance of 200
feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width
of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet beyond each end of the
primary surface. The centerline of the approach zones are the continuation of
the centerline of the runway.



      (2)   Conical zone. A conical zone is established beneath the
conical surface at the airport which exceeds outward from the periphery of
the horizontal surface for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.



      (3)   Horizontal zone. A horizontal zone is established
beneath the horizontal surface at the airport which is a plane 150 feet above
the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by
swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary
surface and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.



      (4)   Transitional zones. Transitional zones are established
beneath the transitional surfaces at the airport. Transitional surfaces,
symmetrically located on either side of the runway, have variable widths as
shown on the Airspace Drawing. Transitional surfaces extend outward at right
angles from the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended from the
periphery of the primary surface and the approach surfaces to where they
intersect the horizontal surface.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 9-18-00)



§ 153.088  HEIGHT LIMITATION.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, no structure
shall be erected, altered or maintained and no tree shall be allowed to grow
in any zone created by this subchapter to a height in excess of the
applicable height limit herein established for such zone or as excepted in
division (B)(5) of this section.



   (B)   Such applicable height limitations are established for each of
the zones in question as follows:



      (1)   Approach zones. Slope one foot in height for each 34
feet in horizontal distance beginning at each end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to points 10,000 feet from
each end of the primary surface.



      (2)   Conical zone. Slopes one foot in height for each 20 feet
in horizontal distance beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and
at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet
above the airport elevation or to a height of 713.4 feet above mean sea level.



      (3)   Horizontal zone. Established at 150 feet above the
airport elevation or at a height of 513.4 feet above mean sea level.



      (4)   Transitional zones. Slope one foot in height for each
seven feet in horizontal distance beginning at the sides of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and the approach surfaces and extending to a
height of 150 feet above the airport elevation or to a height of 513.4 feet
above mean sea level.



      (5)   Excepted height limitation. Nothing in this subchapter
shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of
any structure or tree to a height of up to 50 feet above the surface of the
land at its location.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 9-18-00)



§ 153.089  LAND USE RESTRICTIONS.



   No use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this
subchapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communications between the airport and
aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair
visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create potential bird strike
hazards or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing,
taking off or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 9-18-00)



§ 153.090  NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   Regulations not retroactive.  The regulations prescribed by
this subchapter shall not be construed as to require the removal, lowering or
other change or alteration of any nonconforming structure or tree or
otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Except as
provided in the following provision of this section, nothing herein contained
shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of
any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the
effective date of this subchapter and is diligently prosecuted.



   (B)   Lighting, marking and trimming. Notwithstanding the provision
in division (A) of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or
tree is required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance
thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the
administrative agency to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the
vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers
and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the
City of Mount Pleasant, Texas. Should any nonconforming tree grow to a
greater height than it was on the effective date of this subchapter, the
owner of such tree is required to trim or cut such tree to a height equal to
or less than it was as of the effective date of this subchapter. Such
trimming or cutting shall be at the expense of the owner of such tree or, if
deemed appropriate by the administrative agency or the Board of Adjustment,
at the expense of the City of Mount Pleasant, Texas.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 9-18-00)



§ 153.091  PERMITS AND VARIANCES.



   (A)   Future uses.



      (1)   Except as specifically provided hereunder, no new
structure shall be erected or otherwise established and no tree shall be
permitted to grow in any zone created in excess of the excepted height
limitation allowed in § 153.088(E), and no material change shall be made in
the use of land that would create a hazardous condition as described in §
153.089 unless a permit therefore shall have been applied for and granted by
the administrative agency.



      (2)   Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose
for which the permit is desired with sufficient particularity to allow it to
be determined whether the resulting structure, tree or use would conform to
the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the
affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit allowing inconsistency
with the provisions of this subchapter shall be granted unless a variance has
been applied for and granted in accordance with division (D) of this section.



      (3)   In the areas lying with the approach surfaces but at a
horizontal distance of not less than  4,200 feet beyond each end of the
runway or within the limits of the horizontal zone or conical zone, no permit
shall be required for any structure or tree less than 75 feet of vertical
height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour or
topographic features, such structure or tree would extend above the height
limits prescribed for such zones.



      (4)   Nothing contained in the foregoing exception shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit the construction or alteration
of any structure or the growth of any tree in excess of the height limits
established by this subchapter, except as set forth in § 153.088(E).



   (B)   Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow a
nonconforming structure, tree or use to be made or become higher or become a
greater hazard to air navigation that it was on the effective date of this
subchapter.



   (C)   Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the
administrative agency determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has
been removed, torn down or physically deteriorated or decayed, the owner of
such structure or tree must apply for and receive a permit to rebuild or
repair such structure or replace such tree, and the permit shall be granted.
However, no permit shall be granted which would allow such structure or tree
to exceed its original height or otherwise deviate from the zoning
regulations.



   (D)   Variances. Any person desiring to erect, establish or increase
the height of any structure, permit the growth of any tree or use his or her
property in violation of the regulations prescribed in this subchapter must
apply to the Board of Adjustment for a variance from such regulations in
question. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a
determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of
the proposal on the operation of the airport and other air navigation
facilities within the zoned areas and the safe, efficient use of navigable
airspace. Such variances may be allowed where it is duly found that a literal
application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary
hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest
but do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this
subchapter. If an airport advisory board exists for the City of Mount
Pleasant, Texas, no application for variance to the requirements of this
subchapter may be considered by the Board of Adjustment unless a copy of the
application has been furnished to that airport advisory board for advice as
to the aeronautical effects of the requested variance. If an airport advisory
board does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the
Board of Adjustment may act on its own to grant or deny said application.



   (E)   Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance
granted may, if such action is deemed advisable by the administrative agency
or the Board of Adjustment, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the
structure or tree in question to install, operate and maintain such markings
and lights as may be necessary and recommended by the Federal Aviation
Administration. Such marking and lighting shall be installed, operated and
maintained at the expense of the owner of such structure or tree or, if
deemed proper by the Board of Adjustment, this condition may be modified by
the Board of Adjustment to require the city, to install, operate and
maintain, at its own expense, such markings and lights.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 9-18-00)



§ 153.092  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the City Manager, to administer and enforce the
regulations prescribed herein and is designated as the administrative agency.
Applications for permits shall be made to the office of the administrative
agency and shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Applications
for variances shall be reviewed and approved or denied by the Board of
Adjustment by first filing the application for variance with the office of
the administrative agency who shall forthwith transmit the application to the
Board of Adjustment for determination.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 9-18-00)



§ 153.093  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   There is created a Board of Adjustment to have and exercise
the following powers:



      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the administrative agency in the
administration or enforcement of this subchapter;



      (2)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of an
airport zoning regulation when the regulation requires the Board to do so; and



      (3)   To hear and decide specific variances.



   (B)   The Zoning Board of Appeals or Adjustment for the city, is
designated as the Board of Adjustment for this subchapter.



   (C)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance
and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this subchapter. Meetings of
the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at
such times as the Board of Adjustment may determine. The Chairperson, or in
his or her absence the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the Board of Adjustment shall be
public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing
the vote of each member upon each question or, if any member is absent or
fails to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be
filed in the office of the Board of Adjustment or in the office of the City
Secretary. All such records shall be a public record.



   (D)   The Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of fact
and conclusions of law stating the facts upon which it relied when making its
legal conclusions in reversing, affirming or modifying any order, requirement
or decision or any determination or decision pertaining to a request for a
variance from the zoning regulations which comes before it under the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (E)   The concurring vote of four members of the Board of Adjustment
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the administrative agency to decide in favor of the
applicant or any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
subchapter or to effect any variation in this subchapter as provided in the
Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 241.032(d).



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 9-18-00)



§ 153.094  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision
of the administrative agency made in the administration of this subchapter
may appeal to the Board of Adjustment. The same right of appeal is extended
to the governing body of a political subdivision or a joint airport zoning
board, if they are of the opinion that a decision of the administrative
agency is an improper application of these regulations.



   (B)   All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time
as provided by the rules of the Board of Adjustment by filing a notice of
appeal with the administrative agency specifying the grounds for the appeal.
The administrative agency shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment
all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken.



   (C)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed unless the administrative agency certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason
of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of the
administrative agency, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the Board of
Adjustment on notice to the administrative agency and on due cause shown.



   (D)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for
hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest
and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may
appear in person, by agent and/or by attorney.



   (E)   The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, in whole or in
part, or modify the administrative agency’s order, requirement, decision or
determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order,
requirement, decision or determination, and for this purpose the Board of
Adjustment has the same authority as the administrative agency.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 9-18-00)



§ 153.095  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   Any person who is aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of
the Board of Adjustment may appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction as
provided by Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 241.041. This same right of appeal is
extended to the governing body of a political subdivision or a joint airport
zoning board.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 9-18-00)



§ 153.096  REMEDIES.



   The City of Mount Pleasant, Texas may institute in a court of competent
jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation
of this subchapter or of any order or ruling made in connection with its
administration or enforcement, including but not limited to an action for
injunctive relief as provided by Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 241.044.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 9-18-00)



§ 153.097  CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.



   Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or
limitations prescribed in this subchapter and any other regulation applicable
to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of
structures or trees, the use of land or any other matter, the more stringent
limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail as provided by Tex. Loc.
Gov’t Code, § 241.901.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 9-18-00)



§ 153.098  DUTIES OF JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD.



   Upon adoption of this Mount Pleasant Municipal Airport Hazard Zoning
Ordinance, the duties, responsibilities and authority of the Mount
Pleasant-Titus County-Camp County Joint Airport Zoning Board will cease,
except as listed in §§ 153.094 and 153.095. In the event it becomes
necessary to revise the zoning or any other matter requiring actions by a
joint airport zoning board other than as listed in  §§ 153.094 and
153.095, a new joint airport zoning board must be appointed as provided in
Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 241.014.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 9-18-00)



§ 153.998  KNOWLEDGE OF RULES IMPLIED.



   By publication and adoption of Ord. 2003-8 (codified here as §§
153.001, 153.002, 153.005 - 153.017, 153.020 - 153.037, 153.045, 153.060 -
153.069 and 153.998), all persons shall be deemed to have knowledge of its
contents. However, the Airport Manager is directed to have copies of the
ordinance printed and available to the users of the airport. Copies shall be
available at all times in the Airport Manager's office, and copies shall be
furnished to all owners and operators of aircraft based at the airport.



(Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-19-03)



§ 153.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is set forth shall be punished as set forth in § 10.99.



   (B)   Each violation of §§ 153.085et seq. or of any regulation,
order or ruling promulgated thereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00; and
each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 9-18-00)



CHAPTER 154:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   154.01   Title



   154.02   Authority



   154.03   Jurisdiction



   154.04   Plat requirements



   154.05   Policy



   154.06   Purposes



   154.07   Administration



   154.08   Enactment



   154.09   Interpretation, conflict and separability



   154.10   Saving provision



   154.11   Reservations and repeals



   154.12   Amendments



   154.13   Compliance with regulations



   154.14   Variances, exceptions and waiver of conditions



   154.15   Enforcement and violation



   154.16   Definitions



Subdivision Application Procedure and Approval Process



   154.30   General procedure



   154.31   Sketch plan and preliminary conference



   154.32   Classification and approval procedure



   154.33   Preliminary plat



   154.34   Final subdivision plat



   154.35   Vested rights and development agreements



   154.36   Signing and recording of a subdivision plat



   154.37   Replats



   154.38   Administrative subdivision plat approval



   154.39   Vacating plat



Assurance for Construction, Completion and Maintenance of Improvements



   154.50   Purpose



   154.51   Completion of improvements



   154.52   Design of improvements



   154.53   Construction plans



   154.54   Construction of improvements



   154.55   Public utility review



   154.56   Street lights



   154.57   Street signs/traffic signals



   154.58   Approval of improvements



   154.59   Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy



   154.60   Consumer protection legislation and conflicts of interest
statutes



Requirements for Improvements, Reservations and Design



   154.75   General improvements



   154.76   Lot improvements



   154.77   Roads



   154.78   Storm drainage requirements



   154.79   Water facilities



   154.80   Sewerage facilities



   154.81   Utilities



   154.82   Nonresidential subdivision



 



   154.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Preliminary plat endorsements



   Appendix B:   Final plat endorsements - Planning and Zoning and City
Council approval



   Appendix C:   Final plat endorsements for administrative approval



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.01 TITLE.



   These regulations shall officially be known, cited, and referred to as
the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Mount Pleasant, Texas.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.1, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.02  AUTHORITY.



   These regulations are adopted under the authority of the constitution
and laws of the State of Texas, including Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Chapters
42 and 212, as amended.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.2, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.03  JURISDICTION.



   These regulations shall apply to all land and all developments within
the territorial jurisdiction of the City of Mount Pleasant, except as
otherwise specifically provided for in these regulations. The territorial
jurisdiction of the city shall be defined as follows:



   (A)   The area within the corporate limits of the City of Mount
Pleasant;



   (B)   The area outside the corporate limits of the City of Mount
Pleasant and within one mile thereof (also known as the extraterritorial
jurisdiction); and



   (C)   Any other area to which the provisions of this chapter are
made applicable in accordance with and as permitted by state law.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.3, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.04 PLAT REQUIREMENTS.



   See §§ 154.30 through 154.39 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.4, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.05  POLICY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent of a tract of land
located within the corporate limits or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the City of Mount Pleasant to divide the tract into two or more parts
without prior approval of the City of Mount Pleasant Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council to:



      (1)   Lay out a subdivision of the tract, including an
addition to a municipality;



      (2)   Lay out suburban, building, or other lots; or



      (3)   Lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts
of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of
purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys,
squares, parks, or other parts.



   (B)   A division of a tract under this subsection includes a
division regardless of whether it is made by using:



      (1)   A metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance
or in a contract for a deed;



      (2)   A contract of sale or other executory contract to
convey; or



      (3)   Any other method.



   (C)   A division of land under this subsection does not include a
division of land into parts greater than five acres, where each part has
public access and no public improvement is being dedicated.



   (D)   It is declared to be the policy of the municipality to
consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the
subdivided plat in the corporate limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction
as subject to the control of the municipality pursuant to the official
comprehensive plan of the municipality for the orderly, planned, efficient,
and economical development of the municipality.



   (E)   Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can
be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from
fire, flood, or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until adequate
public facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been made
for drainage, water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as schools,
parks, recreational facilities, transportation facilities, and improvements.



   (F)    The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform
to and be properly related to the proposals shown in the comprehensive plan
and the capital budget and program of the municipality, and it is intended
that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the
provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes, zoning
ordinances, the comprehensive plan and land use plan, and the capital budget
and program of the municipality.



   (G)   Land that has been subdivided prior to the effective date of
these regulations should, whenever possible, be brought within the scope of
these regulations to further the purpose of regulations identified in §
154.07.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.5, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.06 PURPOSES.



   These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:



   (A)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the municipality.



   (B)   To guide the future growth and development of the municipality
in accordance with the master plan.



   (C)   To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure
safety from fire, flood, and other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of the
land and undue congestion of population.



   (D)   To protect the character and the social and economic stability
of all parts of the municipality and to encourage the orderly and beneficial
development of the community through appropriate growth management techniques
assuring the timing and sequencing of development, promotion of infill
development in existing neighborhoods and non-residential areas with adequate
public facilities, to assure proper urban form and open space separation of
urban areas, to protect environmentally critical areas and areas premature
for urban development.



   (E)   To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the
municipality and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and
to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.



   (F)   To guide public and private policy and action in order to
provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
parks, playgrounds, recreation, and other public requirements and facilities.



   (G)   To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses
of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the
municipality, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the
streets and highways and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the
various uses of land and buildings, and to provide for the proper location
and width of streets and building lines.



   (H)   To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivisions and resubdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and
use of land, and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of
subdivided land.



   (I)   To ensure that public facilities and services are available
concurrent with development and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the
proposed subdivision and that the community will be required to bear no more
than its fair share of the cost of providing the facilities and services
through requiring the developer to pay fees, furnish land, or establish
mitigation measures to ensure that the development provides its fair share of
capital facilities needs generated by the development.



   (J)   To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure
the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table, and to
encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the
municipality in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the
community and the value of the land.



   (K)   To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the
municipality and to ensure appropriate development with regard to these
natural features.



   (L)   To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design
and layout of the land, including the use of average density in providing for
minimum width, depth and area of lots, while preserving the density of
development as established in the zoning ordinance of the municipality.



   (M)   To ensure that land is subdivided only when subdivision is
necessary to provide for uses of land for which market demand exists and
which are in the public interest.



   (N)   To remedy the problems associated with inappropriately
subdivided lands, including premature subdivision, excess subdivision,
partial or incomplete subdivision, scattered and low-grade subdivision.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.6, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.07 ADMINISTRATION.



   The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Mount Pleasant is
vested with the authority to review and recommend approval or disapproval of
applications for the subdivision of land, including preliminary and final
plats. The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant variances from these
regulations pursuant to the provisions of § 154.14. Final approval or
disapproval of applications for the subdivision of land, including
preliminary and final plats, will be made by the City Council, except for
those plats that may be approved administratively. See § 154.38
Administrative Subdivision Plat Approval of this chapter.



   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to
review and recommend to the City Council to approve or disapprove
subdivisions.



      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act on a plat
within 30 days after the date the plat is filed. A filed plat is considered
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission unless it is disapproved
within that period.



      (2)   The City Council shall act on a plat within 30 days
after the date the plat is approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or
it is considered approved by the inaction of the City Council. A plat is
considered approved by the City Council unless it is disapproved within that
period.



      (3)   If a plat is approved by the City Council, the plat must
be certified and signed by the authority's presiding officer and attested by
the authority's secretary.



   (B)   No land shall be subdivided or developed until each of the
following conditions has occurred in accordance with these regulations:



      (1)   The subdivider or his agent has submitted a conforming
sketch plat of the subdivision to the Planning Department.



      (2)   The subdivider or his agent has obtained approval of the
sketch plat, a preliminary plat when required, and a final plat from the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.



      (3)   The City Planner or his agent files the approved plats
with the Clerk and Recorder for Titus County at the expense of the subdivider.



      (4)   No building, mechanical, plumbing, or electrical permit
shall be issued by the city for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for
which final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor any
structure on a lot within a subdivision in which the standards contained
herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full.



      (5)   No construction of any public or private improvements
shall take place or be commenced until the Planning and Zoning Commission and
the City Council have approved a preliminary plat.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.7, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.08 ENACTMENT.



   In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with these purposes
and policies, these subdivision regulations are hereby adopted and made
effective as of September 20, 2005 (effective date). All applications for
subdivision approval, including final plats, pending on the effective date of
these regulations shall be reviewed under these regulations except that these
regulations will not apply if preliminary plat approval was obtained prior to
the effective date of these regulations and the subdivider has constructed
subdivision improvements prior to submission of the final plat as required by
the municipality unless the Planning and Zoning Commission determines on the
record that application of these regulations is necessary to avoid a
substantial risk of injury to public health, safety, and general welfare.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.8, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.09 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT, AND SEPARABILITY.



   (A)   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. These
regulations shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes for which they
are adopted.



      (1)   Public provisions. These regulations are not intended to
interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
statute, or other provision of law except as provided in these regulations.
Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from
those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the provision which
is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control.



      (2)   Private provisions. The regulations are not intended to
abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or
restriction, provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations that such easement,
covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of
these regulations shall govern. Where the provisions of the easement,
covenant, or private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations
more restrictive or standards that are higher than the requirements of these
regulations, or the determinations of the Planning and Zoning Commission or
the City Council in approving a subdivision or in enforcing these
regulations, and the private provisions are not inconsistent with these
regulations or the determinations made under these regulations, then the
private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to these regulations
and the determinations made under the regulations.



   (B)   Separability. If any part or provision of these regulations or
the application of these regulations to any person or circumstances is
adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the judgment shall
be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application directly
involved in the controversy in which the judgment shall be rendered and it
shall not affect or impair the validity or the remainder of these regulations
or the application of them to other persons or circumstances. The City
Council hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these
regulations even without any such part, provision, or application which is
judged to be invalid.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.9, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.10 SAVING PROVISION.



   These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now
pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as
discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, corporation, or
as waiving any right of the municipality under any section or provision
existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or
annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation by lawful
action of the municipality except as shall be expressly provided for in these
regulations.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.10, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.11  RESERVATIONS AND REPEALS.



   Upon the adoption of these regulations according to law, the
Subdivision Regulations of the City of Mount Pleasant adopted April 16, 1985
(date of enactment), as amended, are hereby repealed, except as to those
sections expressly retained in these regulations.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.11, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.12 AMENDMENTS.



   For the purpose of protecting public health, safety, and general
welfare, the Planning and Zoning Commission may from time to time propose
amendments to these regulations which shall then be approved or disapproved
by the City Council at a public meeting following public notice.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.12, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.13 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.



   Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated
by the state. The developer has the duty of compliance with reasonable
conditions laid down by the City of Mount Pleasant for design, dedication,
improvement, and restrictive use of the land to conform to the physical and
economic development of the municipality and to the health, safety, and
general welfare of the future lot owners in the subdivision and of the
community at large.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.13, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.14 VARIANCES, EXCEPTIONS, AND WAIVER OF CONDITIONS.



   (A)   General.  Where the City Council finds that extraordinary
hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with
these regulations and/or the purposes of these regulations may be served to a
greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve variances,
exceptions, and waiver of conditions to these subdivision regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided
that the variance, exception, or waiver conditions shall not have the effect
of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and further
provided the City Council shall not approve variances, exceptions, and waiver
of conditions unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented
to it in each specific case that:



      (1)   The granting of the variance, exception, or waiver of
conditions will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare
or injurious to other property;



      (2)   The conditions upon which the request is based are
unique to the property for which the relief is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property;



      (3)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape,
or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere
inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations is carried out;



      (4)   The relief sought will not in any manner vary the
provisions of the zoning ordinance or the master plan, except that those
documents may be amended in the manner prescribed by law.



   (B)   Procedures. A petition for a variance, exception, or waiver of
conditions shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time when
the preliminary plat is filed for the consideration of the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the
application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.14, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.15 ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Planning Department to
enforce these requirements.



      (2)   No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of the
land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any part of the
parcel before a final plat of the subdivision has been approved by the City
Council in accordance with the provisions of the regulations and filed with
the Clerk and Recorder of Titus County.



      (3)   The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the
use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of development is
prohibited except as provided by state law.



      (4)   No building permit shall be issued for the construction
of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in
violation of the provisions of these regulations, nor shall the municipality
have any obligation to issue certificates of occupancy or to extend utility
services to any parcel created in violation of these regulations.



   (B)   Civil enforcement. Appropriate actions and proceeding may be
taken in law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to
prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or
abate a violation and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building structure or
premises. These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described in
§ 154.99.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.15, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.16 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations,
terms, and words shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in the
following. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used
in the present tense include the future tense and words used in the plural
include the singular.



   ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES. Facilities determined to be capable of
supporting and servicing the physical area and designated intensity of the
proposed subdivision as determined by the Governing Body based upon specific
levels of service.



   ALLEY.  A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve
as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on some other street.



   APPLICANT. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or its
representative who shall have express written authority to act on behalf of
the owner. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises.



   AREA OF BENEFIT. An area of land which is designated by the Planning
and Zoning Commission as receiving benefits from or creating the need for the
construction, acquisition, or improvement of a “Public Facilities
Project.“



   AREA-RELATED FACILITY. A capital improvement which is designated in the
capital improvements program as serving new development and which is not a
site-related facility. Area-related facility may include land dedication or
construction of an oversized capital improvement, whether located offsite, or
within or on the perimeter of the development site.



   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of
waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities.



   BOND. Any form of a surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to
the Governing Body. All bonds shall be approved by the Governing Body
whenever a bond is required by these regulations.



   BUFFER. See External Buffer.



   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind. Building
includes the word "structure".



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. A public facility with a life expectancy of three
or more years, to be owned and operated by or on behalf of the local
government.



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM. A plan setting forth, by category public
facilities, those capital improvements and that portion of their costs which
are attributable to serving new development within designated service areas
for such public facilities over a period of specified years (10-20).



   CENTRAL SEWERAGE SYSTEM. A community sewer system including collection
and treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a new
subdivision in an outlying area.



   CERTIFY. Whenever these regulations require that an agency or official
certify the existence of some fact or circumstance, the municipality by
administrative rule may require that such certification be made in any
manner, oral or written, which provides reasonable assurance of accuracy of
the certification.



   CITY. Refers to the City of Mount Pleasant, Texas.



   CITY PLANNER. The officer who administers these regulations and assists
administratively other boards and commissions such as the Planning and Zoning
Commission.



   CLUSTER ZONING. A technique which allows lots to be reduced in size and
buildings sited closer together provided the total development density does
not exceed that which could be constructed on the site under conventional
zoning and the remaining land is utilized for open space or public purposes.



   COLLECTOR ROADS. A road intended to move traffic from local roads to
secondary arterials. A collector road serves a neighborhood or large
subdivision and should be designed so that no residential properties face
onto it.



   COMMON OWNERSHIP. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm,
entity, partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by different
corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations,
in which a stockbroker, partner, or associate, or a member of his family owns
an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or unincorporated
association.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A comprehensive plan for development of the local
government prepared and adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the
City Council, pursuant to state law, and including any part of such plan
separately adopted and any amendment to such plan, or parts thereof.



   CONCURRENCY. Requirement that development applications demonstrate that
adequate public facilities be available at prescribed levels of service
concurrent with the impact or occupancy of development units.



   CONDOMINIUM. A unit available for sale in fee simple contained in a
multi-occupancy project subject to covenants and restrictions placing control
over the common facilities in an elected board.



   CONSTRUCTION PLAN. The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat
and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed
in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the local
government as a condition of the approval of the plat.



   CONTIGUOUS. Lots are contiguous when at least one boundary line of one
lot touches a boundary line or lines of another lot.



   CORPORATE LIMITS. The limits of the area occupied by a city or town.



   COUNTY. Refers to Titus County, Texas.



   CUL-DE-SAC. A street having but one outlet to another street, and
terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turn around. The turn around
shall have a minimum right-of-way radius of 45 feet and a minimum paved
surface radius of 40 feet, measured from back of curb to back of curb, unless
an equally safe and convenient form of paved space is approved by the City
Council.



   DESIGN CRITERIA. Standards that set forth specific improvement
requirements.



   DEVELOPER. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or its
representative who is responsible for any undertaking that requires review
and/or approval under these regulations. See “Subdivider.”



   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. Agreement between the Governing Body and
developer through which the Governing Body agrees to vest development use or
intensity or refrain from interfering with subsequent phases of development
through new legislation in exchange for the provision of public facilities or
amenities by the developer in excess of those required under current
community regulations.



   EASEMENT. Authorization by a property owner for another to use the
owner's property for a specified purpose.



   ESCROW. A deposit of cash with the local government or escrow agent to
secure the promise to perform some act.



   EXACTIONS. Requirement of development to dedicate or pay for all or a
portion of land or costs of public facilities as a condition of development
approval.



   EXPENDITURE. A sum of money paid out in return for some benefit or to
fulfill some obligation. The term includes binding contractual commitments
whether by development agreement or otherwise to make future expenditures as
well as any other substantial change in position.



 



   EXTERNAL BUFFER. A naturally vegetated area or vegetated area along the
exterior boundaries of an entire development processed in accordance with a
multiphase or phased subdivision application which is landscaped and
maintained as open space in order to eliminate or minimize conflicts between
such development and adjacent land uses.



   EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION. The land area provided in Tex. Local
Gov’t Code,  Chapter 42, and consisting of, "all the contiguous
unincorporated area, not a part of any other city, within one mile of the
"corporate limits" of the City of Mount Pleasant.



   FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT. The map of a subdivision to be recorded after
approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council and any
accompanying material as described in these regulations.



   FRONTAGE. That side of a lot abutting on a street or way and ordinarily
regarded as the front of the lot; but it shall not be considered as the
ordinary side of a corner lot.



   FRONTAGESTREET. Any street to be constructed by the developer or any
existing street where development shall take place on both sides.



   GOVERNINGBODY. The City of Mount Pleasant is the body of the local
government having the power to adopt ordinances.



   GRADE. The slope of a road, street, or other public way specified in
percentage terms.



   HEALTH, SAFETY, OR GENERAL WELFARE. The purpose for which
municipalities may adopt and enforce land use regulations for the prevention
of harm or promotion of public benefit to the community; commonly referred to
as police power.



   HIGHDENSITY. Those residential zoning districts in which the density is
equal to or greater than one dwelling unit per 7,000 square feet.



   HIGHWAY, LIMITEDACCESS. A freeway or expressway providing a trafficway
for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting
property on lands and other persons have no legal right to access to or from
the same, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by
the public authority having jurisdiction over the traffic way.



   HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION. See Property Owners Association.



   HOUSEHOLD. Any person or persons who reside or intend to reside in the
same housing unit.



   HOUSING UNIT OR UNIT. A building or portion of a building which is
designed for or used for residential purposes.



   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A septic tank, seepage tile sewage
disposal system, or any other approved sewage treatment device.



   INFILL DEVELOPMENT. Development designed to occupy scattered or vacant
parcels of land which remain after the majority of development has occurred
in an area.



   LANDSCAPING. Acting with the purpose of meeting specific criteria
regarding uses of outside space, including ground cover, buffers, and shade
trees.



   LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The municipality of the City of Mount Pleasant, Texas.



   LOCAL GOVERNMENT ATTORNEY. The licensed attorney designated by the
Governing Body to furnish legal assistance for the administration of these
regulations.



   LOCAL GOVERNMENT ENGINEER. The licensed engineer who furnishes
engineering assistance for the administration of these regulations.



   LOCAL ROAD. A road whose sole function is to provide access to abutting
properties and to other roads from individual properties and to provide
right-of-way beneath it for sewer, water, and storm drainage pipes.



   LOT. A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer
of ownership, or possession, or for building development.



   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the
interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.



   LOT IMPROVEMENT. Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other
object situated on a lot.



   LOW DENSITY. Those residential zoning districts in which the density is
equal to or less than one dwelling unit per 10,000 square feet.



   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions, including but not limited to subdivisions of five or more lots,
or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the local
government facilities or the creation of any public improvements.



   MASTER PRELIMINARY PLAT. That portion of a preliminary plat submitted
in connection with a multiphase or phased subdivision application which
provides the information and graphics meeting the requirements of this
chapter for the purpose of implementing an integrated development scheme for
all phases of the proposed subdivision.



   METES AND BOUNDS. The boundary lines of land, with their terminal
points and angles. A way of describing land by listing the compass directions
and distances of the boundaries.



   MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision containing not more than four lots
fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road, or the
extension of municipal facilities or the creation of any public improvements,
and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining
property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Master
Plan, Zoning Ordinance, or these regulations.



   MODEL HOME. A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which
typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision and
which will not be permanently occupied during its use as a model.



   MONEY IN LIEU OF LAND. Payment of money into a municipally earmarked
fund to provide for acquisition of facilities off-site in place of dedicating
land or providing such facility on site.



   MUNICIPALITY. See Local Government.



   NEIGHBORHOOD PARK AND RECREATION IMPROVEMENT FUND. A special fund
established by the Governing Body to retain monies contributed by developers
in accordance with the "money in lieu of land" provisions of these
regulations.



   NEW DEVELOPMENT. A project involving the construction, reconstruction,
redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement
of any structure; or any use or extension of land; any of which has the
effect of increasing the requirements for capital improvements, measured by
number of service units to be generated by such activity, and which requires
either the approval of a plat pursuant to the City's subdivision regulations,
the issuance of a building permit, or connection to the City's water or
sanitary sewer system.



   NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. A subdivision whose intended use is other
than residential, such as commercial or industrial.



   NOTICE OF NONCOMPLIANCE. A notice issued by the City Planner informing
the applicant for approval of a major subdivision that the sketch plat is not
in compliance with these regulations and that the applicant may not apply for
preliminary plat approval.



   NOTICE TO PROCEED. A notice issued by the City Planner informing the
applicant for approval of a major subdivision that the sketch plat is in
compliance with these regulations and that the applicant may proceed to apply
for preliminary plat approval.



   OFF-SITE. Any premises not located within the area of the property to
be subdivided, whether or not in the common ownership of the applicant for
subdivision approval.



   OFFICE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. Any new construction, addition, extension,
conversion, or enlargement, or combination thereof, of an existing structure
which includes any gross square feet of office space.



   OFFICIAL MASTER PLAN. See Master Plan.



   ORDINANCE. Any legislative action, however denominated, of a local
government which has the force of law, including any amendment or repeal of
any ordinance.



   OWNED UNIT. A designated unit which is a condominium, stock
cooperative, or community apartment.



   OWNER. The record owners of the fee or a vendee in possession,
including any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient
proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under the definition
of Same Ownership.



   PERFORMANCE CRITERIA. Regulation of development based on open space
ratio, impervious surface ratio, density, and floor area ratio.



   PERIMETER STREET. Any existing street to which the parcel of land to be
subdivided abuts on only one side.



   PERSON. Any individual or group of individuals, or any corporation,
general or limited partnership, joint venture, unincorporated association, or
governmental or quasi-governmental entity.



   PHASED SUBDIVISION APPLICATION. An application for subdivision approval
submitted pursuant to a Master Preliminary Plat, or at the option of the
subdivider, pursuant to a specific plan in which the applicant proposes to
immediately subdivide the property but will develop in one or more individual
phase(s) over a period of time.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A development constructed on a tract of
minimum size under single ownership planned and developed as an integral unit
and consisting of a combination of residential and/ or nonresidential uses on
the land.



   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The local government's Planning
Commission established in accordance with law.



   PLAT. A plat is a survey, prepared by a licensed registered surveyor,
of property showing the dimensions and location of lot lines, streets, and
easements. A plat also establishes the lot, block, and subdivision name used
in real estate transactions. A plat is a legal document complete with a
drawing of the property boundaries, a written description of those boundaries
(metes and bounds), a dedication statement, an owner's certification
statement, a title block and approval statements.



   POLICE POWER. Inherent, delegated, or authorized legislative power for
purposes of regulation to secure health, safety, and general welfare.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in
these regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the
subdivision to be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the
City Council for approval.



   PRIMARY ARTERIAL. A road intended to move through traffic to and from
major attractors such as central business districts, regional shopping
centers, colleges and/ or universities, military installations, major
industrial areas, and similar traffic generators within the governmental
unit; and/ or as a route for traffic between communities or large areas and/
or which carries high volumes of traffic.



   PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION. An association or organization, whether or
not incorporated, which operates under and pursuant to recorded covenants or
deed restrictions, through which each owner of a portion of a subdivision-be
it a lot, parcel site, unit plot, condominium, or any other interest-is
automatically a member as a condition of ownership and each such member is
subject to a charge or assessment for a pro-rated share of expense of the
association which may become a lien against the lot, parcel, unit,
condominium, or other interest of the member.



   PUBLIC FACILITIES PROJECT. Any and all public improvements the need for
which is directly or indirectly generated by development, including but not
limited to the following:



      (1)   Water mains, pipes, conduits, tunnels, hydrants, and
other necessary works and appliances for providing water service.



      (2)   Lines, conduits, and other necessary works and
appliances for providing electric power service.



      (3)   Mains, pipes, and other necessary works and appliances
for providing gas service.



      (4)   Poles, posts, wires, pipes, conduits, lamps, and other
necessary works and appliances for lighting purposes.



      (5)   Sidewalks, crosswalks, steps, safety zones, platforms,
seats, statuary, fountains, culverts, bridges, curbs, gutters, tunnels,
subways or viaducts, parks and parkways, recreation areas, including all
structures, buildings, and other facilities necessary to make parks and
parkways and recreation areas useful for the purposes for which intended.



      (6)   Sanitary sewers or instrumentalities of sanitation,
together with the necessary outlets, cesspools, manholes, catch basins, flush
tanks, septic tanks, disposal plants, connecting sewers, ditches, drains,
conduits, tunnels, channels, or other appurtenances.



      (7)   Drains, tunnels, sewers, conduits, culverts and channels
for drainage purposes; with necessary outlets, cesspools, manholes, catch
basins, flush tanks, septic tanks, disposal plants, connecting sewers,
ditches, drains, conduits, channels, and appurtenances.



      (8)   Pipes, hydrants, and appliances for fire protection.



      (9)   Retaining walls, embankments, buildings, and any other
structures or facilities necessary or suitable in connection with any of the
work mentioned in this section.



      (10)   Compaction of land, change of grade or contours,
construction of caissons, retaining walls, drains, and other structures
suitable for the purpose of stabilizing land.



      (11)   Works, systems, or facilities for the transportation of
people, including rolling stock and other equipment appurtenant thereto.



      (12)   All other work auxiliary to that described in the
definition of “Capital Improvements Program” above in this section, which
may be required to carry out that work, including terminal and intermediate
stations, structures, platforms, or other facilities which may be necessary
for the loading of people into and unloading of people from such
transportation facilities.



      (13)   The grading or regrading, the paving or repaving, the
planking or replanking, the macadamizing or remacadamizing, the graveling or
regraveling, and the oiling or reoiling of streets.



      (14)   Acquisition, construction, improvement, and equipping
of temporary and permanent school buildings.



      (15)   Acquisition, construction, improvement, and equipping
of fire stations.



      (16)   Acquisition, construction, improvement, and equipping
of police stations.



      (17)   Acquisition, construction, and installation of traffic
signs, signals, lights, and lighting.



      (18)   Public works maintenance facilities.



      (19)   All other work auxiliary to any of the above which may
be required to carry out that work including, but not limited to, the
maintenance of Public Facilities Projects and administrative, engineering,
architectural, and legal work performed in connection with establishing,
implementing, and monitoring Public Facilities Projects.



      (20)   Acquisition of any and all property, easements, and
rights-of-way which may be required to carry out the purposes of the project.



   PUBLIC HEARING. An adjudicatory proceeding held by the Planning and
Zoning Commission preceded by published notice and actual notice to certain
persons and at which certain persons, including the applicant, may present
their concerns to the Planning and Zoning Commission.



   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk,
pedestrianway, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other
facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may effect an
improvement for which local government responsibility is established.



   PUBLIC MEETING. A meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission or
Governing Body preceded by notice, open to the public and at which the public
may, at the discretion of the body holding the public meeting, be heard.



   RECOUPMENT. The imposition of an impact fee to reimburse the local
government for capital improvements previously oversized to serve new
development.



   REGISTERED ENGINEER. An engineer properly licensed and registered in
the State of Texas.



   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor properly licensed and
registered in the State of Texas.



   RENTAL UNIT. A designated unit which is not a condominium, stock
cooperative, or community apartment.



   REPLAT. Any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat
that affects any street layout on the map or area reserved thereon for public
use or any lot line, or that affects any map or plan legally recorded prior
to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be a street,
crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline,
water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for any other
special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for platting purposes shall
mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat
is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such
right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or
parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm drains, shade trees, or any other use involving
maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker
of the plat on which such right-of-way is established.



   ROAD, CLASSIFICATION. For the purpose of providing for the development
of the streets, highways, roads and rights-of-way in the governmental unit,
and for their future improvement, reconstruction, realignment, and necessary
widening, including provision for curbs and sidewalks, each existing street,
highway, road, and right-of-way, and those located on approved and filed
plats, have been designated on the Master Street Plan of the local
government, classified therein. The classification of each street, highway,
road, and right-of-way is based upon its location in the respective zoning
districts of the local government and its present and estimated future
traffic volume and its relative importance and function as specified in the
Master Plan of the local government. The required improvements shall be
measured as set forth for each street classification.



   ROAD, DEAD-END. A road or a portion of a road with only one
vehicular-traffic outlet.



   ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH. The distance between property lines measured
at right angles to the center line of the street.



   SALE OR LEASE. Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or any
possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise,
intestate succession, or other transfer of an in interest in a subdivision or
part thereof, whether by metes and bounds or lot and block description.



   SCREENING. Either a strip at least ten feet wide of densely planted (or
having equivalent natural growth) shrubs or trees at least four feet high at
the time of planting, of a type that will form a year-round dense screen at
least six feet high; or an opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence
at least six feet high.



   SECONDARY ARTERIAL. A road intended to collect and distribute traffic
in a manner similar to primary arterials, except that these roads service
minor traffic-generating areas such as community commercial areas, primary
and secondary educational facilities, hospitals, major recreational areas,
churches, and offices and are designed to carry traffic from collector
streets to the system of primary arterials.



   SECURITY. The letter of credit or cash escrow provided by the applicant
to secure its promises in the subdivision improvement agreement.



   SETBACK. The distance between a building and the property line nearest
to the building. In cases where the property line is in the center of the
street, then the distance shall be measured from the edge of pavement or back
of curb.



   SHADE TREE. A tree in a public place, street, special easement, or
right-of-way adjoining a street as provided in these regulations.



   SITE-RELATED FACILITY. An improvement or facility which is for the
primary use or benefit of a new development and for which the developer or
property owner is solely responsible under subdivision or other applicable
regulations.



   SKETCH PLAN. A sketch preparatory to the preliminary plat (or final
plat in the case of minor subdivisions) to enable the subdivider to save time
and expense in reaching general agreement with the Planning and Zoning
Commission as to the form of the plat and the objectives of these regulations.



   STREET. See “Road.”



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected.



   SUBDIVIDE. The act or process of creating a subdivision.



   SUBDIVIDER. Any person who:



      (1)   Having an interest in land, causes it, directly or
indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision or who



      (2)   Directly or indirectly, sells, leases, or develops, or
offers to sell, lease, or develop, or advertises to sell, lease, or develop,
any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision, or, who



      (3)   Engages directly or through an agent in the business of
selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or development a
subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a
subdivision, and who



      (4)   Is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct
or indirect common control with any of the foregoing.



   SUBDIVISION.Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed
to be divided into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots,
condominiums, tracts, or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease, or
development whether immediate or future, either on the installment plan or
upon any and all other plans, terms, and conditions. Subdivision includes the
division or development of residentially and nonresidentially zoned land,
whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map,
plat, or other recorded instrument. Subdivision includes replat. A division
of land into parts great than five acres where each part has access and no
public improvement is being dedicated shall not constitute a subdivision.



   SUBDIVISION AGENT. Any person who represents, or acts for or on behalf
of, a subdivider or developer, in selling, leasing, or developing, or
offering to sell, lease, or develop any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site, or
plat in a subdivision, except an attorney-at-law whose representation of
another person consists solely of rendering legal services.



   SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT. A contract entered into by the
applicant and the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council on
behalf of the municipality by which the applicant promises to complete the
required public improvements within the subdivision within a specified time
period following final subdivision plat approval.



   SUBDIVISION, MAJOR. See “Major Subdivision.”



   SUBDIVISION, MINOR.See “Minor Subdivision.”



   SUBDIVISION PLAT. The final map or drawing, described in these
regulations, on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to
the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council for approval and
which, if approved, may be submitted to the County Clerk for filing.



   TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT. Improvements built and maintained by a
subdivider during construction of the subdivision and prior to release of the
performance bond.



   TRACT. A lot. The term "tract" is used interchangeably with the term
"lot," particularly in the context or subdivision, where a "tract" is
subdivided into several lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, condominiums,
tracts, or interests.



   VESTED RIGHTS. Right to initiate or continue the establishment of a use
which will be contrary to a restriction or regulation coming into effect when
the project associated with the use is completed.



   ZONING INSPECTOR. The person designated by the local government to
enforce the Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. 2005-6, Art. 2, passed 9-20-05)



SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS



§ 154.30 GENERAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Classification of subdivisions. Before any land within the
corporate city limits or the area outside the corporate city limits and
within one mile thereof is subdivided, the owner of the property proposed to
be subdivided, or his authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval
of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedures,
which include two principal steps for a minor subdivision and four principal
steps for a major subdivision:



      (1)   Minor subdivision.



         (a)   Sketch plan.



         (b)   Final subdivision plat.



      (2)   Major subdivision.



         (a)   Sketch plan.



         (b)   Preliminary plat.



         (c)   Construction of improvements (See §§ 154.50
through 154.60).



         (d)   Final subdivision plat.



   (B)   Official submission dates. For the purpose of these
regulations, for both major and minor subdivisions, the date on which the
application is first filed shall constitute the official submission date for
the plat, after which the statutory period required for approval or
disapproval of the plat shall commence to run. The Planning Department shall
publish at least 30 days prior to the beginning of each year a calendar of
official submittal dates. This calendar shall specify a submittal date for
each month. All applications delivered to the city on a date other than a
scheduled date shall be dated received on the next official submittal date.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 3.1, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.31 SKETCH PLAN AND PRELIMINARY CONFERENCE.



   (A)   Prior to the official filing of a preliminary plat, the
applicant shall obtain a copy of the Subdivision Regulations of the City of
Mount Pleasant.



   (B)   The applicant shall present a sketch plan of the proposed
subdivision to the City Planner.



      (1)   The sketch plan shall include the following:



         (a)   Name.



            1.   Name of subdivision if property is within an
existing subdivision.



            2.   Proposed name if not within a previously
platted subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any
plat previously recorded.



            3.   Name of property if no subdivision name has
been chosen. (This is commonly the name by which the property is locally
known.)



         (b)   Ownership.



            1.   Name and address, including telephone number,
of legal owner or agent of property, and citation of last instrument
conveying title to each parcel of property involved in the proposed
subdivision, giving grantor, grantee, date, and land records reference.



            2.   Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way
or easements affecting the property.



            3.   Existing covenants on the property, if any.



            4.   Name and address, including telephone number,
of the professional person(s) responsible for subdivision design, for the
design of public improvements, and for surveys.



         (c)   Description. Location of property by government
lot, section, township, range and county, graphic scale, north arrow, and
date.



            1.   A copy of a plat of the property from the
Titus County Appraisal District.



            2.   A vicinity map showing streets and other
general development of the surrounding area.



            3.   Location of property lines, existing
easements, burial grounds, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, and existing
wooded areas or trees eight inches or more in diameter, measured four feet
above ground level; location, width, and names of all existing or platted
streets or other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the tract;
names of adjoining property owners from the latest assessment rolls within
500 feet of any perimeter boundary of the subdivision.



            4.   Location and sizes of existing sewers, water
mains, culverts, and other underground structures within the tract and
immediately adjacent thereto; existing permanent building and utility poles
on or immediately adjacent to the site and utility rights-of-way.



            5.   Approximate topography.



            6.   The approximate location and widths of
proposed streets.



            7.   Preliminary proposals for connection with
existing water supply and sanitary sewage systems, or alternative means of
providing water supply and sanitary waste treatment and disposal; preliminary
provisions for collecting and discharging surface water drainage.



            8.   The approximate location, dimensions, and
areas of all proposed or existing lots.



            9.   The approximate location, dimensions, and
areas of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside for park or playground
use or other public use, or for the use of property owners in the proposed
subdivision.



            10.   The location of temporary stakes to enable
city staff to find and appraise features of the sketch plat in the field.



      (2)   The applicant shall then schedule an appointment and
meet with the City Planner to discuss the general procedure for approval of a
subdivision plat.



      (3)   The City Planner shall then coordinate a preliminary
conference with the applicant and the appropriate members of the city staff
and outside agencies who must eventually approve those aspects of the
proposed subdivision plat coming within their jurisdiction to discuss the
proposed subdivision. The conference shall be held for general comments and
clarifications regarding requirements to the general layout of streets and
for reservations of land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire
protection, and similar matters, as well as the availability of existing
services. No approvals, either tentative or final, will be given on the
sketch plan. The sketch plan is an economy measure to facilitate the
inclusion of requirements and suggestions, prior to going to the expense of
designing and drafting the preliminary plat.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 3.2, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.32 CLASSIFICATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE.



   The City Planner shall determine whether the sketch plan constitutes a
minor or major subdivision and shall notify the applicant of the
classification within 20 days from the date that the sketch plan is submitted
to the City Planner.



   (A)   Minor subdivision. If the sketch plan constitutes a minor
subdivision, the applicant may proceed directly to the filing of an
application for approval of a final subdivision plat as provided in these
regulations. The City Planner shall determine, according to § 154.38 herein,
whether the minor subdivision plat may be approved administratively by the
City Planner or whether to place the matter on the next available regular
meeting agenda of the Planning and Zoning Commission for formal approval or
disapproval.



   (B)   Major subdivision. If the sketch plan constitutes a major
subdivision, the City Planner shall issue a notice to proceed only if the
sketch plan complies with all applicable laws governing the subdivision of
land. The notice to proceed shall include, as appropriate, recommended
changes in the sketch plan to be incorporated into the preliminary plat to
assist the applicant in obtaining preliminary plat approval from the Planning
and Zoning Commission. If the City Planner determines that the sketch plan
does not comply with all applicable laws governing the subdivision of land
and the applicant refuses to modify the sketch plan, the City Planner shall
issue a notice of noncompliance. The City Planner shall issue either the
notice to proceed, or the notice of non-compliance not later than 20 days
after the date on which the sketch plan was submitted to the City Planner.
After receipt of a notice to proceed, the applicant must first file an
application for approval of a preliminary plat, as provided in these
regulations, before filing for final subdivision plat.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 3.3,  passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.33 PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   No later than 120 days after the date of the notice to proceed, the
applicant may apply for preliminary plat approval. If the applicant fails to
apply for preliminary plat approval within the 120-day period, a new sketch
plan must be submitted.



   (A)   General. Based on the notice to proceed, the applicant shall
cause to be prepared a preliminary plat by a licensed land surveyor, engineer
or land planner in accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   Time and place for filing and copies required. The applicant
shall file one mylar copy, seven  blue or black line copies, and one 8-1/2
inch x 14 inch size copy of the preliminary plat and a minimum of three
copies of construction plans with the City Planner according to § 154.30(B).
The preliminary plat shall conform substantially to the sketch plan submitted
by the applicant and which formed the basis for the notice to proceed.



   (C)   Filing fees. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by an
application which includes a filing fee of $250. This fee shall not be
refunded should the applicant fail to make formal application for preliminary
plat approval or should the plan be disapproved. The deposit of such fees
shall constitute formal request for plat approval. The office of the City
Planner shall provide the application form.



   (D)   Form and content. The plan shall be drawn on sheets 36 inches
wide and 22 or 24 inches high with a binding margin of not less than 1-1/2
inches on the left side of the sheet. The plan shall be drawn to a scale of
100 feet to one inch. Sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more than one
sheet is used. The preliminary plat shall show the following:



      (1)   Name and address of the applicant, record owner,
engineer, and surveyor.



      (2)   The date of the map, approximate true north point and
scale.



      (3)   Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not have
the same spelling or be pronounced similar to the name of any other
subdivision located within the city, or within the extra-territorial
jurisdiction of the city.



      (4)   Names of contiguous subdivisions and the owners of
contiguous parcels of unsubdivided land, and show the platting of adjoining
property if such be the case.



      (5)   Description by metes and bounds, of the subdivision
boundary, or locate the tract to be subdivided on a location map at a scale
of 1,000 or 2,000 feet to an inch, which shall show existing subdivisions,
streets, easements, rights-of-way, parks, and public facilities in the
vicinity.



      (6)   Council and Commission endorsements of plat approval
spaces (see Appendix A for samples.)



      (7)   The location and dimensions of all subdivision boundary
lines of the property indicated by heavy lines, expressed in feet and
decimals of a foot, and computed in acreage of the subdivision.



      (8)   Existing sites as follows:



         (a)   The location and name of all existing or recorded
streets, alleys, reservations, easements or other public rights-of-way within
the subdivision, intersecting or contiguous with its boundaries or forming
such boundaries.



         (b)   The location, dimensions, and name of all existing
or recorded residential lots, parks, public areas, and any permanent
structures within the subdivision and other sites within or contiguous with
the subdivision.



         (c)   The location of existing utilities, watercourses
and drainage structures within the subdivision or on contiguous tracts.



      (9)   The location and dimensions of all proposed streets,
alleys, utilities, drainage, structures, parks, other public areas,
reservations, easements or other rights-of-way, blocks, lots and other sites
within the subdivision.



      (10)   A number or letter to identify each lot or site and
each block.



      (11)   Front building setback lines on all lots and sites.
Side yard building setback lines at street intersections and crosswalk ways.



      (12)   Indication of the use of any lot (single-family,
two-family, multi-family, townhouse) and all uses other than residential
proposed by the subdivider.



      (13)   Where the proposed subdivision constitutes a phase of a
larger tract owned by the subdivider, which is intended to be subsequently
subdivided as additional phases of the same subdivision, the preliminary plat
shall be accompanied by a layout of the entire area showing the tentative
proposed layout of streets, blocks, drainage, water, sewerage, and other
improvements for such areas. The overall layout, if approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and the City Council, shall be attached to and filed
with a copy of the approved preliminary plan in the permanent files of the
city. Thereafter, plats of subsequent phases of such subdivision shall
conform to such approved overall layout, unless changed by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the City Council.



      (14)   Blocks shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in
alphabetical order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing
the same name shall be numbered or lettered consecutively throughout the
several additions.



      (15)   All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered.
Outlots shall be lettered in alphabetical order. If blocks are numbered or
lettered, outlots shall be lettered in alphabetical order within each block.



      (16)   All information required on the sketch plat should also
be shown on the preliminary plat, and the following notation shall also be
shown:



         (a)   Explanation of drainage easements, if any.



         (b)   Explanation of site easements, if any.



         (c)   Explanation of reservations, if any.



         (d)   Endorsement of owner.



      (17)   Endorsement of Planning and Zoning Commission.



      (18)   Endorsement of City Council.



      (19)   The lack of information under any item specified
herein, or improper information supplied by the applicant, shall be cause for
disapproval of a preliminary plat.



   (E)   Processing of preliminary plat.



      (1)   Upon receipt of a formal application for preliminary
plat approval, which includes required filing fees and all accompanying
material, the City Planner shall check the preliminary plat as to its
conformity with the city's comprehensive plan, land use plan, zoning
districts and regulations.



      (2)   The City Engineer shall check the plat for conformity
with applicable engineering standards and specifications set forth herein, as
well as, with generally accepted engineering principles when not specified
herein.



      (3)   The City Planner shall call a public hearing for the
next scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission, whereby the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall act on the plat, if all requirements are
completed.



      (4)   When required, the City Planner shall submit a notice
for publication in one newspaper of general circulation to be published at
least 15 days prior to the public hearing and mail notices to all owners of
real property within a 200-foot radius as specified by the most recently
approved municipal tax role, as specified by state law, and shall maintain
file copies of the plat and construction plans when appropriate for public
review prior to the hearing.



      (5)   After the Planning and Zoning Commission has reviewed
the preliminary plat and construction plans, the report of the City Planner,
any municipal recommendations and testimony and exhibits submitted at the
public hearing, the applicant shall be advised of any required changes and/or
additions. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve or disapprove the
preliminary plat within 30 days from the official submission date (as defined
in § 154.30(B)).



      (6)   The City Council shall then act on the plat within 30
days after the date the plat is approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or the plat is considered approved by the inaction of the Planning
and Zoning Commission. A plat is considered approved by the City Council
unless it is disapproved within that period.



      (7)   Unless at least a portion of the area covered by the
preliminary plat is approved in final plat form within one year from the date
of approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council, the preliminary plat
automatically becomes null and void and must be resubmitted as if no
preliminary plat were in existence. The preliminary plat for any area which
has not been platted in final form within three years from the date of the
approval of the preliminary plat shall be null and void unless a time
extension is granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission after its review
of the preliminary plat. No additional filing fees shall be required for this
extension.



   (F)   Standards for approval of preliminary plats. No preliminary
plat of a proposed subdivision shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission unless the applicant proves by clear and convincing evidence that:



      (1)   Definite provision has been made for a water supply
system that is sufficient in terms of quantity, dependability, and quality to
provide an appropriate supply of water for the type of subdivision proposed;



      (2)   If a public sewage system is proposed, adequate
provision has been made for such a system and, if other methods of sewage
disposal are proposed, that such systems will comply with federal, state, and
local laws and regulations.



      (3)   All areas of the proposed subdivision which may involve
soil or topographical conditions presenting hazards or requiring special
precautions have been identified by the subdivider and that the proposed uses
of these areas are compatible with such conditions;



      (4)   The proposed subdivision will not result in the
scattered subdivision of land that leaves undeveloped parcels of land lacking
urban services between developed parcels;



      (5)   The subdivider has taken every effort to mitigate the
impact of the proposed subdivision on public health, safety, and welfare.



   (G)   Public improvements. All public improvements shall be
installed in accordance with §§ 154.50 through 154.60 of this chapter and
dedicated prior to the signing of the final subdivision plat by the
Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (H)   Zoning and subdivision regulations. Every preliminary plat
shall conform to existing zoning regulations and subdivision regulations
applicable at the time that the proposed preliminary plat is submitted for
the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (I)   Model homes. For the purposes of allowing the early
construction of model homes in a subdivision, the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council in their sole discretion may permit a portion
of a major subdivision involving no more than two lots to be created in
accordance with the procedures for minor subdivisions, provided the portion
derives access from an existing city, township, county, or state highway, and
provided no future road or other improvement is anticipated where the lots
are proposed. The subdivision plat for the "minor" portion shall be submitted
to the Planning and Zoning Commission simultaneously with the preliminary
plat for the entire major subdivision. Subsequent to preliminary approval,
the model homes may be constructed, subject to such additional requirements
as the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council may require.



   (J)   Amendments to preliminary plat. At any time after preliminary
plat approval and before submission of a final plat, the applicant may
request of the City Planner that an amendment be made in the approval of the
preliminary plat. Under regulations established by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the City Planner may agree to proposed amendments that are deemed
to be minor. If the proposed amendment is major, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed major amendment in
accordance with the same requirements for preliminary plat approval. The City
Council shall then act on the proposed amendment of the preliminary plat
within 30 days after the date the amended plat is approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission or is considered approved by the inaction of the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The proposed amendment to the plat is
considered approved by the City Council unless it is disapproved within that
period.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 3.4, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.34 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   Following the approval of the sketch plan in the case of
a minor subdivision, or of the preliminary plat in the case of a major
subdivision, the applicant, if he wishes to proceed with the subdivision,
shall file an application for final approval of a subdivision plat with the
City Planner. No subdivision of land shall be accomplished without proper
submittal, approval, and adoption of a final plat prepared by a licensed land
surveyor in accordance with this chapter.



      (2)   All final plats must first be preceded by properly
prepared and approved preliminary plats and construction plans, except in
areas previously platted and filed of record, in which case, existing lots
may be increased in size by combining all parts of adjacent lots, provided no
fragments of lots remain alone, causing a reduction in the lot size to less
than minimum required by the zoning of the particular area.



      (3)   The final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a
licensed land surveyor and shall comply in all respects with the sketch plan
or preliminary plat, as approved, whichever is applicable, depending on the
classification of the subdivision.



   (B)   Drainage study for proposed subdivision. A drainage study
shall be performed by a registered engineer licensed to practice in the State
of Texas. The City Manager may waive the requirement for a drainage study for
small subdivisions or in other special circumstances. At a minimum, the
drainage study shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Identifying existing and proposed hydrology and
hydraulics of the site.



      (2)   Proposed storm drainage system.



      (3)   Specific solutions to drainage problems that will or
could occur as a result of development.



      (4)   Alternative solutions to drainage problems.



      (5)   Capacity of facilities on and off-site.



      (6)   Location of floodplain and/or floodway designated areas
(if applicable).



      (7)   Location of all proposed or existing drainage easements,
both on-site and off-site.



      (8)   Copies of all drainage calculations (methods to be
approved by the City Engineer).



      (9)   Existing and proposed contours of the platted area.
Contour interval shall be not less than five feet. Existing contours shall be
shown as dashed lines. Proposed contours shall be shown as solid lines.



      (10)   Drainage patterns, both existing and proposed.



      (11)   Contributing drainage areas and flows.



      (12)   If the proposed development or any portion thereof is
within an area designated by FEMA as a floodway, the developer will be
prohibited from development in the floodway unless the developer completes a
HEC-2 study and/or receives a "Letter of Map Revision" from FEMA.



      (13)   A storm water pollution prevention plan in compliance
with the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) or the Texas
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) of the Clean Water Act.



   (C)   Application procedure and requirements.



      (1)   Time and place for filing and copies required. The
applicant shall file seven blue or black line copies and two mylar copies of
the final subdivision plat together with the construction plans and other
required documents with the City Planner according to § 154.30(B). A
legal-sized (8-1/2" x 14") reduction with all signatures shall also be
provided. The plat must also be furnished in AutoCAD Release 11/12, AutoCAD
2000, Microstation or standard ".dxfl' format as approved by the city.



      (2)   Filing and inspection fees. When the final subdivision
plat is filed with the City Planner for consideration and adoption, such plan
shall be accompanied by an application which includes a filing fee of $250.
The deposit of such fees shall constitute formal request for plat approval.
The City Planner shall provide the application form.



      (3)   Offers of dedication. When the final subdivision plat is
filed with the City Planner, such plat shall dedicate to the use of the
public forever all streets, alleys, parks, easements, rights-of-way and
public places shown thereon on the subdivision plat and construction
documents.



      (4)   Endorsement of health authorities. The final subdivision
plat shall be properly endorsed by the City Engineer, or for final
subdivision plats within the extra territorial jurisdiction, the county
appointed Health Officer, with respect to all sewer and water facilities and
that same comply with all rules, regulations, and requirements of local
government, regional, state, and federal authorities.



      (5)   Notice of public meeting. All meetings shall be public
and notification shall be in accordance with state law.



      (6)   Public meeting - Planning and Zoning Commission. After
the public meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall, within 30 days
from the official submission date for the final subdivision plat, approve or
disapprove the subdivision application which shall set forth in detail any
reasons for disapproval. One copy of the final subdivision plat shall be
returned to the applicant with the date of approval or disapproval noted on
the plat, and, if the plat is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval
accompanying the plat.



      (7)   Public Meeting  - City Council. The City Council shall
then act on the plat within 30 days after the date the plat is approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission or is considered approved by the inaction
of the Commission. A plat is considered approved by the City Council unless
it is disapproved within that period.



   (D)   Form and content.



      (1)   The final subdivision plat and accompanying data shall
comply in all respects with the sketch plan or preliminary plat, whichever is
applicable, depending upon the classification of the subdivision as approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council, incorporating any
and all changes, modifications, alterations, corrections, and conditions
imposed by the either the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council.



      (2)   The final plat shall be drawn in permanent ink on 4 mil
Mylar sheets 36 inches wide and 22 or 24 inches high and a margin not less
than 1-1/2 inches on the left side of the sheet. The plat shall be drawn at a
scale of 100 feet to one inch. Where more than one sheet is necessary to
accommodate the entire area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at
appropriate scale shall be attached to the plat.



      (3)   The final plat shall include the entire subdivision, or
section thereof, which derives access from an existing state, county, or
local government highway.



      (4)   Notation of any self-imposed restrictions, and locations
of any building lines proposed to be established in this manner, if required
by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with these regulations.



      (5)   In addition to the various requirements for the
preliminary plat, the final subdivision plat shall also include the following:



         (a)   The exact location, dimensions, name and
description of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations,
easements, or other public rights-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting
or contiguous with its boundary or forming such boundaries, with accurate
dimensions, bearings or deflecting angles and radii, central angle, degree of
curvature, tangent distance, and length of all curves, where appropriate.



         (b)   The exact location, dimensions, description and
name of all proposed streets, alleys, utilities, drainage, watercourses,
structures, parks, other public areas, reservations, easement or other
rights-of-way, blocks, lots, and other sites within the subdivision with
accurate dimensions, bearing or deflecting angles and radii, central angles,
degree of curvature, tangent distance, and length of all curves, where
appropriate.



         (c)   All monuments erected, corners, and other points
established in the field in their proper places. The material of which the
monuments, corners, or other points are made shall be noted at the
representation thereof or by legend, except that lot corners need not be
shown. The legend for metal monuments shall indicate the kind of metal, the
diameter, length, and weight per lineal foot of the monuments.



         (d)   Owner's acknowledgement and dedications. (See
Appendix B for samples.)



         (e)   Surveyor's certificate. (See Appendix A for
example.)



         (f)   Planning and Zoning Commission approval space.
(See Appendix B for example.)



         (g)   City Council's approval space. (See Appendix B for
example.)



         (h)   City Planner's approval space for minor
subdivision's only. (See Appendix B for example.)



         (i)   County Commissioner's approval space when in the
ETJ. (See Appendix B for example.)



         (j)   City Engineer's approval space. (See Appendix B
for example.)



         (k)   County Health Officer's approval space when in the
ETJ. (See Appendix B for example.)



         (l)   Irrevocable offers of dedication.



   (E)   Submission and review. Subsequent to the resolution of the
City Council, three paper copies of the construction plans, two mylar copies
of the original of the subdivision plat, and seven copies of the subdivision
plat on paper shall be submitted to the City Planner for final review. A
check payable to the County Clerk and Recorder of Titus County in the amount
of the current filing fee shall be provided. No final approval shall be
endorsed on the plat until a review has indicated that all requirements of
the resolution have been met.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 3.5, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.35 VESTED RIGHTS AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   Effect of approval. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, no vested rights shall accrue to the owner or developer of any
subdivision by reason of preliminary or final plat approval until the actual
signing of the final plat by the Mayor of the City Council and attested by
the City Secretary.



   (B)   Effect of recordation. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, no vested rights shall accrue to the owner or developer of any
subdivision by virtue of the recordation of the final plat.



   (C)   Applicable laws. To obtain final plat approval, the applicant
shall be in compliance with all federal and state laws applicable at the time
that the final plat is considered for approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The applicant also shall be in compliance with all local laws and
regulations applicable at the time that the preliminary plat was submitted to
the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with § 154.33(H) (or, if a
minor subdivision, at the time the sketch plat was submitted to the City
Planner), except that the applicant shall comply with those local laws and
regulations in effect at the time that the final plat is considered for
approval by the Commission if the Planning and Zoning Commission makes a
determination on the record that compliance with any of those local laws and
regulations is reasonably necessary to protect public health and safety. If
the Planning and Zoning Commission required the applicant to complete public
improvements in the subdivision prior to final plat approval, and the
improvements have, in fact, been completed, the applicant may be required to
comply with local laws and regulations in effect at the time that the final
plat is considered for approval only if the Planning and Zoning Commission
makes a finding on the record that such compliance is necessary to prevent a
substantial risk of injury to public health, safety and general welfare.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 3.6, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.36 SIGNING AND RECORDING OF A SUBDIVISION PLAT.



   (A)   Signing of plat.



      (1)   The Mayor, City Secretary, Chairman of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and the City Planner will sign two mylar copies of the
final subdivision plat and seven paper copies of the final subdivision plat.



      (2)   When installation of improvements is required prior to
recordation of the final plat, the Mayor, City Secretary, Chairman of the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Planner shall endorse approval on
the final plat after all conditions have been satisfied and all improvements
satisfactorily completed. There shall be written evidence that the required
public facilities have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the local
government.



   (B)   Recordation of plat. It shall be the responsibility of the
City Planner to file the final plat with the County Clerk and Recorder's
Office within ten days of the date of signature. Simultaneously with the
filing of the final plat, the City Planner shall record the agreement of
dedication together with such legal documents as shall be required to be
recorded by the Local Government Attorney.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 3.7, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.37 REPLATS.



   (A)   Ownership. In order to replat, resubdivide, or amend a tract
of land for which a final subdivision plat is filed for record in the Plat
Records of Titus County, the tract must be either fully owned by the person
desiring to replat, or the person desiring the replat must furnish the city
with written acknowledgment and consent by all other property owners.



   (B)   Changes which require a replat.



      (1)   Any change in any street layout or any other public
improvement;



      (2)   Any change in any lot line;



      (3)   Any change in the amount of land reserved for public use
or the common use of lot owners;



      (4)   Any change in any easements shown on the approved plat.



   (C)   Procedures and fees.



      (1)   The procedure for replatting shall follow the procedures
for § 154.34 herein entitled "Final Subdivision Plat" with a sketch plan
being presented to the City Planner, and a preliminary conference being held
between the subdivider and city staff.



      (2)   The City Planner shall determine, according to § 154.38
herein, whether the replat or amending plat may be approved administratively
by the City Planner or whether to place the matter on the next available
regular meeting agenda of the Planning and Zoning Commission for formal
approval or disapproval.



      (3)   If utilities and/or street improvements are necessary
for approval of the replat then §§ 154.50 through 154.60  "Assurance for
Construction, Completion and Maintenance of Improvements" shall be followed.
In addition, all companies that furnish the city with utilities must
acknowledge to the city, in writing, that they have reviewed and approved the
re-plat. Such written acknowledgment must be in the hands of the City Planner
prior to the submission of the final plat to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for approval.



      (4)   When the final plat (replat) is filed with the City
Planner for consideration and adoption it shall be accompanied by a filing
fee of $200. The deposit of such fees shall constitute formal request for
plat approval.



   (D)   Signing plat. The Mayor, City Secretary, Chairman of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, and the City Planner will sign two mylar
copies of the final subdivision plat and seven paper copies of the final
subdivision plat.



   (E)   Filing. It shall be the responsibility of the City Planner to
file the final plat with the County Clerk and Recorder's Office within ten
days of the date of signature. Simultaneously with the filing of the final
plat, the City Planner shall record the agreement of dedication together with
such legal documents as shall be required to be recorded by the Local
Government Attorney.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 3.8, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.38 ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL.



   City staff may administratively approve:



   (A)   Minor subdivision plats involving four or fewer lots fronting
on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the
extension of municipal facilities.



   (B)   A replat as described by state law that does not require the
creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities. (Tex.
Local Gov’t Code, § 212.0145)



   (C)   A replat of a part of a subdivision may be recorded and is
controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat if the
replat;



      (1)   Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the
property being replatted; and



      (2)   Involves only property:



         (a)   Of less than one acre that fronts an existing
street; and



         (b)   That is owned and used by a nonprofit corporation
established to assist children in at-risk situations through volunteer and
individualized attention.



      (3)   An existing covenant or restriction for property that is
replatted under this section does not have to be amended or removed if:



         (a)   The covenant or restriction was recorded more than
50 years before the date of the replat; and



         (b)   The replatted property has been continuously used
by the nonprofit corporation for at least ten years before the date of the
replat.



   (D)   Amending plats as described below:



      (1)   To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the
preceding plat;



      (2)   To add a course or distance that was omitted on the
preceding plat;



      (3)   To correct an error in a real property description shown
on the preceding plat;



      (4)   To indicate monuments set after the death, disability,
or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for
setting monuments;



      (5)   To show the location or character of a monument that has
been changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to
location or character on the preceding plat;



      (6)   To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error
or omission previously approved by the municipal authority responsible for
approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and
identification of adjacent recorded plats;



      (7)   To correct an error in courses and distances of lot
lines between two adjacent lots if



         (a)   Both lot owners join in the application for
amending the plat;



         (b)   Neither lot is abolished;



         (c)   The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded
covenants or restrictions; and



         (d)   The amendment does not have a material adverse
effect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat;



      (8)   To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent
encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement;



      (9)   To relocate one or more lot lines between one or more
adjacent lots if:



         (a)   The owners of all those lots join in the
application for amending the plat;



         (b)   The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded
covenants or restrictions; and



         (c)   The amendment does not increase the number of lots;



      (10)   To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to
create six or fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision
covered by the preceding plat if:



         (a)   The changes do not affect applicable zoning and
other regulations of the municipality;



         (b)   The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any
covenants or restrictions; and



         (c)   The area covered by the changes is located in an
area that the municipal planning commission or other appropriate governing
body of the municipality has approved, after a public hearing, as a
residential improvement area; or



      (11)   To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing
street if:



         (a)   The owners of all those lots join in the
application for amending the plat;



         (b)   The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded
covenants or restrictions;



         (c)   The amendment does not increase the number of
lots; and



         (d)   The amendment does not create or require the
creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal
facilities.



      (12)   Notice, a hearing, and the approval of other lot owners
are not required for the approval and issuance of an amending plat.



   (E)   City staff may, for any reason, elect to present the plat for
approval to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.



   (F)   City staff shall not disapprove any plat that meets all state
and city requirements. Any plat not approved by city staff may be submitted
to Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council according to state law.



   (G)   City staff shall notify the Planning and Zoning Commission and
the City Council of any plats approved administratively.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 3.9, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.39 VACATING PLAT.



   (A)   The proprietors of the tract covered by a plat may request
permission from the city to vacate the plat at any time before any lot in the
plat is sold. The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument
declaring the plat vacated is approved and recorded according to § 154.34
herein entitled "Final Subdivision Plat" in the same manner prescribed for
the original plat that being approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the City Council.



   (B)   If lots in the plat have been sold, the plat, or any part of
the plat, may be vacated on the application of all the owners of lots in the
plat with approval obtained in the manner prescribed for the original plat.



   (C)   The County Clerk shall write legibly on the vacated plat the
word "Vacated" and shall enter on the plat a reference to the volume and page
at which the vacating instrument is recorded.



   (D)   On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the
vacated plat has no effect.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 3.10, passed 9-20-05)



ASSURANCE FOR CONSTRUCTION, COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS



§ 154.50 PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter shall be to assure that all public
improvements have been designed, constructed, and completed in accordance
with §§ 154.75 through 154.82 of this chapter, and that all assurances for
the maintenance and dedication of such improvements have been properly
executed.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 4.1, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.51 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   Before the final subdivision plat is signed by the Chairperson of the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Mayor, all applicants shall be
required to complete, in accordance with the City Council's decision and to
the satisfaction of the City Engineer, all the street, sanitary and other
public improvements, including lot improvements on the individual lots of the
subdivision, as required in these regulations, specified in the final
subdivision plat and as approved by the city, and to dedicate those public
improvements to the local government, free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances on the dedicated property and public improvements.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 4.2, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.52 DESIGN OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   All construction plans for subdivision improvements are to be prepared
under the direction and supervision of a qualified Texas Registered
Professional Engineer and such plans shall bear the seal and signature of
that engineer.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 4.3, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.53 CONSTRUCTION PLANS.



   Two complete sets of construction plans and specifications shall be
submitted to the City Engineer for review prior to contracting for
construction of improvements. The plans shall be prepared on plan/profile
sheets, or plan sheets with separate profile sheets, which are 36 inches wide
and 22 or 24 inches high with a binding margin of not less than 1-1/2 inches
on the left side of the sheet. Profiles shall have grid increments of not
less 1/10 inch. The plans shall be drawn to a scale of 20 feet to the inch
horizontally and five feet to the inch vertically. The plans must also be
furnished in AutoCAD Release 11/12, AutoCAD 2000, Microstation or standard
".dxf' format as approved by the city.



   (A)   Complete plans shall include the following sheets:



      (1)   Title sheet showing names of subdivision, subdivider,
Engineer, City Engineer, City Manager, date, location map, and any other
pertinent information. It should also provide a space for signature of
approval from the City Manager and City Engineer.



      (2)   Preliminary plan as submitted and approved.



      (3)   Overall water and sanitary sewer layout sheet showing
street, layout, lots and lot dimensions, curve data, and any other pertinent
information necessary for surveying all lots and streets. This may be a
modified print of the subdivision preliminary plan.



      (4)   Drainage area map, drainage study and drainage
computation sheet showing contours at minimum ten-foot intervals for the
entire drainage basin of all structures planned for the subdivision and flood
plains shown on the plan. See § 154.34(B) of this chapter for further
details.



      (5)   Plan-profile sheets showing all improvements in
accordance with §§ 154.75 through 154.82 of this chapter shall include but
not be limited to the following:



         (a)   Right-of-way, lot lines, lot numbers, easements,
subdivision lines, and city limit lines;



         (b)   Existing topographic features such as utility
poles, fire hydrants, streets, driveways, lakes, watercourses, etc.;



         (c)   Existing underground utilities located as
accurately as possible on both the plan and profile sections;



         (d)   Existing ground profiles along the centerline of
proposed water and sewer improvements, at each proposed curb line and at each
right-of-way line for street improvements;



         (e)   Survey baseline showing stationing and appropriate
information to re-establish baseline, if necessary;



         (f)   Street names, north arrow and graphic scale;



         (g)   Benchmark (National Geodetic Survey Datum,
formerly U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey Datum) description and elevation on
each sheet with temporary benchmarks set at intervals of not more than 600
feet;



         (h)   Location of soil borings;



      (i)   Proposed streets, storm sewer, sanitary sewer, water,
electrical, gas, T.V. cable lines and telephone lines, including valves, fire
hydrants, water and sewer service lines, manholes and cleanouts;



         (j)   Stationing of proposed improvements to left or
right of the survey baseline, and angles and stationing of intersection
streets;



         (k)   Curb radii, and special curb grade points such as
end of radius returns and mid-points and top of inlet, etc.; limits of
significant cut or fill; directional arrows showing direction of drainage in
gutters; and crown transition in intersections;



         (l)   Proposed top of curb profile line and existing top
of curb line where curb has previously been built. If the new street does not
have curb and gutter, proposed top of pavement profile along centerline and
flowline of ditches on both sides;



         (m)   Horizontal and vertical curve data including the
curve length, vertical point of intersection station and elevation, and high
point or low point station and elevation. Percent grades shall be shown on
all tangents.



         (n)   Top of curb elevations shall be shown at not more
than 50-foot intervals in tangents, and 25-foot intervals in vertical curves.
The PC, PT and PI shall be shown in profile with station and elevation;



         (o)   Proposed flowline of sanitary sewer mains, storm
sewer, culverts, channels and water mains. Percent grades shall be shown
between manholes and/or cleanouts on sewer lines. Flowline elevations shall
be shown at not more than 50-foot intervals. Top and flowline elevations
shall be shown for all manholes and cleanouts for sewer lines, channels,
inlets, manholes and headwalls for storm sewer lines, and for all valves, air
release or blow-off structures for water mains 12 inches and larger;



         (p)   Minimum finished floor elevation for each lot
within or adjacent to a 100-year floodplain or drainage easement, or where a
lot requires fill for sanitary sewer service;



         (q)   Special notes;



         (r)   Engineer's seal and signature on each sheet.



      (6)   Detail sheets for special construction, and sheets with
City of Mount Pleasant standard details as included in §§ 154.75 through
154.82 of this chapter.



   (B)   One set of plans and specifications marked with any changes
required by the City Engineer will be returned to the subdivider or his or
her authorized representative. One corrected set of plans and specifications
plus the original title sheet shall be submitted to the City Engineer for
approval. The original title sheet will be returned, upon approval and
signature by the City Manager and City Engineer. Five complete sets of the
approved plans and specifications shall be submitted to the City Engineer
prior to start of construction.



   (C)   Within 30 days after written final acceptance of all
improvements, one set of mylar film originals or mylar film sepias of the "As
Built" or "Record" plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer. The plans
shall show the location of all lines, valves, fire hydrants, manholes,
cleanouts, service connections, curb lines, inlets and storm sewers, and the
installed alignment and grades. All valves, manholes, cleanouts and service
connections shall be located on the ground, tied to at least two permanent
land marks that are at least 90 degrees apart, i.e. fire hydrants, power
poles, property corners, etc.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 4.4, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.54 CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Cost of improvements. All required improvements shall be made
by the developer, at their expense, without reimbursement by the city or any
improvement district except that, as may be allowed under state law.



   (B)   Securing contractors. The subdivider shall be responsible for
securing the contractors for construction of improvements by whatever means
that he or she may deem appropriate (sealed bids, price quotes, force
account, etc.). The City of Mount Pleasant shall not be a party of the
contract.



   (C)   Exception. If it is determined by the City Engineer that a
water line, sewer line or street must be increased to larger dimensions than
is necessary for the proposed subdivision, the city will pay the additional
cost for the enlargement. The City Engineer will make a determination of the
appropriate dimensions based on the currently approved comprehensive plan for
the city's water, sewer and street systems. If the city is to share in the
cost of the improvements in this manner, the subdivider must obtain sealed
bids or price quotes for both sizes of the improvements in order to determine
the city's share. If the subdivider uses "force account," the city will pay
only for the additional cost of materials. If the city's portion of the costs
for improvements is 30% or more of the total costs, the contractor must be
secured by competitive sealed bids.



   (D)   Preconstruction conference. After securing the contractors for
construction of improvements and prior to the start of any construction work
(except clearing and site grading), the subdivider shall contact the City
Engineer and arrange a preconstruction conference. Those in attendance at the
preconstruction conference shall include the subdivider, his or her engineer,
the engineer's inspector, the contractor, the contractor's superintendent,
the City Engineer, the City Planner, the Chief Building Official, and the
Director of Utilities. Construction schedules, inspection and other
construction related activities will be discussed and coordinated at the
conference.



   (E)   The subdivider shall be responsible for ensuring that the
improvements are constructed in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications. Therefore, the subdivider's engineer shall provide the
inspection services that he or she determines necessary to verify
installation in accordance with the plans and specifications.



   (F)   The city shall provide for inspection of required improvements
during construction and ensure their satisfactory completion including
subdivisions within the extraterritorial jurisdiction. If the City Engineer
finds upon inspection that any one or more of the required improvements have
not been constructed in accordance with the city's construction standards and
specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for properly completing
the improvements.



   (G)   Upon completion of the improvements, the subdivider shall
submit to the City Engineer the following:



      (1)   Certification by the subdivider that all improvements
are complete and all contractors are paid in full;



      (2)   Certification by the subdivider's engineer that the
improvements were constructed in general conformance with the plans and
specifications;



      (3)   One year warranty agreements or performance bonds for
materials and workmanship from the contractors that constructed the
improvements. Following the acceptance of the dedication of any public
improvement, the city shall require the subdivider to maintain the
improvement for a period of one year from the date of acceptance;



      (4)   "As Built" or "Record" plans as described in § 154.53
of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 4.5, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.55 PUBLIC UTILITY REVIEW.



   Prior to consideration of the final plat by the Commission, the
subdivider shall submit proof that all public utilities have been furnished a
copy of the proposed plat and that such utilities take no exception to
servicing the subdivision as proposed. Utilities shall include at least:



   (A)   AEP SWEPCO (or current provider);



   (B)   Center Point Energy Gas Company (or current provider);



   (C)   Southwestern Bell Telephone Company (or current provider);



   (D)   Cox Cablevision of Texas (or current provider);



   (E)   Bowie-Cass Electric Co-Op (where applicable);



   (F)   Tri-Special Utility District (where applicable).



(Ord. 2005-6, § 4.6, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.56 STREET LIGHTS.



   The subdivider shall be responsible for providing the necessary
easements, and for the installation of electrical conduit for streetlights
within the subdivision. Placement of streetlights shall be at the approval of
the city. The subdivider shall submit proof that such arrangements have been
made with the power company.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 4.7, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.57 STREET SIGNS/TRAFFIC SIGNALS.



   As part of plat approval, the city may require the developer to perform
a traffic study. If no study is performed, the developer will be required to
install traffic control devices as called for by the City Engineer.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 4.8, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.58 APPROVAL OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   Upon receipt of the documents identified in § 154.55 above, the City
Engineer will review them for compliance with the respective requirements.
The City Engineer will perform any inspections of the improvements that are
necessary to verify completion of the work. Upon completion of the review,
the City Engineer will notify the developer, City Manager, and the City
Planner, and the Chief Building Official that construction of improvements
are complete and the development is ready for final platting.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 4.9, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.59 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   No building permits or certificates of occupancy for any building in
the subdivision shall be issued prior to the completion of the required
public improvements and the acceptance of the dedication of those
improvements by the city.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 4.10, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.60 CONSUMER PROTECTION LEGISLATION AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST STATUTES.



   (A)   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
granted or issued if a developer or its authorized agent has violated any
federal, state or local law pertaining to (1) consumer protection; or (2)
real estate land sales, promotion, or practices; or (3) any applicable
conflicts-of-interests legislation with respect to the lot or parcel of land
which is the subject of the permit or certificate until a court of competent
jurisdiction so orders.



   (B)   With respect to any lot or parcel of land described in the
immediately preceding section, if a building permit or certificate of
occupancy has been granted or issued, it may be revoked by the municipality
until a court of competent jurisdiction orders otherwise, provided that in no
event shall the rights of intervening innocent third parties in possession of
a certificate of occupancy be prejudiced by any such revocations.



   (C)   Any violation of federal, state, or local consumer protection
law, including, but not limited to: Postal Reorganization Act of 1970; the
Federal Trade Commission Act of 1970; Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure
Act; the Truth in Lending Act; the Uniform Commercial Credit Code; state
"Blue Sky" laws; state subdivision disclosure acts, or any conflicts of
interest statute law, or ordinances shall be deemed a violation of these
regulations and subject to all of the penalties and proceedings as set forth
in § 154.99.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 4.11, passed 9-20-05)



REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS, AND DESIGN



§ 154.75 GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. In addition
to the requirements established in these regulations, all subdivision plats
shall comply with the following laws, rules, and regulations:



      (1)   All applicable statutory provisions;



      (2)   The local government zoning ordinance, building and
housing codes, and all other applicable laws of the appropriate jurisdictions;



      (3)   The Official Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, Public
Utilities Plan, and Capital Improvements Program of the local government,
including all streets, drainage systems, and parks shown on the Official Map
or Comprehensive Plan as adopted;



      (4)   The special requirements of these regulations and any
rules of the Health Department and/or appropriate state or substate agencies;



      (5)   The rules of the State Highway Department if the
subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a state highway or connecting
street;



      (6)   The standards and regulations adopted by the City
Engineer and all boards, commissions, agencies, and officials of the local
government;



      (7)   Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in
conformity with the above laws, regulations, guidelines, and policies as well
as the purposes of the regulations established in this chapter.



   (B)   Adequate public facilities. No preliminary plat shall be
approved unless the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council
determines that public facilities will be adequate to support and service the
area of the proposed subdivision. The applicant shall, at the request of the
Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council, submit sufficient
information and data on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate the expected
impact on and use of public facilities by possible uses of said subdivision.
Public facilities and services to be examined for adequacy will include roads
and public transportation facilities, sewerage, and water service.



      (1)   Periodically the City Council will establish by
resolution, after public hearing, guidelines for the determination of the
adequacy of public facilities and services. To provide the basis for the
guidelines, the Planning and Zoning Commission must prepare an analysis of
current growth and the amount of additional growth that can be accommodated
by future public facilities and services. The Planning and Zoning Commission
must also recommend any changes in preliminary plat approval criteria it
finds appropriate in the light of its experience in administering these
regulations.



      (2)   The applicant for a preliminary plat must, at the
request of the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council, submit
sufficient information and data on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate
the expected impact on and use of public facilities and services by possible
uses of said subdivision.



      (3)   Comprehensive Plan consistency required. Proposed public
improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the local
government's comprehensive plan and all applicable capital improvements plans.



      (4)   Water. All inhabitable buildings and buildable lots
shall be connected to a public water system capable of providing water for
health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection.



      (5)   Wastewater. All habitable buildings and buildable lots
shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment.



      (6)   Stormwater management. Drainage improvements shall
accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall
be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding. The local government
may require the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and/or
the construction of offsite drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of
the proposed developments.



      (7)   Roads. Proposed roads shall provide a safe, convenient,
and functional system for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, shall be
properly related to the comprehensive plan, and shall be appropriate for the
particular traffic characteristics of each proposed development.



      (8)   Extension policies. All public improvements and required
easements shall be extended through the parcel on which new development is
proposed. Streets, water lines, wastewater systems, drainage facilities,
electric lines, and telecommunications lines shall be constructed through new
development to promote the logical extension of public infrastructure. The
local government may require the applicant of a subdivision to extend offsite
improvements to reach the subdivision or oversize required public facilities
to serve anticipate future development as a condition of plat approval.



   (C)   Self-imposed restrictions. If the owner places restrictions on
any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by
the Zoning Ordinance of these regulations, such restrictions or reference to
those restrictions may be required to be indicated on the subdivision plat,
or the Planning and Zoning Commission may require that restrictive covenants
be recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds in a form to be approved by the
Local Government Attorney.



   (D)   Monuments. The applicant shall place permanent reference
monuments in the subdivision as required in these regulations and as approved
by a registered land surveyor.



      (1)   Monuments shall be located on street right-of-way lines,
at street intersections, angle points of curve and block corners. They shall
be spaced so as to be within sight of each other, the sight lines being
contained wholly within the street limits.



      (2)   External boundaries of a subdivision shall be monumented
in the field by monuments of stone or concrete, not less than 30 inches in
length, not less than four inches square or five inches in diameter, and
marked on top with a cross, brass plug, iron rod, or other durable material
securely embedded; or by iron rods or pipes at least 30 inches long and two
inches in diameter. These monuments shall be placed not more than 1,400 feet
apart in any straight line and at all corners, at each end of all curves, at
the point where a curve changes its radius, at all angle points in any line,
and at all angle points along the meander line, those points to be not less
than 20 feet back from the bank of any stream, except that when such corners
or points fall within a street, or proposed future street, the monuments
shall be placed in the side line of the street.



      (3)   All internal boundaries and those corners and points not
referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be monumented in the field by
like monuments as described above. These monuments shall be placed at all
block corners, at each end of all curves, at a point where a stream changes
its radius, and at all angle points in any line.



      (4)   The lines of lots that extend to streams shall be
monumented in the field by iron pipes at least 30 inches long and 7/8 inch in
diameter or by round or square iron bars at least 30 inches long. These
monuments shall be placed at the point of intersection of the stream lot
line, with a meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the
bank of the river or stream.



      (5)   All monuments required by these regulations shall be set
flush with the ground and planted in such a manner that they will not be
removed by frost.



      (6)   All monuments shall be properly set in the ground and
approved by a registered land surveyor prior to the time the Planning and
Zoning Commission recommends approval of the final plat.



   (E)   Character of the land. Land that the Planning and Zoning
Commission or the City Council finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or
development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock
formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or
other features that will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health, and
general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision
and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless
adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, upon recommendation of the City Engineer, to solve the
problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set
aside for uses as shall not involve any danger to public health, safety, and
welfare.



   (F)   Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision and
streets therein, shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate
phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the area covered by these
regulations. The City Council shall have final authority to designate the
name of the subdivision.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 5.1, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.76 LOT IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there
will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other
conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance
with the Zoning Ordinance and other city regulations and in providing
driveway access to buildings on the lots from an approved street.



   (B)   Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum
standards of the Zoning Ordinance. Where lots are more than double the
minimum required area for the zoning district, the Planning and Zoning
Commission or the City Council may require that those lots be arranged so as
to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they
would be necessary to serve potential lots, all in compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance and these regulations. In general, side lot lines shall be at right
angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation
from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. Dimensions of corner
lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of buildings, observing the
minimum front-yard setback from both streets. Depth and width of properties
reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall
be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities
required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in
the Zoning Ordinance.



   (C)   Lot orientation. The lot line common to the street
right-of-way shall be the front line. All lots shall face the front line and
a similar line across the street. Wherever feasible, lots shall be arranged
so that the rear line does not abut the side line of an adjacent lot.



   (D)   Double frontage lots and access to lots.



      (1)   Double frontage lots. Double frontage and reversed
frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation
of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation.



      (2)   Access from major and secondary arterials. Lots shall
not, in general, derive access exclusively from a major or secondary street.
Where driveway access from a major secondary street may be necessary for
several adjoining lots, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City
Council may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in
order to limit possible traffic hazards on the street. Where possible,
driveways should be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles
to back into traffic on major and secondary arterials.



   (E)   Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive
drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be
coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage
shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from
each lot to adjacent lots.



   (F)   Debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks,
stones, soil, junk, rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind shall be
buried in any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and removal of those items and
materials shall be required prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy
on a subdivision. No items and materials as described in the preceding
sentence shall be left or deposited in any area of the subdivision at the
time of expiration of any subdivision improvement agreement or dedication of
public improvements, whichever is sooner.



   (G)   Waterbodies and watercourses. If a tract being subdivided
contains a water body, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to
distribute the entire ownership of the water body among the adjacent lots.
The Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council may approve an
alternative plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe
maintenance of the water body is so placed that it will not become a local
government responsibility. No more than 25% of the minimum area of a lot
required under the Zoning Ordinance may be satisfied by land that is under
water. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the
street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a
culvert or other structure, of design approved by the City Engineer.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 5.2, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.77 ROADS.



   (A)   General requirements.



      (1)   Frontage on improved roads. No subdivision shall be
approved unless the area to be subdivided has frontage on and access from an
existing street on the Master Street Plan, unless such street is:



         (a)   An existing state, county, or municipal street; or



         (b)   A street shown upon a plat approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council and recorded in the
County Recorder of Deed's office. Such street or highway must be suitably
improved as required by the highway rules, regulations, specifications, or
orders, or be secured by a performance bond required under these subdivision
regulations, with the width and right-of-way required by these subdivision
regulations or the Master Street Plan.



      (2)   Grading and improvement plan. Roads shall be graded and
improved and conform to the local government construction standards and
specifications and shall be approved as to design and specifications by the
City Engineer, in accordance with the construction plans required to be
submitted prior to final plat approval.



      (3)   Topography and arrangement.



         (a)   Roads shall be related appropriately to the
topography. Local roads shall be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity
of lot appearance. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many
building sites as possible at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of
streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A
combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. Specific standards
are contained in the design standards of these regulations.



         (b)   All streets shall be properly integrated with the
existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as
established on the Master Street Plan and/or the Comprehensive Master Plan.



         (c)   Minor or local streets shall be laid out to
conform as much as possible to the topography to discourage uses by through
traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the
minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to
property.



         (d)   The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern need
not necessarily be adhered to, and the use of curvilinear streets,
cul-de-sacs, or U-shaped streets shall be encouraged where such use will
result in a more desirable layout.



         (e)   Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary
lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other
physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council such extension is not necessary or desirable
for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing
layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracks.



         (f)   In business and industrial developments, the
streets and other accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping
of buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck
loading and maneuvering areas, and walks and parking areas so as to minimize
conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including
pedestrian.



      (4)   Blocks.



         (a)   The lengths, widths, and shape of blocks shall be
such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of development
contemplated, but block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 2,200
feet or 12 times the minimum lot width required in the zoning district, nor
be less than 400 feet in length. Wherever practicable, blocks along major
arterials and collector streets shall be not less than 1,000 feet in length.



         (b)   In long blocks, the Planning and Zoning Commission
or the City Council may require the reservation of an easement through the
block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or pedestrian traffic.



         (c)   Pedestrianways or crosswalks, not less than ten
feet wide, may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City
Council through the center of blocks more than 800 feet long where deemed
essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping
centers, transportation, or other community facilities. Blocks designed for
industrial uses shall be of such length and width as may be determined
suitable by the Planning and Zoning Commission for prospective use.



      (5)   Access to primary arterials. Where a subdivision borders
on or contains an existing or proposed primary arterial, the Planning and
Zoning Commission or the City Council may require that access to such streets
be limited by one of the following means:



         (a)   The subdivision of lots so as to back onto the
primary arterial and front onto a parallel local street; no access shall be
provided from the primary arterial, and screening shall be provided in a
strip of land along the rear property line of such lots;



         (b)   A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or
short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a
parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the
primary arterial.



         (c)   A marginal access or service road (separated from
the primary arterial by a planning or grass strip and having access at
suitable points).



      (6)   Road names. The developer shall recommend proposed
street names at the type of preliminary plat approval. The City Council shall
have final authority to designate the name of all streets. Names shall be
sufficiently different in sound and spelling from other road names in the
municipality so as not to cause confusion. A road which is (or is planned as)
a continuation of an existing road shall bear the same name.



      (7)   Street lights. The subdivider shall be responsible for
providing the necessary easements, and for the installation of electrical
conduit for street lights within the subdivision. The subdivider shall submit
proof that such arrangements have been made with the power company.



      (8)   Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not
be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access
from adjacent property to the street.



      (9)   Construction of roads and dead-end roads.



         (a)   Construction of roads. The arrangement of streets
shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent
properties when the continuation is necessary for convenient movement of
traffic, effective fire protection, for efficient provision of utilities, and
where the continuation is in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. If the
adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must temporarily be a
dead-end street, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A
temporary T- or L-shaped turnabout shall be provided on all temporary
dead-end streets, with the notation on the subdivision plat that land outside
the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abuttors whenever the street
is continued. The Planning and Zoning Commission may limit the length of
temporary dead-end streets.



         (b)   Dead-end roads (permanent). Where a road does not
extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not
required by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council for access
to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such
boundary than 50 feet. However, the Planning Commission or the City Council
may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate
drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A cul-de-sac
turnaround shall be provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street in
accordance with local government construction standards and specifications.
For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire
protection, permanent dead-end streets shall, in general, be limited in
length in accordance with the design standards of these regulations.



   (B)   Design standards.



      (1)   Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, provision
must be made for the extension of major streets; secondary streets shall be
provided for circulation of traffic through the subdivision; and adequate
minor or local residential streets provided to accommodate the subdivision.



      (2)   Private streets or drives shall be constructed in
accordance with guidelines listed below.



      (3)   Any gated street shall be deemed a private street.



      (4)   Off-center street intersections will not be approved.
All major and secondary streets shall be continuous or in alignment with
existing streets, unless variations are deemed advisable by the City Council
after consideration of recommendations made by the City Engineer or City
Manager and reference to the proposals of the major thoroughfare plan.
Curvilinear streets shall be allowed.



         (a)   Curve requirements (other than intersection). All
street curves, both horizontal and vertical, shall be designed in accordance
with the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) manual, A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, most
current edition. In special circumstances, upon recommendation and approval
from the City Engineer, the City Council may approve minor or local
residential street with a design that does not conform to these requirements;
however, the developer will be responsible for paying any additional costs
for utility installation as a result of deviation from these standards.



         (b)   Street intersections. More than two streets
intersecting at one point shall be avoided, except where it is impractical to
secure a proper street system otherwise. Where several streets converge at
one point, setback lines, special rounding or cut-off of corners or a traffic
circle may be required to insure safety and facility of traffic movement. The
design of any such intersection shall be approved by the City Engineer. All
street designs shall be in accordance with AASHTO manual, A Policy on
Geometric Design of Highway and Streets, most current edition. No street
intersection, unless approved by the City Engineer, shall be at an angle less
than 60 degrees. Major street intersections shall have property line corner
radii with a minimum tangent distance of 30 feet. Minor and residential
streets shall have as the property line corner, the point of intersection of
intersecting streets. Curb radii at intersections shall in no case be less
than 11.5 feet measured from the back of the curb.



         (c)   Dead-end streets, cul-de-sacs, and courts. Courts
or places may be permitted where the form or contour of the land or the shape
of the property makes such street design appropriate. Such cul-de-sacs,
courts, or places shall provide proper access to all lots and shall generally
not exceed 400 feet in length and a turn-around shall be provided at the
closed end, which has a minimum right-of-way radius of 45 feet, except that
if an equally safe and convenient form of paved space is approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council in place of a turning
circle, such approved space may be improved as agreed upon.



         (d)   Relation to adjoining streets and land. The system
of streets designated for the subdivision, except in unusual cases, must
connect with streets already dedicated in adjacent subdivision; and where no
adjacent connections are platted, must in general be the reasonable
projection of streets in the nearest subdivided tracts, and must be continued
to the boundaries of the tract subdivided, so that other subdivisions may
connect therewith. Reserve strips of land controlling access to or egress
from other property or to or from any street or alley or having the effect of
restricting or damaging the adjoining property for subdivision purposes or
which will not be taxable or accessible for special improvements shall not be
permitted in any subdivision unless such reserve strips are conveyed to the
city on fee simple.



         (e)   Street grades. Street grades shall be in
accordance with the AASHTO manual, A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways
and Streets, most current edition, and shall be approved by the City
Engineer. Major street grades shall in no case exceed 8%, and this grade
cannot be used for a continuous distance greater than 200 feet. Minor or
local residential streets shall in no case exceed a 10% grade. All streets
must have a minimum grade of 0.30% unless otherwise approved by the City
Engineer. Whenever a cross slope is necessary or desirable from one curb to
the opposite curb, such cross slope shall be in accordance with the AASHTO
manual, and approved by the City Engineer.



         (f)   Block lengths and widths. In general, intersecting
streets, determining block lengths, shall be provided at such intervals as to
serve cross traffic adequately and to meet existing streets or customary
subdivision practices in the neighborhood. Where no existing plats control,
the blocks shall be not more than 1,600 feet in length nor less than 300 feet
in length except in unusual cases.



         (g)   Street widths. Major streets shall have a minimum
dedicated width of 80 feet or as prescribed by the major thoroughfare plan
with a minimum pavement width in accordance with the major thoroughfare plan
standards. Secondary streets shall have a minimum dedicated width of 60 to 80
feet, with a minimum paving width of 36 to 44 feet. Minor or local
residential streets shall have a minimum dedicated width of 50 feet, and all
minor or local residential streets shall have a minimum pavement width of 31
feet from back of curb to back of curb, except that in the case of
curvilinear streets such width shall be increased to a width of 33 feet from
back of curb to back of curb, if required by the City Engineer or City
Manager in order to provide easy and safe travel on such streets. Where the
curve is not too sharp, it shall be the policy not to require the additional
width in such curvilinear streets.



         (h)   Sidewalks. Parallel residential sidewalks may be
required, and where provided they shall be not less than three feet in width
exclusive of curb width; parallel to and not more than two feet above or
below the adjacent curb grade; and shall be located one foot inside the
dedicated street line and be situated wholly within the dedicated street.
Sidewalks abutting business property shall have a minimum width of ten feet.
Parkways (the area between curbs and right-of-way line) shall be excavated or
filled to a grade parallel with and be not more than two feet above and shall
not be lower than the centerline street grade at the right-of-way line.
Landing walk of a width not less than 18 inches may be installed abutting the
rear of the curb. The City of Mount Pleasant does not require sidewalks.
However, if sidewalks are built they need to comply with ADA requirements.



         (i)   Alleys and alley width. When alleys are provided,
the minimum right-of-way width of an alley shall be 20 feet and the minimum
paved width shall be 15 feet. Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted, except
that the City Council may waive this requirement where such dead-end alleys
are unavoidable and where adequate turn-around facilities have been provided.
Alleys that provide garage access shall be built according to city street
standards and specifications.



         (j)   Work subject to inspection; construction
specifications. All construction work, such as street grading, street paving,
storm sewers, curb or gutter work, sanitary sewers, or water mains performed
by the owner, developer, or contractor, shall be subject to inspection during
construction by the proper authorities of the city and shall be constructed
in accordance with the specifications approved by the City Council, and in
accordance with the provisions of the ordinance governing the making of any
excavation in streets, avenues, or alleys and which are on file in the
offices of the City Engineer and City Manager.



         (k)   Curb and gutter. Curb and gutter shall be required
to be constructed on all streets and avenues. Radial curb and gutter shall be
constructed at each corner upon each block to which curb and gutter is
constructed. All alley intersections shall be constructed with alley aprons
in accordance with city standards. All curb and gutter and all lay down curbs
shall be 30 inches wide from the back of the curb to the toe of the gutter,
and shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications on
file in the office of the City Engineer or the Director of Public Works. All
concrete used shall have a compressive strength of 3,000 psi in 28 days, and
shall contain no fly ash. Concrete shall have an air-entraining agent to
provide 4% and 6% entrained air.



         (l)   Street standards. All proposed streets and alleys
to be paved in a subdivision shall be designed by a Registered Professional
Engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas. At a minimum, the design
and construction of streets and alleys shall conform to the following
guidelines:



            1.   Plan and profile sheets, 24 inches by 36
inches, and plotted to a scale of 100 feet to one inch horizontal and ten
feet to one inch vertical for each proposed street or alley in the
subdivision shall be provided. These plan and profile sheets shall show the
right-of-way of the street and portions of the right-of-way of intersection
street and portions shall show the existing ground and the proposed grade at
five points of cross-section; that is, at the centerline, the back-of-curb
lines, and the property lines. The plan portion shall show the size and
location of all drainage structures, storm sewers, curb inlets, and the like,
and the direction of flow of all storm water.



            2.   Typical cross-sections shall be shown of the
type and width of paving proposed for the streets. A minimum cross slope of
2% shall be required on all streets and alleys. Curbs and gutters, pavement
types, and drainage structure design standards of the city, in effect at the
time of submission of final plat, shall be used, subject to the approval of
the City Engineer or City Manager and City Council.



            3.   North Point, scale, and date shall be shown.



            4.   Construction of all streets in the
subdivision and approval thereof by the City Engineer shall be mandatory
before street paving is accepted for maintenance by the city. All street
paving shall conform to one of the following standards:



               a.   Minimum six-inch compacted flexible
base material meeting the requirements of the Texas Department of
Transportation's Standard Specifications for Construction of Highways,
Streets, and Bridges, most current edition, Item 247 - Flexible Base, Type A
or B, Grade 1, 2, or 6. Surface shall be a minimum of 2 inches thick, meeting
requirements of Items 340 - Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete Pavement, Type D. All
base courses shall be constructed on subgrade course approved by the City
Engineer. In areas of poor subgrade, the developer may be required to
stabilize the subgrade material with lime or other approved materials to
obtain an acceptable subgrade condition, as determined by the City Engineer.
Density requirements for all pavement courses and the condition of all
pavement courses shall be as defined and approved by the City Engineer.



               b.   Six-inch reinforced concrete pavement
with integral curb and gutter. The compressive strength of the concrete shall
not be less than 4,000 psi in 28 days, the cement content shall be no less
than 6.5 sacks per cubic yard, and the maximum water/cement ratio shall not
exceed 5.0 gallons/sack. Where the subgrade is rock, the rock shall be
removed to a depth of four inches and backfilled with sand before placing the
concrete. The pavement shall be reinforced with #4 bars on 18" centers of #3
bars on ten inches centers. All pavement shall be approved by the City
Engineer. All  subgrade, subbase, form lines, and grades shall be approved
by the Director of Public Works or the City Engineer prior to the placement
of any concrete.



            5.   The type of surface course to be used shall
be designated by the City Manager and approved by the City Council. All
street construction shall be performed by a bonded contractor who has filed a
faithful performance bond for the city, as required in the ordinance covering
specifications for street construction.



      (5)   Final plats shall be accompanied by plan-profile sheets,
22 inches by 36 inches, and platted to a scale of 100 feet to one inch
horizontal and ten feet to one inch vertical for each proposed street in the
subdivision. These plan-profiles shall show the right-of-way of the street
and portions of the right-of-way of intersecting streets in the plan portion.
The profile portion shall show the existing ground and the proposed grade at
five points of cross-section; that is, at the centerline, the back-of-curb
lines, and the property lines. The plan portion shall show the size and
location of all drainage structures, storm sewers, curb inlets, and the like
and the direction of flow of all storm water.



      (6)   Typical cross-sections shall be shown of the type and
width of paving proposed for the streets. Curbs and gutters, pavement types,
and drainage structure design standards of the city, in effect at the time of
submission of the plat, shall be used, subject to the approval of the City
Engineer or City Manager and City Council.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 5.3, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.78 STORM DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Drainage structures shall be constructed in such locations and
of such size and dimensions to adequately serve the subdivision and the
contributing drainage area, and in accordance with the drainage study. The
developer shall provide all the necessary easements and rights-of-way
required for drainage structures, including storm sewer, open or lined
channels, or overland flow discharges. Easement width for open or lined
channels shall be at least 15 feet wider than the top of the channel, ten
feet of which shall be on one side to serve as an access for maintenance
purposes. Design flow of storm drainage water is to be calculated based on
the major and minor storms.



   (B)   Streets shall be designed so that in a minor storm, water will
not overtop the curb. Flow may spread to the crown of the street. Streets and
adjoining properties shall be designed so that in a major storm, water will
not inundate residential dwellings and public, commercial, or industrial
buildings at the lowest finished floor elevation. The depth of water at the
street crown may not exceed 12 inches. The depth of water over the gutter
flowline shall not exceed 24 inches.



   (C)   The design, size, type, and location of all storm drainage
facilities shall be approved by the City Manager or City Engineer. The storm
water drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer
system. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by the rational
method, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with
plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across
or around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than 600 feet in the
gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a
point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and
basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water drainage
patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block.



      (1)   Open or lined drainage ditches. Open or lined drainage
ditches, as required by the City Engineer, shall be constructed in the
locations defined in drainage study. All open or lined channels shall have a
minimum bottom width of four feet, and shall be designed based on the major
and minor storms. Side slopes of channels shall not be steeper than one foot
vertical rise to four feet horizontal distance unless approved by the
Director of Public Works shall determine if the velocity or other factors
warrant a lined channel.



      (2)   Storm sewer. Water in excess of the maximum allowed
shall be carried by storm sewers or channels. Location and design of storm
sewer shall be approved by the City Engineer.



      (3)   Accessibility to public storm sewers.



         (a)   Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the
applicant shall install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a
reasonable distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of
storm waters, subject to the specifications of the City Engineer.



         (b)   If a connection to a public storm sewer will be
provided eventually, as determined by the City Engineer, the developer shall
make arrangements for future storm water disposal by a public utility system
at the time the plat receives final approval. Provision for such connection
shall be incorporated by inclusion in the subdivision improvement agreement
required for the subdivision plat.



      (4)   Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or
other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate
potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage, whether inside or outside
the subdivision. The City Engineer shall determine the necessary size of the
facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards and
specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed permitted
by the Zoning Ordinance.



      (5)   Effect on downstream drainage areas. The City Engineer
shall also study the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream
drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Local government
drainage studies together with such other studies as shall be appropriate,
shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that
the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will
overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the City Engineer may
withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the
expansion of the existing downstream drainage facility. No subdivision shall
be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage
watercourse or facility.



      (6)   Areas of poor drainage. Whenever a plat is submitted for
an area that is subject to flooding, the City Engineer may approve such
subdivision provided that the applicant fills the affected area of the
subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place the elevation of streets and
lots at a minimum of 12 inches above the elevation of the 100-year
floodplain, as determined by the City Engineer. The plat of the subdivision
shall provide for an overflow zone along the bank of any stream or
watercourse, in a width that shall be sufficient in times of high water to
contain or move the water, and no fill shall be placed in the overflow zone
nor shall any structure be erected or placed in the overflow zone. The
boundaries of the overflow zone shall be subject to approval by the City
Engineer. The City Engineer may deny subdivision approval for areas of
extremely poor drainage.



      (7)   Floodplain areas. The City Engineer may, when it deems
necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future
population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage,
and sanitary facilities, prohibit the subdivision of any portion of the
property that lies within the floodplain of any stream or drainage course.
These floodplain areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or
damage resulting from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste material,
or stumps, except at the discretion the City Engineer.



   (D)   Dedication of drainage easements.



      (1)   General requirements. When a subdivision is traversed by
a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a
storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the
lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction as will be
adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the
drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate
width for maximum potential volume of flow.



      (2)   Drainage easements.



         (a)   Where topography or other conditions are such as
to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road
rights-of-way, perpetual, unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width
for drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road
lines and with satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be indicated
on the plat. Drainage easements shall extend from the road to a natural
watercourse or to other drainage facilities.



         (b)   When a proposed drainage system will carry water
across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must
be secured and indicated on the plat.



         (c)   The applicant shall dedicate by a drainage
easement or conservation easement, land on both sides of existing
water-courses to a distance to be determined by the City Engineer.



         (d)   Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to
flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in
areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state
as drainage ways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not
be computed in determining the number of lots to be utilized for average
density procedures nor for computing the area requirement of any lot.



      (3)   Intersections.



         (a)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as
nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two new
streets at an angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable. An
oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be
approximately at right angles for at least 100 feet therefrom. Not more than
two streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (b)   Proposed new intersections along one side of an
existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing
intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with
centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted, except where
the intersected street has separated dual drives without median breaks at
either intersection. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment
shall be continuous. Intersection of major streets shall be at least 800 feet
apart.



         (c)   Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two
local streets shall be at least 20 feet; and minimum curb radius at an
intersection involving a collector street shall be at least 25 feet. Alley
intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the
corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practice to permit
safe vehicular movement.



         (d)   Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade
wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an
intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a 2%
rate at a distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of
the intersecting street.



         (e)   Where any street intersection will involve earth
banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a
traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground
and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the
public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to provide an adequate
sight distance.



         (f)   Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the
applicant, as by the City Council shall be constructed at the full expense of
the applicant without reimbursement from the local government. The sharing
expense for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the
applicant as determined by the City Council, will be fixed by special
agreement between the governing body and the applicant. The cost of bridges
that do not solely benefit the developer shall be charged to the developer
pro rata based on the percentage obtained by dividing the service area of the
bridge into the area of the land being developed by the subdivider.



   (E)   Road dedications and reservations.



      (1)   New perimeter streets. Street systems in new
subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or avoid perimeter half
streets.



      (2)   Widening and realignment of existing roads. Where a
subdivision borders an existing narrow road or when the master plan or zoning
setback regulations indicate plans for realignment or widening a road that
would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall
be required to improve and dedicate at its expense those areas for widening
or realignment of those roads. Frontage roads and streets as described above
shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant at its own expense to the
full width as required by these subdivision regulations when the applicant's
development activities contribute to the need for the road expansion. Land
reserved for any road purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance whether the land is to be dedicated to
the municipality in fee simple or an easement is granted to the local
government.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 5.4, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.79 WATER FACILITIES.



   (A)   General requirements. The applicant shall install water
facilities in a manner prescribed by the local government construction
standards and specifications.



   (B)   When a public water main is not accessible, the developer
shall take necessary action to extend or create a water-supply district for
the purpose of providing a water-supply system capable of providing for
domestic water use and fire protection.



   (C)   When a public water main is accessible, the developer shall
install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the
specifications of state or local authorities. All water mains shall be at
least six inches in diameter.



   (D)   Water main extensions shall be approved by the City Engineer.



   (E)   The location of all fire hydrants, all water supply
improvements, and the boundary lines of proposed districts, indicating all
improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the preliminary plat,
and the cost of installing same shall be borne by the developer.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 5.5, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.80 SEWERAGE FACILITIES.



   (A)   General requirements. The applicant shall install sanitary
sewer facilities in a manner prescribed by the local government construction
standards and specifications. All plans shall be designed and approved in
accordance with the rules, regulations, and standards of the City Engineer,
Health Department, and other appropriate state agency. All installations
shall conform to the latest applicable "Design Criteria for Sewerage Systems"
as published by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.



   (B)   Mandatory connection to public sewer system. If a public
sanitary sewer is accessible and a sanitary sewer is placed in a street or
alley abutting upon property, the owner of the property shall be required to
connect to the sewer for the purpose of disposing of waste, and it shall be
unlawful for any such owner or occupant to maintain upon any such property an
individual sewage disposal system.



   (C)   Unauthorized waste disposal. No connection shall be made to
the city's sewage system which will permit the entrance of surface water from
roof, street, or other type drains.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 5.6, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.81 UTILITIES.



   (A)   Location. All utility facilities existing and proposed
throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
Underground service connections to the street property line of each platted
lot shall be installed at the subdivider's expense.



   (B)   Easements.



      (1)   Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided
for utilities (private and municipal) and such easements shall be at least 15
feet wide. Proper coordination shall be established between the subdivider
and the applicable utility companies for the establishment of utility
easements established in adjoining properties.



      (2)   When topographical or other conditions are such as to
make impractical the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines,
perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided
along side lot lines with satisfactory access to the road or rear lot lines.
Easements shall be indicated on the plat.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 5.7, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.82 NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION.



   (A)   General. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned
for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with
respect to the land shall make provision as the Planning and Zoning
Commission or the City Council may require. A nonresidential subdivision
shall also be subject to all the requirements of site plan approval set forth
in the Zoning Ordinance. Site plan approval and nonresidential subdivision
plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the Planning
and Zoning Commission or the City Council. A nonresidential subdivision shall
be subject to all the requirements of these regulations, as well as such
additional standards required by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the
City Council, and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards
established in the Master Plan, Official Map, and Zoning Ordinance.



   (B)   Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in
these regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions,
the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the City Council that the street, parcel, and block
pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes
into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and
standards shall be observed:



      (1)   Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area
and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated.



      (2)   Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to
accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated
thereupon.



      (3)   Special requirements may be imposed by the local
government with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and
construction.



      (4)   Special requirements may be imposed by the local
government with respect to the installation of public utilities, including
water, sewer, and storm water drainage.



      (5)   Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent
residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or
industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels
backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions
for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary.



      (6)   Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially
truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent
existing or potential areas.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 5.8, passed 9-20-05)



§ 154.99 PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any of these regulations shall be subject to a
fine as provided by state law and according to City of Mount Pleasant Code of
Ordinances § 10.99 General Penalties.



(Ord. 2005-6, § 1.15, passed 9-20-05)



APPENDIX A: PRELIMINARY PLAT ENDORSEMENTS



The Planning & Zoning Commission of the City of Mount Pleasant on this the 
                                    day of          
                                                   
                                                   
  voted affirmatively to recommend approval of this preliminary plat.



 



 



BY:    



                                                   
  CHAIRMAN



 



ATTEST:    



                                                   
CITY PLANNER



 



 



This City Council of the City of Mount Pleasant on this the 
             day of                ,



             voted affirmatively to approve this preliminary plat.



 



 



BY:    



                                                 
MAYOR



 



ATTEST:    



                                                CITY
SECRETARY



APPENDIX B: FINAL PLAT ENDORSEMENTS FOR PLANNING & ZONING  AND CITY COUNCIL
APPROVAL



STATE OF TEXAS      )



COUNTY OF TITUS    )  OWNER'S ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND DEDICATION



 



I (we), the undersigned owner(s) of the land shown on this plat within the
area described by the metes and bounds description shown hereon, and
designated herein as                     and whose name is
subscribed hereto, hereby dedicate to the use of the public forever all
streets, alleys, parks, easements, rights-of-way and public places shown
thereon.



                                                   
         



OWNER



 



STATE OF TEXAS      )



COUNTY OF TITUS      )



 



BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared
            



             known to me to be the person whose name is
subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he
executed the same for the purposes therein stated.



 



Given under my hand and seal of office this              day of
                        ,



            .



                                       �
�     



               



NOTARY PUBLIC, STATE OF TEXAS



(seal)



 



 



 



STATE OF TEXAS      )



COUNTY OF TITUS      ) CERTIFICATE OF SURVEYOR



 



I, the undersigned Registered Public Surveyor in the State of Texas, hereby
certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual
survey of the property made under my supervision on the ground.



 



                           



(seal)      REGISTERED PUBLIC SURVEYOR



         NO.          



 



The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Mount Pleasant on this the
          day of                 
,          voted affirmatively to recommend approval of this plat.



 



BY:                               



         CHAIRMAN



 



ATTEST:                               



         CITY PLANNER



 



 



The City Council of the City of Mount Pleasant on this the
             day of                ,
          voted affirmatively to approve this plat.



 



BY:                               



         MAYOR



 



 



ATTEST:                            



         CITY SECRETARY



 



 



I,                     , City Planner for the City of
Mount Pleasant, on this the             day of
                  , hereby affirmatively approve this plat
as to conformity with the development guidelines of the City of Mount
Pleasant.



 



BY:                               



       CITY PLANNER



 



 



I,                         , City Engineer for the
City of Mount Pleasant, on this the              day of
                     ,              hereby
affirmatively approve this plat as to conformity with respect to all sewer
and water facilities and that same comply with all rules, regulations, and
requirements of local government, regional, state, and federal authorities.



 



BY:                               



      CITY ENGINEER



 



 



I,                               , Titus County
Health Official, on this the          day of
                  ,              hereby
affirmatively approve this plat as to conformity with respect to all sewer
and water facilities and that same comply with all rules, regulations, and
requirements of local government, regional, state, and federal authorities.



 



BY:                                  



      TITUS COUNTY HEALTH OFFICIAL



 



STATE OF TEXAS      )



COUNTY OF TITUS      )



 



Approved by the Commissioner's Court of Titus County, Texas on this the
             day of                ,
            .



 



BY:                                 



         COUNTY JUDGE



 



ATTEST:                               



         SECRETARY



APPENDIX C: FINAL PLAT ENDORSEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL



STATE OF TEXAS      )



COUNTY OF TITUS      )    OWNER'S ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND DEDICATION



 



I (we), the undersigned owner(s) of the land shown on this plat within the
area described by the metes and bounds description shown hereon, and
designated herein as                            



and whose name is subscribed hereto, hereby dedicate to the use of the public
forever all streets, alleys, parks, easements, rights-of-way and public
places shown thereon.



 



                              



OWNER



 



 



 



STATE OF TEXAS      )



COUNTY OF TITUS      )



 



BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared
            , known to me to be the person whose name is
subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he
executed the same for the purposes therein stated.



 



 



Given under my hand and seal of office this                day
of                      ,                .



 



                              



            NOTARY PUBLIC, STATE OF TEXAS



(seal)



 



 



 



STATE OF TEXAS      )



COUNTY OF TITUS      )   CERTIFICATE OF SURVEYOR



 



I, the undersigned Registered Public Surveyor in the State of Texas, hereby
certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual
survey of the property made under my supervision on the ground.



 



                           



(seal)   REGISTERED PUBLIC SURVEYOR



      NO.             



 



I,                               , City
Engineer for the City of Mount Pleasant, on this the
                day of                   ,
            hereby affirmatively approve this plat as to
conformity with respect to all sewer and water facilities and that same
comply with all rules, regulations, and requirements of local government,
regional, state, and federal authorities.



 



BY:                               



      CITY ENGINEER



 



 



I,                               , City Planner
for the City of Mount Pleasant, on this the             day of
         ,              hereby affirmatively approve
this plat as to conformity with the development guidelines of the City of
Mount Pleasant.



 



BY:                               



      CITY PLANNER



 



 



I,                               , Titus County
Health Official, on this the              day of
               ,              hereby affirmatively
approve this plat as to conformity with respect to all sewer and water
facilities and that same comply with all rules, regulations, and requirements
of local government, regional, state, and federal authorities.



 



BY:                                  



      TITUS COUNTY HEALTH OFFICIAL



 



 



STATE OF TEXAS      )



COUNTY OF TITUS      )



 



Approved by the Commissioner's Court of Titus County, Texas on this the
               day of                   ,
            .



 



BY:                               



         COUNTY JUDGE



 



 



ATTEST:                            



         SECRETARY



CHAPTER 155:  ZONING CODE



Section



General Provisions



   155.01   Title



   155.02   Purpose



   155.03   Definitions



   155.04   Zoning districts



   155.05   Zoning map and boundaries



   155.06   Annexation policy



District Regulations



   155.20   FD - Future Development District



   155.21   SF-1 - Single-Family Residential District



   155.22   SF-2 - Single-Family Residential District



   155.23   TF - Two-Family Residential District



   155.24   MF - Multi-Family Residential District



   155.25   MH - Mobile Home District



   155.26   NS - Neighborhood Service District



   155.27   GR - General Retail District



   155.28   CB - Central Business District



   155.29   C - Commercial District



   155.30   LI - Light Industrial District



   155.31   HI - Heavy Industrial District



   155.32   PD - Planned Development District



   155.33   FP - Flood Plain District



Supplemental Regulations



   155.45   Specific use regulations



   155.46   Special development regulations



   155.47   Off-street parking and loading regulations



   155.48   Sign regulations



   155.49   Nonconforming buildings and uses of land



   155.50   Communication towers/telecommunications facilities



   155.51   Landscape



Administration and Enforcement



   155.60   Enforcement



   155.61   Building permits



   155.62   Board of Adjustment



   155.63   Planning and Zoning Commission



   155.64   Changes and amendments



 



   155.99   Penalty



   Appendix:   Use Regulation Schedule



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 155.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Mount Pleasant, Texas.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. I, § 1)



§ 155.02  PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is declared to be the intent and purpose of this chapter to
promote and protect the health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and
general welfare of the citizens of Mount Pleasant by assuring quality
development to allow for proper economic growth which conforms to a
comprehensive plan of the city. It is further declared that the purpose of
this chapter is:



      (1)   To promote the stability of existing land uses that
conform with a comprehensive plan and to protect them from unharmonious
influences and harmful intrusions;



      (2)   To promote a harmonious, convenient, workable
relationship among land uses;



      (3)   To encourage quality development through effective
planning which utilizes modern innovations of urban design;



      (4)   To promote and protect the aesthetic quality of the city
by conserving and enhancing the taxable values of land and buildings
throughout the city;



      (5)   To protect and enhance areas of scenic, historic or
cultural importance;



      (6)   To provide adequate light and air;



      (7)   To encourage proper population densities and prevent the
overcrowding of structures;



      (8)   To provide adequate protection for community investments
in water, streets, sewerage, schools, parks and other community facilities;



      (9)   To promote a safe, effective traffic circulation system;
and



      (10)   To provide safety from fire and other dangers.



   (B)   The city is divided into zones or districts, redistricting and
regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry,
residence and other specified uses; to regulate the intensity of the use of
lot areas and to regulate and determine the area of open spaces surrounding
such buildings; to establish building lines and locations of buildings
designed for specified industrial, business, residential and other uses
within such areas; to fix standards to which buildings or structures shall
conform therein; to prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with
the character of such districts, respectively; to prevent additions to and
alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or structures in such a way
as to avoid the restriction; and limitations lawfully imposed hereunder,
providing for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land,
buildings and structures.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. I, § 2)



§ 155.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words
used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number
include the plural, and words in the plural number include the singular and
use of any gender shall be applicable to all genders; the word “shall” is
mandatory and not directory;



   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. A subordinate building, or portion of the
main building, the use of which is incidental or secondary to that of the
dominant or primary use of the main building or land. An accessory use is one
which is incidental or secondary to the main use of the premises.



   ALLEY. A public way which provides only a secondary means of access to
abutting property.



   APARTMENT. A room or group of rooms in a multi-family dwelling
arranged, designed or occupied as a place of residence by a single-family,
individual or group of individuals.



   BASEMENT.  A building story which is partly underground but having at
least ½ of its height above the average land of the adjoining ground. A
BASEMENT is counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations if
subdivided and used for business or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor
employed on the premises.



   BILLBOARD. Any single detached sign exceeding 250 square feet in gross
area and used as an outdoor display for the purpose of making known,
advertising or displaying anything shall be determined to be a billboard.



   BLOCK. An area enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for
buildings; or if said word is used as a term of measurement, it shall mean
the distance along a side of a street between the nearest two streets which
intersect said street.



   BOARDINGHOUSE. A building other than hotel where for compensation and
by prearrangement for definite periods meals or lodging and meals are
provided for three or more persons but not exceeding 15 persons.



   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter, enclosure or
protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.  BUILDING
includes the term STRUCTURE.



   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level
or from the natural ground level if higher (or if no street grades have been
established) to the highest point of a flat roof or to the deck line of a
mansard roof or to the average height level between eaves and ridge for a
gable, hip or gambrel roof.



   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The person charged with the enforcement of building
codes of the City of Mount Pleasant.



   BUILDING LINE. A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street
line at a specified distance, thereby establishing the minimum distance from
the street line that a building may be erected.



   CARGO OR SHIPPING CONTAINERS.  Sealable shipping containers, designed
for intermodal transportation, either with or without a permanent affixed
chassis, used in intrastate, interstate and international commerce for the
shipment of goods and merchandise.



   CARPORT. A roofed but otherwise unenclosed structure designed to
shelter an automobile.



   CELLAR. A story having more than ½ its height below the average level
of the adjoining ground.  A cellar shall not be counted as a story in
computing building height.



   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. An official certificate issued by the city
through the enforcing official which indicates conformance with the zoning
regulations and authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued.



   CHANGEABLE ELECTRONIC VARIABLE MESSAGE SIGN.  A sign or portion of a
sign, that displays an electronic image or video, which may or may not
include text, including any sign or portion of a sign that uses changing
lights or similar form of electronic display such as LED to form a sign
message or messages with text and or images wherein the sequence of messages
and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by
electronic processes. This definition includes without limitation television
screens, digital screens, flat screens, LED displays, video boards, and
holographic displays. This includes any sign which permits light to be turned
on or off intermittently or which is operated in a way whereby light is
turned on or off intermittently, including any illuminated sign on which such
illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all
times when such sign is in use, including an LED (light emitting diode) or
digital sign, and which varies in intensity or color. A CEVMS does not
include a sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic
control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) approved by the Federal Highway Administrator
as the National Standard.



   CLINIC. An institution or station for the examination and treatment of
outpatients.



   CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME. Any structure used for or occupied by
persons recovering from illness or suffering from the infirmities of old age.



   COURT. An open, unoccupied space bounded on more than two sides by the
walls of a building. An inner court is entirely surrounded by the exterior
walls of a building. An outer court is a court having one side open to a
street, alley, yard or other permanently open space.



   COVERAGE. The percent of a lot or tract covered by the roof or first
floor of a building. Roof eaves to the extent of two feet from the walls of a
building shall be excluded from coverage computations.



   DAY.  Means the portion of one calendar day from sunrise to sunset.



   DAY CARE CENTER. A facility that provides care for more than six
children for all or part of the 24-hour day, but excluding a facility that
regularly provides care in the caretaker’s own residence for not more than
six children under 14 years of age, excluding the caretaker’s own children,
and that provides care after school for not more than six additional
school-age children (the total number is no more than 12 at any time).



   DISTRICT. Any section of the City of Mount Pleasant within which the
zoning regulations are uniform.



   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. An establishment serving food and drink to
customers in their cars. This definition does not include an establishment
which serves customers through drive-in windows and which provides limited
seating within the building.



   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. A detached building having accommodations for and
occupied exclusively by one-family.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached building having separate
accommodations for and occupied exclusively by two families living
independently of each other.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building designed for and occupied by
three or more families living independently of each other.



   DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion of a building which is designed
for or used for residential purposes.



   EFFICIENCY APARTMENT. An apartment having a combination living and
bedroom (no separate bedroom).



   FAMILY. One person or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or
legal adoption or a group of not more than three unrelated persons occupying
a dwelling unit. A group of people occupying a boardinghouse, dormitory,
lodging house, fraternity, hotel or similar establishment shall not be
construed as a family.



   FLASHING SIGN.  Means a sign which contains an intermittent or
sequential flashing light source used primarily to attract attention,
utilizing a lighting source such as an incandescent or flurorescent light
bulb, LED or other source of illumination.



   FLOOR AREA. The total square feet of floor space within the outside
dimensions of a building including each floor level, but excluding cellars,
carports or garages.



   FRONTAGE. All the property abutting on one or more walls common with
the principal building by an enclosed porch or passageway, the roof of which
is a part or extension of the roof of the principal building.



   GARAGE, ATTACHED. A garage which has one or more walls common with the
principal building by an enclosed porch or passageway, the roof of which is a
part or extension of the roof of the principal building.



   GRADE. This term includes the following:



      (1)   For buildings having walls adjoining one street only,
the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street;



      (2)   For buildings having walls adjoining more than one
street, the average of the elevations of the sidewalk at the centers of all
walls adjoining the streets;



      (3)   For buildings having no wall adjoining a street, the
average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior
walls of the building;



      (4)   Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than 15
feet from a street line is to be considered as adjoining the street. Where
sidewalks do not exist, the grade shall be as established by the office of
the Director of Public Works.



   HOME BEAUTY SHOP. The business, practice or trade of hair dressing or
cosmetology within a residential dwelling.



   HOTEL. A building in which lodging or boarding are provided for more
than 12 persons and is offered to the public for compensation and in which
entrance and exit to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or
office supervised by an individual on duty at all times. A HOTEL is available
to the transient public in contrast to the boardinghouse, a rooming house or
an apartment, which are herein defined separately.



   INSTITUTION. A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or
nonprofit establishment for public use.



   LANDSCAPING. The creation of an aesthetic effect by the use of a
combination of plant material, including but not limited to grass, trees,
shrubs, planters, brick, stone, natural forms, water forms, aggregate and
other features.



   LED.  Light emitting diode.



   LOADING SPACE. A space within the main building or on the same lot,
providing for the off-street standing, unloading or loading of trucks or
trailers.



   LOT. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings and including such open spaces as required under this chapter and
having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved
place.  LOT includes the terms PLOT, TRACT, or PARCEL OF LAND.



   LOT AREA. The net area of the lot not including portion of streets or
alleys.



   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of two or more streets.



   LOT, DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.



   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.



   LOT, KEY. A corner lot in which the rear lot line of a structure abuts
the side lot line of another structure which fronts a side street.



   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.



   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets.



   LOT WIDTH. The distance between the side lot lines measured along the
building setback line when one is required and otherwise along the street
line; in the case of an irregularly shaped lot, the width of the lot shall be
the average of the greatest and least distances between the side lot lines.



   MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure capable of being towed by a
motor vehicle, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling
mode, is 8 body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length or,
when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet. The structure is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MOBILE or MANUFACTURED HOME shall include the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning and electrical systems contained within the structure.



   MODULAR HOME. A dwelling that is manufactured in two or more modules at
a location other than the homesite and which is designed to be used as a
residence when the modules are transported to the homesite and the modules
are joined together on a permanent and conventional foundation. The term
MODULAR HOME shall include only those structures with composition roofs, with
a pitch greater than a 2½-foot rise for every 12 feet of run. The term also
includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
contained in the structure. However, the term MODULAR HOME shall not mean or
apply to:



      (1)   Sectional or panelized housing in which the basic
components assembled at a homesite are not at least three-dimensional modules;



      (2)   A ready-built home which is constructed so that the
entire living area is contained in a single unit or section at a temporary
location for the purpose of selling it and moving it to another location;



      (3)   A home constructed in modules incorporating concrete or
masonry as the primary structural component.



   MOTEL OR MOTOR COURT. A building or group of buildings used for the
temporary residence of motorists or travelers.



   NIGHT.  The portion of two calendar days from sunset to sunrise.



   NITS.  Candela per meter square – used as a measurement of
brightness.



   NONCONFORMING USE. Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at
the time of passage of this chapter which does not conform after the passage
of this chapter with the district in which it is situated.



   PARKING AREA. An open unoccupied space used or required for use for
parking of vehicles exclusively and in which no gasoline or vehicular
accessories are sold or no other business is conducted and no fees are
charged.



   PARKING LOT. An open, surfaced area used exclusively for the temporary
storage of motor vehicles and within which motor fuels and oils may be sold
and fees charged, but no vehicles are to be equipped, repaired, rented or
sold.



   PLACE. An open, unoccupied space or thoroughfare other than a street or
alley permanently reserved as a principal means of access to abutting
property.



   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. Land under unified control, planned and developed
as a whole in a single development operation or a definitely programmed
series of development operations, including all land and buildings.



   PORTABLE SIGN.  Any sign designed or constructed to be easily moved
from one location to another and not permanently affixed to the ground or to
a structure or building, including signs mounted upon or designed to be
mounted upon a trailer, bench, wheeled carrier, or other non-motorized mobile
structure. A portable sign which has its wheels removed shall still be
considered a portable sign under this definition.



   PREMISES. A lot together with all buildings and structures existing
thereon.



   PROMOTIONAL EVENT. A carnival, circus, fair, revival or similar
temporary activity produced for a shopping center, business, public or
semipublic use.



   RESTAURANT. A building serving food to customers inside the building
while occupying seating provided for customers.



   ROOMING OR LODGING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel where lodging
for three but no more than 12 persons is provided for definite periods for
compensation in accordance with a previous arrangement.



   SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA. An apparatus constructed of solid, mesh or
perforated materials of any configuration that is used to receive television
signals from a satellite and including any poles, frame or other supporting
structure.



   SIGN AREA. The sign area shall be the area of the rectangular
enclosures of the entire sign other than structural supports.



   SIGN. A presentation or representation by letters, figures, designs,
pictures, devices, emblems, insignia, numbers, lines or colors displayed so
as to be visible to the public for the purpose of making anything known or
attracting attention.



   SIGN, OWNER IDENTIFICATION. A sign which pertains only to the use of a
premise and which contains information pertaining to the name of the owner,
occupancy or management associated with the use of the property, the kind of
business or the brand name of the principal commodity sold on the premises or
other information relative to a service or activity involved in the conduct
of the business, but not including the names of subsidiary products being
sold.



   STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.



   STORY, HALF. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the
top floor level and in which space not more than two-thirds  of the floor
area is finished off for use. A half-story containing independent apartment
or living quarters shall be counted as a full story.



   STREET. A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal
means of access to adjoining property.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or that it be attached to something having a location
on the ground.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders or any substantial
changes in the roof or exterior walls.



   SWIMMING POOL. Any constructed or prefabricated pool containing or
normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater than 18
inches.



   TRAVEL TRAILER. A structure equipped for use as a dwelling and designed
to be towed along a highway by a motor vehicle and which is of such dimension
and weight that it can be licensed and no special permit is required for use
of the state highways.



   TEMPORARY SIGN.  A promotional placard. Such signs are constructed of
cardboard, wallboard, plastic, or metal and are not intended for long-term
use. A sign intended to display either commercial or non-commercial messages
of a transitory or temporary nature. These signs are not permanently embedded
in the ground, or permanently affixed to a building or sign structure that is
permanently embedded in the ground. A portable sign shall not be considered a
temporary sign.



   URBAN DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per acre of ground. AVERAGE
URBAN DENSITY shall mean approximately 12 dwelling units per acre of ground.



   YARD. An open space other than a court on the same lot with a building
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise
provided herein.



   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the
side yard line and the main building or any projections thereof other than
the projection permitted in § 155.46.



   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side
lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear of the
main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of
uncovered steps, uncovered balconies or uncovered porches and the rear lot
line.



   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the main building and the side line of the
lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. I, § 3) (Am. Ord. 1990-9, passed 6-5-90;
Am. Ord. 1993-3, passed 2-2-93; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 11-18-03; Am. Ord.
2008-13, passed 5-20-08)



§ 155.04  ZONING DISTRICTS.



   The City of Mount Pleasant is divided into the following districts or
classifications:



   (A)   FD - Future Development District;



   (B)   SF-1 - Single-Family Residential District;



   (C)   SF-2 - Single-Family Residential District;



   (D)   TF - Two-Family Residential District;



   (E)   MF - Multi-Family Residential District;



   (F)   MH - Mobile Home District;



   (G)   NS - Neighborhood Service District;



   (H)   GR - General Retail District;



   (I)   CB - Central Business District;



   (J)   C - Commercial District;



   (K)   LI - Light Industrial District;



   (L)   HI - Heavy Industrial District;



   (M)   PD - Planned Development District;



   (N)   FP - Flood Plan District.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. I, § 4)



§ 155.05  ZONING MAP AND BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   Maps. The boundaries of these districts are established as
shown on the map accompanying and made a part of this chapter, which map is
designated as the Zoning District Map of the City of Mount Pleasant. The
Zoning District Map and all the notations, references and other information
shown thereon are a part of this chapter and shall have the same force and
effect as if such a map and all the notations, references and other
information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein; which
Zoning District Map is properly attested, filed and maintained as follows:



      (1)   One copy shall be filed with the City Secretary and
retained as the original record and shall not be changed in any manner;



      (2)   One copy shall be filed with the City Planner and shall
be maintained up-to-date by the zoning officer by posting thereon all changes
and subsequent amendments for observation and issuing building permits and
enforcing the zoning ordinance;



      (3)   Reproductions for informational purposes may from time
to time be made of the Official Zoning District Map.



   (B)   District boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to
the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts shown on the Zoning Map, the
following rules shall apply:



      (1)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following the center lines of streets or highways, street lines or highway
right-of-way lines, such center lines, street lines or highway right-of-way
lines shall be construed to be said boundaries;



      (2)   Where district boundaries are so dedicated that they
approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be
said boundaries;



      (3)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following a parallel to a drainage course or other prominent physical
feature, such drainage course, other prominent physical feature or parallel
line shall be construed to be said boundaries;



      (4)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the center lines or street lines of streets, or the
center lines of right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries
shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom
as indicated on the Zoning Map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall
be determined by the use of the scale of said Zoning Map;



      (5)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately perpendicular to the center line or right-of-way lines of
streets, highways or drainage courses, such district boundaries shall be
construed to be perpendicular to said street, highways or drainage courses;



      (6)   If unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on
the Zoning Map shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map;



      (7)   In the case of a district boundary line dividing a lot
into two parts, the district boundary line shall be construed to be the lot
line nearest the least restricted district;



      (8)   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is
vacated by official action of the City Council, the zoning district adjoining
each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended
to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall
then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts;



      (9)   Where the streets or alleys on the ground differ from
the streets or alleys as shown on the Zoning Map, the streets or alleys on
the ground shall control;



      (10)   Where a district boundary established in this
subchapter, or as shown on the Zoning Map, divides a lot which was in single
ownership at the time of enactment of this chapter, the use authorized
thereon and other district requirements applying to the least restricted
portion of such lot under this chapter shall be construed as extending to the
entire lot, provided such lot does not extend more than 50 feet beyond said
boundary line. The use so extended shall be deemed to be a conforming use.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. I, § 5) (Ord. 2002-25, passed 2-19-02)



§ 155.06  ANNEXATION POLICY.



   (A)   All territory hereafter annexed to the City of Mount Pleasant
shall be temporarily classified as “FD” Future Development District,
until permanent zoning is established by the City Council of the City of
Mount Pleasant. The procedure for establishing permanent zoning of annexed
territory shall conform to the procedure established by law from the adoption
of original zoning regulations.



   (B)   In an area temporarily classified as “FD” Future
Development:



      (1)   No person shall erect, construct or proceed or continue
with the erection or construction of any building or structure or cause the
same to be done in any newly annexed territory to the City of Mount Pleasant
without first applying for and obtaining a building permit or certificate of
occupancy from the Building Official or the City Council as may be required
herein;



      (2)   No permit for the construction of a building or use of
land shall be issued by the Building Official other than a permit which will
allow the construction of a building permitted in the “FD” Future
Development District by the City Council in the manner provided by law;



      (3)   An application for a permit for any other use than that
specified in subsection (2) above shall be made to the Building Official of
the city and by him or her referred to the City Planning and Zoning
Commission. In making its recommendation to the City Council concerning any
such permit, the Commission shall take into consideration the appropriate
land use for the area;



      (4)   The City Council, after receiving and reviewing the
recommendations of the City Planning and Zoning Commission, may, by majority,
vote to authorize the issuance of a building permit or certificate of
occupancy or may disapprove the application.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. I, § 6)



DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 155.20  FD - FUTURE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to classify newly
annexed land which is near the development stage. Existing agricultural and
residential uses will be protected until urbanization warrants a zoning
change.



   (B)   Use regulations. The following uses are permitted in this
district:



      (1)   Single-family residential dwelling;



      (2)   Church or other place of public worship;



      (3)   Community center (public);



      (4)   Farm or ranch;



      (5)   Institutions of a religious or philanthropic nature;



      (6)   Private country club with golf course;



      (7)   Public golf course;



      (8)   Public park or playground;



      (9)   Public playfield or stadium;



      (10)   Other uses as designated in § 155.45



   (C)   Development regulations.



      (1)   Lot requirements. (Minimum figures)



         (a)   Lot area:  At least 10,000 square feet;



         (b)   Lot width:  70 feet;



         (c)   Lot depth:  100 feet;



      (2)   Yard requirements. (Minimum figures)



         (a)   Front yard:  25 feet;



         (b)   Side yard:



            1.   Interior lot:  7 feet;



            2.   Exterior lot:  10 feet;



         (c)   Rear yard:  25 feet;



      (3)   Height requirements.



         Maximum building height:  35 feet;



      (4)   Spatial controls.



         Minimum floor space per dwelling:  1,200 square feet.



   (D)   Parking. Off-street parking and loading regulations: see §
155.47.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. II, § 1) (Ord. 2002-25, passed 2-19-02)



§ 155.21  SF-1 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to establish areas
for larger than average size homes at a lower than average population
density. This district is intended to provide a high degree of privacy and
seclusion for its residents.



   (B)   Use regulations. The following uses are permitted in this
district:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwelling;



      (2)   Community center (public);



      (3)   Park or playground (public);



      (4)   Public golf course;



      (5)   Public stadium;



      (6)   Other uses as designated in § 155.45.



   (C)   Development regulations.



      (1)   Lot requirements. (Minimum figures)



         (a)   Lot area:  At least 10,000 square feet;



         (b)   Lot width:  70 feet;



         (c)   Lot depth:  100 feet.



      (2)   Yard requirements. (Minimum figures)



         (a)   Front yard:  25 feet;



         (b)   Side yard:



            1.   Interior lot:  7 feet;



            2.   Exterior lot:  10 feet;



         (c)   Rear yard:  25 feet.



      (3)   Height requirements.



         Maximum building height:  35 feet.



      (4)   Spatial controls.



         Minimum floor space per dwelling unit:  1,200 square feet.



   (D)   Parking regulations.



      (1)   Each dwelling will provide off-street parking for two
automobiles or other vehicles not to exceed 3/4 ton in capacity.



      (2)   Off-street parking and loading regulations: see §
155.47.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. II, § 2)



§ 155.22  SF-2 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to establish
residential areas of average urban density. This district should serve as a
zone of transition between lower and higher density residential areas.



   (B)   Use regulations. The following uses are permitted in this
district:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the “SF-1” District;



      (2)   “SF-2” dwellings;



      (3)   Other uses as designated in § 155.45.



   (C)   Development regulations.



      (1)   Lot requirements. (Minimum figures)



         (a)   Lot area:  At least 7,000 square feet;



         (b)   Lot width:  50 feet;



         (c)   Lot depth:  100 feet.



      (2)   Yard requirements. (Minimum figures)



         (a)   Front yard:  25 feet;



         (b)   Side yard:



            1.   Interior lot: 



            2.   Exterior lot:  10 feet;



         (c)   Rear yard:  25 feet.



      (3)   Height requirements.



         Maximum building height:  35 feet.



      (4)   Spatial control.



         Minimum floor space per dwelling unit:  800 square feet.



   (D)   Parking regulations.



      (1)   Same as “SF-l” District.



      (2)   Off-street parking and loading regulations: see §
155.47.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. II, § 3)



§ 155.23  TF - TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for
two-family or duplex dwellings of a slightly higher density than the
single-family districts. This district may encompass an entire neighborhood
or may serve as a zone of transition between low density and high density
residential areas.



   (B)   Use regulations. The following uses are permitted in this
district:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the “SF-2” Residential District;



      (2)   Attached dwelling units, provided that no more than two
dwelling units are attached in one continuous row or group and that no
dwelling unit is constructed above another dwelling unit;



      (3)   Other uses as designated in § 155.45.



   (C)   Development regulations.



      (1)   Lot requirements. (Minimum figures)



         (a)   Lot area:  At least 7,500 square feet;



         (b)   Lot width:  50 feet;



         (c)   Lot depth:  100 feet.



      (2)   Yard requirements. (Minimum figures)



         (a)   Front yard:  25 feet;



         (b)   Side yard:



            1.   Interior lot:  5 feet;



            2.   Exterior lot:  10 feet;



         (c)   Rear yard:  25 feet.



   (D)   Parking regulations.



      (1)   Two spaces for each dwelling unit (total of four) shall
be provided.



      (2)   Off-street parking and loading regulations: see §
155.47.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. II, § 4)



§ 155.24  MF - MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for
multi-family dwellings of a low to moderate density. Multi-family
developments should be designed to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses in
the area, including residential dwellings. This district may encompass an
entire neighborhood or may serve as a zone of transition between lower
density residential and business areas.



   (B)   Use regulations. The following uses are permitted in this
district:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the “TF” Two-Family Residential
District;



      (2)   Multi-family dwellings;



      (3)   Business and professional offices;



      (4)   Churches and other places of public worship;



      (5)   Day nursery or kindergarten school;



      (6)   Hospital (chronic care);



      (7)   Institutions of a religious and philanthropic nature;



      (8)   Library (public);



      (9)   Nursing home;



      (10)   Private school (primary or secondary);



      (11)   Public or parochial school (primary or secondary).



   (C)   Development regulations.



      (1)   Lot requirements. (Minimum figures)



         (a)   Lot area:  At least 10,000 square feet;



         (b)   Lot width:  75 feet;



         (c)   Lot depth:  100 feet.



      (2)   Yard requirements. (Minimum figures)



         (a)   Front yard:  25 feet;



         (b)   Side yard:



            1.   Interior lot:  10 feet;



            2.   Exterior lot:  10 feet;



         (c)   Rear yard:  15 feet.



      (3)   Height Requirements.



         Maximum building height:  35 feet.



      (4)   Spatial controls.



         (a)   Minimum floor area:



            1.   Efficiency apartment:  450 square feet;



            2.   One bedroom apartment:  600 square feet;



            3.   Two bedroom apartment:  750 square feet;



            4.   Three or more bedrooms:  800 square feet;



         (b)   Maximum lot coverage:  65% by all buildings.



   (D)   Parking regulations. The parking requirements for this
district are as follows:




      (1)   Business and professional offices other than medical or
dental:  One space for each 400 square feet of floor area.





      (2)   Churches and other places of worship:  One space for
each four seats in the main auditorium.





      (3)   Hospital:  One space for each two beds, plus one space
for each employee on the largest shift.





      (4)   Institutions of a religious and philanthropic nature: 
Ten spaces, plus one space for each employee.





      (5)   Library:  Ten spaces, plus one space for each 300
square feet of floor area.





      (6)   Medical or dental clinic:  One space for each 200
square feet of floor area.





      (7)   Multi-family dwelling:  Two spaces for each dwelling
unit.





      (8)   Nursing home:  One space for each two beds.




      (9)   School, private or public:  One space for each
classroom, plus one space for each four seats in any auditorium, gymnasium or
other place of assembly.



      (10)   Off-street parking and loading regulations:  See §
155.47.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. II, § 5) (Am. Ord. 2003-14, passed 9-16-03)



§ 155.25  MH - MOBILE HOME DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to establish a
suitable environment for mobile home use and to eliminate the often negative
impacts of these dwellings on adjacent areas.



   (B)   Use regulations.



      (1)   Mobile homes and travel trailers shall be located only
in approved mobile home parks with the following exceptions:



         (a)   A mobile home may be used as an office structure
on a lot doing business as, and licensed for, mobile homes and/or
recreational vehicle sales;



         (b)   Travel trailers may be used as temporary offices
on construction sites.



      (2)   A travel trailer, motor home or camper may be kept on
the premises of a residential dwelling but may not be used as living quarters
or for the conduct of business.



      (3)   The normal and customary accessory uses, including
office and/or maintenance buildings for the mobile home park, recreation
buildings, swimming pool, laundry and storage facilities for use by mobile
home park residents and open recreation areas.



   (C)   Development regulations.



      (1)   Area and spacing requirements.



         (a)   A mobile home park shall be at least two acres in
size and there shall be no more than 12 mobile homes per acre.



         (b)   There shall be at least a 20-foot space between
mobile homes. When mobile homes are parked end-to-end, this space shall be
not less than ten feet.



         (c)   Each mobile home shall be located at least 25 feet
from the property lines of the mobile home park which abuts a public street
or highway.



         (d)   Vehicular entrances to or exits from a mobile home
park shall be at least 200 feet along streets from any school, public
playground, church, hospital or library.



      (2)   Streets and walkways.



         (a)   Each mobile home park shall adjoin a public street
and each mobile home lot shall have direct access to a private interior
street at least 25 feet in width. The internal street or streets shall be
continuous and connect with other internal streets or with public streets or
be provided with a paved cul-de-sac.



         (b)   Internal access drives shall be provided to each
mobile home space and shall be at least 25 feet in width.



         (c)   Walkways not less than two feet wide shall be
provided from the mobile home lot to the service buildings within each mobile
home park.



      (3)   Anchoring and storage.



         (a)   Each mobile home shall rest upon a concrete slab
of sufficient strength to support the wheels and the front parking jack. Each
slab shall be at least eight feet by ten feet and have a minimum thickness of
four inches.



         (b)   Each mobile home shall be firmly anchored to the
slab upon which it rests by means of tie-downs and anchors secured in
accordance with regulations established by the Texas Manufactured Housing
Standards Act.



         (c)   The area underneath a mobile home shall not be
used for storage but shall be screened with material similar in composition
and characteristics to that used to construct the mobile home.



      (4)   Landscaping and screening.



         (a)   All streets, drives and walkways within a mobile
home park shall be surfaced with pavement in accordance with city
specifications.



         (b)   Exposed ground surfaces throughout the mobile home
park shall be completely and permanently landscaped. These surfaces shall be
protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion
and objectionable dust.



         (c)   In the event a mobile home park backs or sides
upon a residential, business, commercial or industrial district, a solid
screening fence at least six feet in height shall be erected along the
property line between the two districts.



   (D)   Parking regulations.



      (1)   Two parking spaces for each mobile home lot, plus one
additional space for each three lots shall be provided.



      (2)   Off-street parking and loading regulations: see §
155.47.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. II, § 6) (Am. Ord. 1996-14, passed
10-15-96)



§ 155.26  NS - NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide limited
convenience goods and personal services for persons in surrounding
residential areas. Since this district is often an integral part of the
residential area it serves, development regulations should complement those
of adjacent uses.



   (B)   Use regulations. The following uses are permitted in the
“NS” Neighborhood Service District:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the “MF” Multi-Family District;



      (2)   Art gallery or museum;



      (3)   Bakery or confectionery shop (retail);



      (4)   Barber or beauty shop;



      (5)   Book store;



      (6)   Cleaning and pressing shop (small retail);



      (7)   Drapery, needlework or weaving shop;



      (8)   Florist or garden shop;



      (9)   Food or grocery store (small retail);



      (10)   Handicraft or hobby shop;



      (11)   Laundry or cleaning (self-service);



      (12)   Office, professional and administrative;



      (13)   Pharmacy;



      (14)   Private country club with golf course;



      (15)   Studio for artist, photographer, musician or health
specialist;



      (16)   Stationery or card shop;



      (17)   Tailor shop;



      (18)   University or college;



      (19)   Other related uses and those special uses designated in
§ 155.45.



   (C)   Development regulations.



      (1)   Lot requirements:  None.



      (2)   Yard requirements: (Minimum figures)



         (a)   Front yard:  25 feet;



         (b)   Side yard:



            1.   Interior lot:  None required except when
adjoining a residential district, then 15 feet;



            2.   Exterior lot:  10 feet.



         (c)   Rear yard:None required where an alley exists on
the rear of the lot, tract or plot; otherwise, a minimum rear yard of ten
feet shall be provided. When adjoining a residential district, a minimum rear
yard of 25 feet shall be provided. Where rail lines exist at the rear of lots
or tracts occupied by industrial or commercial buildings, the buildings may
be located for direct service by rail transportation.



      (3)   Height requirements:



         Maximum building height:  35 feet.



   (D)   Parking regulations. The parking regulations for the “MF”
District shall apply, plus the following requirements:



      (1)   Retail or personal service:  One space for each 200
square feet of floor area. Minimum of five spaces.



      (2)   Off-street parking and loading regulations:  See §
155.47.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. II, § 7)



§ 155.27  GR - GENERAL RETAIL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide specialty
goods and business services for the surrounding community. This
classification includes a wider range of business activities than the
Neighborhood Service District and should provide for the development of
shopping centers and office parks. The General Retail District should serve
as a zone of transition between commercial and high density residential areas.



   (B)   Use regulations. The following uses are permitted in the
General Retail District:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the “NS” Neighborhood Service
District, except single-family and two-family dwellings;



      (2)   Animal hospitals (indoor soundproof kennels);



      (3)   Antique shops (inside display);



      (4)   Auto parts, sales and repair (new merchandise, inside
display or inside repair);



      (5)   Bowling alley;



      (6)   Business and trade schools;



      (7)   Cafeteria;



      (8)   Gasoline service station and/or automobile laundry;



      (9)   Greenhouse or plant nursery;



      (10)   Hotels and motels;



      (11)   Household appliance service and repair (inside storage
of merchandise only);



      (12)   Mimeograph, print or office supply;



      (13)   Mortuary or funeral parlor;



      (14)   Newspaper printing or job printing;



      (15)   Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants;



      (16)   Supermarket;



      (17)   Swim or tennis club;



      (18)   Television station or radio station;



      (19)   Theater, other than drive-in;



      (20)   Other specialty retail stores selling primarily new
merchandise indoors, including electronic, furniture, hardware and discount
stores;



      (21)   Other related uses and those special uses designated in
§ 155.45;



      (22)   Retail sales of welding supplies with screened and
fenced storage facilities for gas cylinders;



      (23)   Mini-storage warehouse;



      (24)   Auto sales;



      (25)   Contractor shops with a maximum 2,000 square-feet floor
area and no outside storage permitted.



   (C)   Development regulations.



      (1)   Lot requirements:  None.



      (2)   Yard requirements:



         (a)   Front yard:  25 feet;



         (b)   Side yard:



            1.   Interior lot:  None required except when
adjoining a residential district, then 15 feet;



            2.   Exterior lot:  10 feet;



         (c)   Rear yard:  None required where an alley exists
on the rear of the lot, tract or plot; otherwise, a minimum rear yard of ten
feet shall be provided. When adjoining a residential district, a minimum rear
yard of 15 feet shall be provided. Where rail lines exist at the rear of lots
or tracts occupied by industrial or commercial buildings, the  buildings may
be located for direct service by rail transportation.



      (3)   Height requirements:



         Maximum building height:  75 feet.



   (D)   Parking regulations. The parking requirements for this
district are as follows:



      (1)   Business and professional offices other than medical or
dental:  One space for each 300 square feet of floor area.



      (2)   Bowling alley:  Six spaces for each lane.



      (3)   Church or other place of public worship:  One space for
each four seats in the main auditorium.



      (4)   Gasoline service station:  Six spaces minimum.



      (5)   High school or college:  One space for each classroom,
laboratory or instructional area, plus one space for each four students
accommodated in the institution.



      (6)   Hospital:  One space for each two beds, plus one 
space for each employee on the largest shift.



      (7)   Hotel or motel:  One space for each room, unit or guest
accommodation.



      (8)   Institutions of a philanthropic nature:  Ten spaces,
plus one for each employee.



      (9)   Library or museum:  Ten spaces, plus one space for each
300 square feet of floor area.



      (10)   Medical or dental clinic:  One space for each 200
square feet of floor area.



      (11)   Mortuary or funeral home:  Ten spaces for each parlor.



      (12)   Nursing home:  One space for each two beds.



      (13)   Places of public assembly not listed:  One space for
each three seats provided.



      (14)   Restaurant or cafeteria:  One space for each three
seats under maximum seating arrangement (minimum of five spaces).



      (15)   Retail or personal service:  One space for each 200
square feet of floor area (minimum of five spaces).



      (16)   Schools, elementary or junior high:  One space for
each classroom, plus one space for each four seats in any auditorium,
gymnasium or other place of assembly.



      (17)   Theaters or meeting rooms:  One space for each three
seats.



      (18)   Off-street parking and loading, regulations:  See §
155.47.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. II, § 8) (Ord. 1989-1, passed 1-5-89; Am.
Ord. 1994-13, passed 8-16-94; Am. Ord. 2000-3, passed - -00; Am. Ord. 2001-8,
passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 2002-02, passed 1-15-02; Am. Ord. 2003-14, passed
9-16-03



§ 155.28  CB - CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide a high
density mixture of retail and business services for the benefit of persons
working or residing in the area. There will be only one contiguous CBD
Central Business District.



   (B)   Use regulations. The following uses are permitted in this
district:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the “GR” General Retail
District, including single- and two-family dwellings;



      (2)   Commercial indoor amusement such as a billiard hall;



      (3)   Wholesale businesses, storage buildings and warehouses;



      (4)   Any other use or service which is similar to the uses
herein listed and those specified in § 155.45.



   (C)   Development regulations.



      (1)   Lot requirements:  None.



      (2)   Yard requirements:



         (a)   Front yard:  No front yard is required except
that a structure larger than one story must be set back from the property
line two feet for each story, plus one foot for every ten feet of building
width.



         (b)   Side yard:  No side yard is required except that
when a structure adjoins a residential district two feet for each story, plus
one foot for each ten feet of building width shall be maintained.



         (c)   Rear yard:  None required where an alley exists
on the rear of the lot, tract or plot; otherwise, a minimum rear yard of ten
feet shall be provided. Where rail lines exist at the rear of lots or tracts
occupied by industrial or commercial buildings, the buildings may be located
for direct service by rail transportation.



      (3)   Height requirements:



         Maximum building height:  75 feet.



   (D)   Parking regulations. None. Off-street parking and loading
regulations: see § 155.47.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. II, § 9) (Am. Ord. 2013-7, passed 8-20-13)



§ 155.29  C - COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. This district is designed for intensive retail or
commercial uses which serve a city- wide or regional area. The Commercial
District should serve as a buffer zone between industrial development and
general retail or multi-family areas.



   (B)   Use regulations. The following uses are permitted in this
district:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the “GR” General Retail
District;



      (2)   Amusement facility - indoor and outdoor;



      (3)   Animal hospital or clinic (outside kennels);



      (4)   Automobile, new or used sales (outside);



      (5)   Automobile painting, repair, seat cover, muffler
installation;



      (6)   Automobile used auto parts (inside);



      (7)   Auditorium, arena, coliseum;



      (8)   Bakery, wholesale;



      (9)   Boat sales, rental, storage, repair;



      (10)   Bus station or terminal;



      (11)   Cabinet, carpentry or upholstery shop;



      (12)   Cleaning and dyeing plant (commercial);



      (13)   Cleaning plant, bags or carpets (special equipment);



      (14)   Cold storage plant;



      (15)   Contractor’s shop and storage yard;



      (16)   Engine and motor repair;



      (17)   Exterminator;



      (18)   Farm equipment sales, service, repair;



      (19)   Feed store;



      (20)   Food locker plant (for consumer use);



      (21)   Freight depot or terminal (railroad or truck);



      (22)   Hauling or storage yard;



      (23)   Heavy machinery - sales and storage;



      (24)   Job printing or newspaper printing;



      (25)   Laboratory - scientific research and testing;



      (26)   Milk depot, dairy or ice cream plant;



      (27)   Paint shop;



      (28)   Pawn shop;



      (29)   Petroleum products - storage, wholesale;



      (30)   Plumbing shop;



      (31)   Railroad or motor freight terminal;



      (32)   Secondhand store, used furniture or rummage sale/shop;



      (33)   Storage and sale of furniture or appliances outside of
building;



      (34)   Terminal, storage and baggage;



      (35)   Theater (drive-in);



      (36)   Trade or commercial school;



      (37)   Trailer, mobile home, camper - rental or sales;



      (38)   Warehouse - storage or sales;



      (39)   Wholesale establishment - office, sales, storage;



      (40)   Other uses as designated in § 155.45.



   (C)   Development regulations.



      (1)   Lot requirements:  (Minimum figures)



         (a)   Lot area:  3,000 square feet;



         (b)   Lot width:  25 feet at the front street building
line.



      (2)   Yard requirements:



         (a)   Front yard:  25 feet;



         (b)   Side yard:



            1.   Interior lot:  No requirement except when
adjoining a residential district, then 15 feet;



            2.   Exterior lot:  10 feet.



         (c)   Rear yard:  None required where an alley exists
on the rear of the lot, tract or plot; otherwise a minimum rear yard of ten
feet shall be provided. When adjoining a residential district, a minimum rear
yard of 15 feet shall be provided. Where rail lines exist at the rear of lots
or tracts occupied by industrial or commercial buildings, the buildings may
be located for direct service by rail transportation.



      (3)   Height requirements:



         Maximum building height:  75 feet.



   (D)   Parking regulations. The parking regulations for the “GR”
General Retail District shall apply, plus the following requirements:




      (1)   Commercial outdoor amusement:  20 spaces, plus one
space for each 100 square feet of floor area over 1,000 square feet.





      (2)   Golf course:  40 spaces for each nine holes.





      (3)   Mobile home, travel trailer, motor home, camper lot: 
One space for each 1,000 square feet of lot area for outdoor use.





      (4)   Motor vehicle - new and used vehicle lot:  One parking
space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area for outdoor use.




      (5)   Repair, storage or wholesale facility:  One space for
each two employees on the maximum shift or one space for each 1,000  square
feet of floor area, whichever is greater.




      (6)   Off-street parking and loading regulations:  See §
155.47.




(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. II, § 10)



§ 155.30  LI - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. This district is designed for light manufacturing,
assembly, fabrication and heavy commercial activities. The Light Industrial
District should be used as a buffer zone between heavy industrial and
commercial development.



   (B)   Use regulations. The following uses are permitted in this
district:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the “C,” “GR,” “NS” and
“MF” districts, excluding hotels, motels, apartments, residences,
elementary or secondary schools and hospitals;



      (2)   Advertising display manufacturers;



      (3)   Apparel and other products assembled from finished
textiles;



      (4)   Automobile or other vehicles - engine rebuilding;



      (5)   Batching or mixing plant - Portland cement, concrete,
mortar or plaster (commercial);



      (6)   Bookbinding other than by hand;



      (7)   Bottling works for all beverages;



      (8)   Carpet manufacturing and cleaning;



      (9)   Ceramic and pottery manufacture;



      (10)   Coal, coke or wood yard;



      (11)   Cosmetics manufacture;



      (12)   Drug and pharmaceutical manufacture;



      (13)   Electrical appliance, equipment assembly, supplies or
similar products, including electrical machinery;



      (14)   Electronic products manufacture;



      (15)   Food products processing;



      (16)   Fur goods manufacture excluding tanning and dyeing;



      (17)   Furniture and upholstery manufacture;



      (18)   Heavy equipment, storage, repair and sales, earth
moving;



      (19)   Household appliance products, assembly and manufacture
from prefabricated parts;



      (20)   Ice, dry or natural;



      (21)   Junk, iron or rag storage or bailing;



      (22)   Jute, hemp, sisal or oakum products;



      (23)   Laundry plant;



      (24)   Machines, business; including typewriter, accounting
machines, calculators, card-counting equipment or similar products;



      (25)   Machinery, miscellaneous; including repairs;



      (26)   Machine tools; including metal lathes, metal presses,
metal stamping machines, woodworking machines or similar products;



      (27)   Mattresses; including rebuilding or renovating;



      (28)   Musical instruments; including pianos or organs;



      (29)   Orthopedic or medical appliances; including artificial
limbs, braces, supports, stretchers or similar products;



      (30)   Paper products; including envelopes, stationery, bags,
boxes, shipping containers, bulk goods, tubes, wallpaper, printing or similar
products;



      (31)   Pharmaceutical products;



      (32)   Plastic products manufacture, but not including the
processing of raw materials;



      (33)   School, commercial or trade; when involving danger of
fire or explosion or offensive noise, vibration, dust, odor, glare, heat or
other objectionable influences;



      (34)   Sporting and athletic equipment manufacture;



      (35)   Testing and research laboratories;



      (36)   Textiles; spinning, weaving, manufacturing, dyeing,
bleaching, printing, knit goods, yard, thread or cordage;



      (37)   Tools or hardware; including bolts, nuts, screws,
doorknobs, drills, hand tools or cutlery, hinges, house hardware, locks,
non-ferrous metal castings, plumbing appliances or similar products;



      (38)   Toys and novelty products;



      (39)   Vehicles, children’s; including bicycles, scooters,
wagons, baby carriages or similar vehicles;



      (40)   Venetian blinds, window shades or awnings.



      (41)   Wrecking yards and junk yards.



   (C)   Development regulations.



      (1)   Lot requirements:  None.



      (2)   Yard requirements:



         (a)   Front yard:



            1.   Where none of the frontage on either side of
the street between the two intersecting streets is located in a residential
district, no front yard is required;



            2.   Where the frontage on one side of the street
between two intersecting streets is located partly in the “LI” District
and partly in a residential district, the front yard will conform to the
residential district regulations for a distance of not less than 300 feet
from the district boundary;



            3.   Where a front yard is required along the
frontage on one side of a street, the front yard requirements of the property
directly opposite on the other side of the street will be at least 25 feet;



         (b)   Side yard: No side yard is required except that a
side yard of at least 25 feet in width will be provided on the side of the
lot adjoining or across a side street from a residential district;



         (c)   Rear yard:



            1.   None required where an alley exists on the
rear of the lot, tract or plot; otherwise, a minimum rear yard of ten feet
shall be provided;



            2.   When adjoining a residential district, a rear
yard of at least 50 feet in depth will be provided upon that portion of a lot
adjoining a residential district. This requirement does not apply where the
property in the residential district also backs up to a rear street;



            3.   Where rail lines exist at the rear of lots or
tracts occupied by industrial or commercial buildings, the buildings may be
located for direct service by rail transportation.



      (3)   Lot requirements:



         Maximum building height:  75 feet.



   (D)   Parking regulations. The parking regulations for the “C”
Commercial District shall apply, plus the following requirements:



      (1)   Manufacturing, processing, repairing and storage
facilities:  One space for each two employees or one space for each 1,000
square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.



      (2)   No parking, storage or similar use is permitted in the
required front, side or side exterior yards within 25 feet of the street line.



      (3)   No parking, storage or similar use is permitted within
25 feet of the rear property line.



      (4)   Off-street parking and loading regulations:  See §
155.47.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. II, § 11)



§ 155.31  HI - HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. This district provides for heavy manufacturing and
industrial activities which generate noise, odor or dust beyond the site
boundaries. These regulations are designed to eliminate the negative impacts
these uses can have on adjacent areas.



   (B)   Use regulations. Any use permitted in the “LI” Light
Industrial District, plus the following, are allowed:



      (1)   Acetylene gas manufacture or storage;



      (2)   Acid manufacture;



      (3)   Alcohol manufacture;



      (4)   Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture;



      (5)   Arsenal;



      (6)   Asphalt manufacture or refining;



      (7)   Blast furnace;



      (8)   Bag cleaning;



      (9)   Boiler works;



      (10)   Brick, tile, pottery or terra cotta manufacture other
than the manufacture of handcraft or concrete products;



      (11)   Candle manufacture;



      (12)   Celluloid manufacture or treatment;



      (13)   Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture;



      (14)   Cement mixing plant for cement, mortar, plaster or
paving materials;



      (15)   Coke ovens;



      (16)   Cotton gins;



      (17)   Cotton seed oil manufacture;



      (18)   Creosote manufacture or treatment;



      (19)   Disinfectants manufacture;



      (20)   Distillation of bones, coal or wood;



      (21)   Dyestuff manufacture;



      (22)   Exterminator and insect poison manufacture;



      (23)   Emery cloth and sandpaper manufacture;



      (24)   Explosives or fireworks manufacture or storage;



      (25)   Fat rendering;



      (26)   Fertilizer manufacture;



      (27)   Fiberglass manufacture;



      (28)   Fish smoking and curing;



      (29)   Forge plant;



      (30)   Garbage, offal or dead animal reduction or dumping;



      (31)   Gas manufacture;



      (32)   Glue, size or gelatin manufacture;



      (33)   Grain processing;



      (34)   Hatchery;



      (35)   Iron, steel, brass or copper foundry or fabrication
plant;



      (36)   Match manufacture;



      (37)   Lampblack manufacture;



      (38)   Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture;



      (39)   Oiled rubber goods manufacture;



      (40)   Ore reduction;



      (41)   Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture;



      (42)   Paper and pulp manufacture;



      (43)   Petroleum or its products, refining or wholesale
storage;



      (44)   Pickle manufacturing;



      (45)   Planing mills;



      (46)   Potash works;



      (47)   Pyroxline manufacture;



      (48)   Rock crusher;



      (49)   Rolling mill;



      (50)   Rubber or gutta-percha manufacture or treatment, but
not the making of articles out of rubber;



      (51)   Sauerkraut manufacture;



      (52)   Salts works;



      (53)   Shoe polish manufacture;



      (54)   Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores;



      (55)   Soap manufacture other than liquid soap;



      (56)   Soda and compound manufacture;



      (57)   Stock yard or slaughter of animals or fowls;



      (58)   Stone mill or quarry;



      (59)   Stove polish manufacture;



      (60)   Tallow, grease or lard manufacture or refining from, or
of, animal fat;



      (61)   Tanning, curing or storage of raw hides or skins;



      (62)   Tar distillation or manufacture;



      (63)   Tar roofing or water proofing manufacture;



      (64)   Tire recapping or vulcanizing;



      (65)   Tobacco (chewing) manufacture or treatment;



      (66)   Vinegar manufacture;



      (67)   Wool pulling or scouring;



      (68)   Yeast plant.



   (C)   Development regulations.



      (1)   Lot requirements:  None;



      (2)   Yard requirements:



         (a)   Front yard:



            1.   Where none of the frontage on either side of
the street between two intersecting streets is located in a residential or
commercial district, no front yard is required;



            2.   Where the frontage on one side of the street
between two intersecting streets is located partly in District “HI” and
partly in a residential district, the front yard shall conform to the
residential district regulations for a distance of not less than 300 feet
from the district boundary;



            3.   Where the frontage on one side of a street is
in a residential or commercial district, the front yard requirements of the
property directly opposite on the other side of the street shall be not less
than 50 feet.



         (b)   Side yard:  no side yard is required, except that
a side yard or side street yard of not less than 50 feet in width shall be
provided on the side of the lot adjoining or across the street from a
residential or commercial district.



         (c)   Rear yard:



            1.   None required where an alley exists on the
rear of the lot, tract or plot; otherwise a minimum rear yard of ten feet
shall be provided;



            2.   When adjoining a residential district, a rear
yard of not less than 50 feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of
a lot abutting on or across a rear street from a residential or commercial
district;



            3.   Where rail lines exist at the rear of lots or
tracts occupied by industrial or commercial buildings, the buildings may be
located for direct service by rail transportation.



      (3)   Height requirements:



         Maximum building height:  75 feet.



   (D)   Parking regulations. The parking regulations for the “LI”
Light Industrial District will apply, plus the following requirements:



      (1)   No parking, storage or similar use is permitted in the
required front, side and side exterior yards within 25 feet of the street
line;



      (2)   No parking, storage or similar use is permitted in the
required rear yard within 25 feet of the rear property line;



      (3)   Off-street parking and loading regulations: see §
155.47.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. II, § 12)



§ 155.32  PD - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. This district is designed to provide for the unified
and coordinated development of tracts for a variety of purposes, including
shopping centers and industrial parks. Modifications of normal district
regulations are permitted if they meet the intent of the standards and
enhance the living or working environment of the area.



   (B)   Use regulations. A structure in this zoning district may be
used for any use allowed in any district contained in this chapter. However,
it must be demonstrated that the uses are in conformance with the purpose and
intent of the Comprehensive Master Plan.



   (C)   Development regulations.



      (1)   General area, yard and height requirements shall conform
to those requirements of the intended use except that modifications are
permitted, provided they are in the best interests of the persons in the
district.



      (2)   A minimum land area computed in acreage is required
before applications for planned development will be approved. Minimum acreage
requirements for typical uses are set forth below:



         (a)   General retail shopping center:  1 acre;



         (b)   Housing development:  1 acre;



         (c)   Mobile home park:  2 acres;



         (d)   Commercial use development:  3 acres;



         (e)   Industrial park:  10 acres.



         (f)   Medical centers or hospitals; civic or community
centers; office centers; recreation centers or any combination of (a) through
(e) above:  No minimum.



      (3)   A comprehensive site plan of the development is required
and must be approved and filed as part of this chapter prior to the issuance
of any building permit. Appropriate regulations in this chapter and all
subdivision requirements for the city shall be complied with. Information to
be included in the plan is as follows:



         (a)   Ingress and egress to the property;



         (b)   Public or private streets;



         (c)   Sidewalks;



         (d)   Utilities and drainage;



         (e)   Yards, height, maximum building coverage, open
spaces;



         (f)   Landscaping and screening;



         (g)   Trash pickup, trash delivery.



   (D)   Special requirements.



      (1)   A commercial or industrial district separated by an area
of different use shall be at least 300 feet apart when on the same side of
the major street they front.



      (2)   A solid screening fence of at least six feet in height
shall be built along that boundary of a commercial or industrial planned
development district which adjoins residential property under different
ownership.



      (3)   When a commercial or industrial planned development
district extends more than 300 feet back from a major street and adjoins
property developed or zones for residential use under different ownership or
if such land abuts other land in a “PD” District under different
ownership, then the proposed use so located may be approved only under the
following conditions. An area of at least 150 feet in width be provided in
which no structure except for a screening fence or necessary lights shall be
permitted. This area shall be measured between the boundary of the adjoining
property described in the this section and any intended structure and shall
extend the entire depth of the commercial or industrial use area which is in
excess of the 300 feet of depth allowed in the preceding paragraph. A paved
parking area may be provided within this 150-foot area.



      (4)   Lighting devices outside of building structures and in
parking lots shall not be operated so as to produce direct or reflected light
or glare across adjoining property lines.



      (5)   Loudspeakers or similar devices in conjunction with
commercial uses shall not operate so as to direct sound across adjoining
property lines.



   (E)   Planned development garden homes. The following development
regulations shall apply solely within the Planned Development District -
Garden Homes created herein:



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements:



         (a)   Lot area:  6,000 sq. ft.



         (b)   Lot width:  55 feet;



         (c)   Lot depth:  100 feet;



      (2)   Minimum yard requirements:



         (a)   Front yard:  15 feet, or as approved on site plan
for lots on cul-de-sac;



         (b)   Rear yard:  10 feet, except for garage openings,
which shall be a minimum of 15 feet from the rear lot line.



         (c)   Side yard:



            1.   Minimum side yard setbacks shall be
determined by the developer and subject to approval by the Planning and Zonin
Commission and the City Council as part of the Site Development Plan.



            2.   On a corner lot, the width of the yard along
the side street shall not be less than 12 feet.



      (3)   Height requirements:



         Maximum building height:  35 feet.



      (4)   Spatial control:



         (a)   Minimum floor space per dwelling unit:  1,200 sq.
ft.;



         (b)   Maximum lot coverage, excluding alleys, public
rights-of-way and access easements:  60%;



      (5)   Parking regulations:Each dwelling unit will provide
off-street parking for two automobiles or other vehicles not to exceed
3/4-ton in capacity;



      (6)   Other requirements: all construction and development
within the Planned Development District - Garden Homes created herein shall
comply with all other appropriate restrictions and regulations as found in
this code of ordinances, the zoning ordinance and the subdivision ordinance
of the City of Mount Pleasant.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. II, § 13) (Ord. 1987-11, passed 8-4-87;
Am. Ord. 2002-39, passed 5-21-02)



§ 155.33  FP - FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. This overlay district is designed to identify those
areas which are subject to flooding and to ensure the safety of the general
public. This district shall be identified by the letters “FP” as a prefix
to the underlying district zoning classification.



   (B)   Use regulations.



      (1)   In this district no land shall be used except for one or
more of the following uses to the extent that they are not prohibited by
other regulations or ordinances and provided that such uses do not require
aboveground structures, filling or storage of equipment, except as herein
specifically authorized:



         (a)   Agricultural activities, including the ordinary
cultivation of land or legal forms of animal husbandry;



         (b)   Electrical substation;



         (c)   All types of local utilities, including but not
limited to water distribution and waste water collection systems, water and
waste water treatment facilities and water quality monitoring stations or
other structures required to provide water and sewerage, telephone, gas and
electrical service;



         (d)   Parks, community center, playgrounds, public golf
courses;



         (e)   Private commercial open area amusements such as
golf courses, driving ranges and similar uses when approved by special use
zoning action;



         (f)   Facilities that would warrant no flood protection,
such as accessory private open space in conjunction with commercial or
residential development, community unit recreational areas or recreation
developments;



         (g)   Parking areas associated with a part of contiguous
land use.



      (2)   No building or structure shall be erected in that
portion of a district designated with a flood plan “FP” prefix other than
those listed in this section.



      (3)   There shall be no dumping, excavation, storage or
filling operations within that portion of a district having a flood plain
“FP” prefix designation except under conditions of this chapter.



   (C)   Establishment of a Flood Plain District.



      (1)   The Flood Plain District shall include all areas subject
to inundation by flood water of the 25-year frequency.



      (2)   The Flood Plain District designated on the Official
Zoning District Map of the City of Mount Pleasant shall be deemed an overlay
on any zoning district now or hereafter applicable to any lot. Should the
Flood Plain District be declared inapplicable to any tract by reason of the
action of:



         (a)   The City Council in amending these sections; or



         (b)   Any court of competent jurisdiction interpreting
the same or determining the legal effect of the same, then the zoning
applicable to such lot shall be deemed to be in the district in which it is
located without consideration of these sections.



      (3)   The source of this delineation shall be the most recent
Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map, as the case may be,
issued separately or as part of detailed studies by or on behalf of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development - Flood Insurance Administration.
The City Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the
authority to approve these studies and the City Council may designate other
areas as a Flood Plain District.



   (D)   Municipal liability. The granting of a zoning permit in the
Flood Plain District shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or
warranty of any kind by the city or by any official or employee thereof of
the practicability or safety of the proposed use. The issuance of the zoning
permit shall create no liability upon the city, its officials or employees.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. II, § 14)



Cross-reference:



   Flood damage prevention, see Ch. 152



SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS



§ 155.45  SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Specific use permits.



      (1)   The City Council, by an affirmative vote may, after
public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected and after
recommendations from the Planning and Zoning Commission that the use is in
general conformance with the Master Plan of the city and containing such
requirements and safeguards as are necessary to protect adjoining property,
authorize a specific use permit. Application shall be accompanied by a site
plan drawn to scale and showing the general arrangements of the project,
together with essential requirements such as off-street parking facilities;
size, height, construction materials and locations of buildings and the uses
to be permitted; location and construction of signs; means of ingress and
egress to public streets; the type of visual screening such as walls,
plantings and fences; and the relationship of the intended use to all
existing properties and land uses in all directions to a minimum distance of
200 feet.



      (2)   Specific use permit regulations:



         (a)   All applications for a specific use shall be
accompanied by two copies of a site plan, as defined in this chapter;



         (b)   An application for a specific use shall not be
accepted unless all requirements of this section are shown on the site plan
at the time application is made;



         (c)   If the property has not previously been platted,
or if the specific use requested necessitates a re-plat, an application for
approval of preliminary plat shall be filed with the application;



         (d)   All uses permitted in this district shall meet the
minimum requirements for that use or similar type uses provided in the
district in which the use or similar type use is permitted. However, the City
Council may vary the requirements to allow flexibility for modern urban
planning and design;



         (e)   When any proposed development involves provisions
for common areas, such as open space, recreational areas and the like, copies
of the proposed articles of incorporation, by-laws and protective covenants
shall be filed at the time of application. Provisions shall be made for the
permanent care and maintenance of such common areas;



         (f)   In recommending that a specific use permit for the
premises under construction be granted, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall determine that such uses are harmonious with and adaptable to building
structures and uses of abutting property and other property in the vicinity
of the premises under consideration and shall make recommendations as to
requirements for the paving of streets, alleys and sidewalks, means of
ingress and egress to public streets, provisions for drainage, adequate
off-street parking, protective screening and open space heights of structures
and compatibility of building;



         (g)   Every specific use permit granted under these
provisions shall be considered as an amendment to this chapter as applicable
to such property under consideration, but shall not be considered as a
permanent change in zoning. In the event the building, premises or land uses
under the specific use permit is voluntarily vacated or if the ownership is
voluntarily transferred or if such building, premise or land is more than 50%
destroyed by fire or other cause, the use of the same shall thereafter
conform to the regulations of the original zoning district of such property
unless a new and separate specific user permit is granted for continuation of
the same;



         (h)   In granting a specific use permit, the City
Council may impose conditions which shall be complied with by the owner or
grantee before utilities are connected by the Building Official for use of
the building on such property pursuant to such specific use permit;



         (i)   No specific use permit shall be granted unless the
applicant, owner and grantee of the specific use permit shall be willing to
accept and agree to be bound by and comply with the written requirements of
the specific use permit, as attached to the site plan drawing (or drawings)
and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission;



         (j)   A building permit shall be applied for and secured
within six months from the time of granting the specific use permit,
provided, however, that the City Council may authorize an extension of this
time upon recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission;



         (k)   No building, premises or land used under a
specific use permit may be enlarged, modified, structurally altered or
otherwise significantly changed, unless a separate specific use permit is
granted for such enlargement, modification, structural alteration or change;



         (l)   The Board of Adjustment shall not have
jurisdiction to hear, review, reverse or modify any decision, determination
or ruling with respect to the granting, extension, revocation, modification
or any other action taken relating to such specific use permit;



         (m)   When the City Council authorizes granting of a
specific use permit, the Zoning Map shall be amended according to its legend
to indicate that the affected area has conditional and limited uses, said
amendment to indicate the appropriate zoning district for the approved use
and suffixed by an “S” designation.



   (B)   Specific uses. A specific use permit shall be required before
the following specific uses can be permitted in the district or districts
indicated:



 

Specific Use
 
District




Airport landing field or heliport
 
FD, GR, C, LI, HI


Art gallery or museum
 
MF


Auto sales lot (new and/or used, outside)
 
GR, CB


Barber or beauty shop
 
MF


Billboards
 
GR


Cafeteria
 
NS


Cleaning or pressing shop
 
MF


Church or rectory
 
SF-1, SF-2, TF


College or university
 
FD, SF-1, SF-2, TF, MF


Commercial outdoor amusement
 
FD


Communication towers/telecommunications facilities
 
MF, GR, CB, C, PD


Dance hall
 
GR


Day care center
 
FD, SF-1, SF-2, TF, MF, MH


Electrical generating plant
 
FD, LI


Electrical substation
 
SF-1, SF-2, TF, MF, MH


Fairground or exhibit area
 
FD, GR


Foster home or juvenile home
 
MF, NS, GR, C, PD


Fraternal organization, lodge or civic club
 
FD, MF


Greenhouse or plant nursery
 
NS


Home for care of alcoholic or psychiatric patients
 
FD, MF, NS


Hospital
 
FD


Indoor assembly and fabrication
 
C


Institutions of a religious or philanthropic nature
 
SF-1, SF-2, TF, MF


Livestock auction
 
FD, LI


Laundry (self-service)
 
MF


Laboratory (scientific research)
 
FD, MF


Livestock feeding plant, pens or yards
 
FD, LI, HI


Mobile home or trailer park
 
FD, GR, C, LI, HI


Modular home
 
SF-2


Mortuary or funeral parlor
 
NS


Petroleum collecting or storage facilities
 
FD, LI


Parking lot or parking structure
 
MF, NS Pawn shops (inside display only)GR


Promotional event
 
FD, GR, C, LI, HI


Public building, shop or yard of local, state or federal government
 
FD, SF-1 SF-2, TF, MF, NS, GR, MH


Private country club with golf course
 
SF-1, SF-2, TF, MF, MH


Restaurant without drive-in service
 
NS


Rodeo grounds
 
FD


Roller or ice skating rink
 
FD


Sanitary landfill
 
FD, LI


Schools - kindergarten, elementary or secondary
 
FD, SF-1, SF-2, TF


Scientific research laboratory
 
FD, MF


Sewage treatment plant
 
FD, GR, C, LI, PD


Swim or tennis club
 
FD, SF-1, SF1-2, TF, MF, MH


Tailor shop
 
MF


Trade or business school
 
FD


Utility business office
 
FD, PD


Utility service storage yard or buildings
 
FD, GR


Water treatment plant
 
SF-1, SF-2, TF, MF, NS, MH, GR




 



   (C)   Special uses and activities. The uses or activities in this
subsection are permitted subject to the following regulations.



      (1)   Home occupation.



         (a)   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING, as used in this section,
shall mean a detached building designed, used and occupied exclusively by
members of one-family as a residence.



         (b)   No person other than members of a family who
reside in the residential dwelling shall be engaged in such occupation,
profession, domestic craft or economic enterprise.



         (c)   Such use shall be and remain incidental and
subordinate to the principal use of the residential dwelling as a family
residence and the area utilized for such occupation, profession, domestic
craft or economic enterprise shall never exceed 25% of the total of the floor
area of the residential dwelling.



         (d)   To prevent increased traffic congestion in
residential areas, no advertising of the occupation, profession, domestic
craft or enterprise may be conducted by the use of signs, displays, handbills
or other visible indication thereof displayed inside or outside the
residential dwellings.



         (e)   The residential dwelling shall maintain its
residential character and shall not be altered or remodeled in order to
create any type of exterior commercial appeal.



         (f)   No exterior storage of material, equipment and/or
supplies used in conjunction with such occupation, profession, domestic craft
or enterprise may be placed, permitted or allowed on the premises occupied by
the residential dwelling.



         (g)   There shall be no offensive noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare beyond the property lines.



         (h)   Such occupation, profession, domestic craft or
enterprise shall be wholly within the residential dwelling and no accessory
building shall be used in conjunction therewith.



         (i)   Only equipment shall be used in such occupation,
profession, domestic craft or enterprise that is ordinarily used in a private
home in like amount and kind.



         (j)   A beauty shop, as defined in this chapter, shall
not be permitted as a home occupation.



      (2)   Day care.



         (a)   Day care centers are subject to minimum rules and
regulations of the Texas Department of Human Services.



         (b)   No signs or play apparatus shall be allowed in the
front yard in residential zoning districts.



         (c)   Provisions shall be made for off-street parking
and for vehicular traffic to enter and exit the site safely.



      (3)   Garage sales.



         (a)   No more than three garage sales shall be allowed
for the same location in any 12-month period. The duration of the garage sale
shall not exceed three consecutive days.



         (b)   One unlighted sign not exceeding 12 square feet in
area shall be permitted. Said sign shall pertain to the garage sale only and
shall be located on the property. Said sign shall be permitted for the
three-day period.



      (4)   Accessory buildings.



         (a)   Accessory buildings detached from or attached to
the main building by an enclosed or unenclosed structure may be permitted in
the allowable building area of any lot defined by the required front, side
and rear building lines.



         (b)   No accessory buildings shall be permitted in the
front yard or in the required side yard.



         (c)   Accessory buildings may be permitted in the
required rear yard provided:



            1.   That they are detached from the main building
or structure and separated therefrom by a distance of not less than ten feet;



            2.   The accessory buildings have a rear and side
yard setback of not less than five feet.



         (d)   Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 30%
of the area of the required rear yard.



         (e)   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a
lot until the construction of the main building has actually been initiated,
and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main building on a lot is
completed and used.



         (f)   No accessory building shall be used as living
quarters or for the conduct of business.



      (5)   Swimming pools.



         (a)   Permits and approvals.



            1.   No swimming pool, public or private, shall be
constructed or used until a building permit has been issued.



            2.   No building permit shall be issued unless the
proposed sanitary facilities and water supply comply with Local and State
Health Department regulations.



         (b)   Requirements.



            1.   The pool may be located anywhere on the
premises except in the required front yard. There shall be a five-foot
setback requirement from any property line and a ten-foot setback from the
rear lot line where there is no dedicated alley, measured from the water’s
edge.  Pump and filter installations shall not be located in the required
side yard.



            2.   Swimming pools shall be equipped with a
filtration system large enough to circulate the water once every eight hours.



            3.   All swimming pool waste water or overflow
water shall be piped into the city sewage system.



            4.   A wall or fence at least four feet in height
with self-latching gates at all entrances shall completely enclose either the
pool area or the surrounding yard area. Such wall or fence shall not be
located in a minimum front yard.



            5.   All lighting of the pool shall be shielded or
directed to face away from adjoining residences. If lights are not
individually shielded, they shall be so designed that direct rays from the
lights shall not be visible from adjacent properties.



            6.   No broadcasting system is to be used for the
purpose of advertising the operation of the pool or for the attraction of
persons to the premises. This shall not prevent a public address system
necessary or useful to the supervision of the pool and the safety of swimmers.



      (6)   Promotional events. Promotional events as defined in
this chapter shall be permitted in certain specified zoning districts,
provided the following special conditions are met and maintained:



         (a)   The promotional event shall take place only on the
premises of the shopping center or major business which is responsible for
the promotional event;



         (b)   The facilities of a promotional event may occupy
off-street parking spaces, provided that no more than 25% of either the
required off-street parking spaces of the shopping center or major business
or the actual off-street parking spaces provided on the premises shall be
utilized for nonparking purposes;



         (c)   The promotional event shall not be conducted after
12:00 midnight;



         (d)   The facilities of a promotional event shall not be
located closer than 200 feet to the nearest inhabited residential structure;



         (e)   The number of promotional events that occupy any
off-street parking space shall be limited to four events per year on the
premises of a shopping center or major business, and each promotional event
shall not exceed a duration of 15 days at a time.



      (7)   Satellite dish antennas.



         (a)   Satellite dish antennas are prohibited in the
required front yard.



         (b)   Satellite dish antennas are prohibited in the
required side and rear yard, except that a minimum setback of five feet from
the side and rear property lines may be permitted when the antenna is not
less than ten feet from the main residence.



         (c)   Satellite dish antennas are permitted as accessory
structures only.



      (8)   Cargo and shipping containers.



         (a)   Cargo and shipping containers may be permitted as
accessory storage only in LI and HI zoning districts.



         (b)   A building permit shall be required for each and
every cargo and shipping container over 120 square feet in size.



         (c)   Cargo and shipping containers used as accessory
storage shall abide by the regulations found under Accessory buildings. See
§ 155.45 (C)(4).



         (d)   Cargo and shipping containers used as
mini-warehouse storage, off-premise warehouse storage or any form of rental
storage, shall not be permitted in any zoning district.



         (e)   Temporary use permits.  The Planning Department
may issue a temporary use permit (TUP) for the following uses, provided that
the temporary use complies with the regulations herein.



            1.   Nonresidential construction.



               a.   Cargo and shipping containers may be
used as temporary accessory storage during non-residential construction when
placed on the lot or parcel where construction is being conducted.



               b.   A temporary use permit shall be
required for each and every cargo and shipping container used as temporary
accessory storage during nonresidential construction and the permit shall be
for 180 days. Upon application, a permit may be extended for construction
projects exceeding 180 days.



            2.   Temporary accessory storage.



               a.   Within areas zoned CB-Central Business
District, GR-General Retail, and C- Commercial, a temporary use permit may be
issued by the Planning Department for the use of a cargo or shipping
container as temporary accessory storage.



               b.   For each 5,000 square feet or portion
thereof of building floor area, a permit for 320 square feet or less of cargo
and shipping container area may be permitted.



               c.   Temporary use permits may be issued for
a maximum of 90 days per calendar year. Upon application, a TUP may be
extended one time in one calendar year not to exceed 30 days.



               d.   Each lot or parcel shall be free of
cargo and shipping containers for not less than 180 days following expiration
of legal permit phase.



               e.   Permitted cargo and shipping containers
for temporary accessory storage shall be located on a lot or parcel in a
manner which is least visible from thoroughfares and adjacent residential
structures. Placement of cargo and shipping containers on a lot or parcel
must be approved by the Planning Department.



         (f)   Application and fees.



            1.   An application for a temporary use permit
shall be completed and signed by the business or property owner. The
application shall include:



               a.   The date of the application.



               b.   The name, address and phone number of
the property owner and the business owner.



               c.   The address of the location and site
where the temporary accessory storage will be placed.



               d.   A copy of a plat of the property from
the Titus County Appraisal District.



               e.   A simple diagram showing proposed
placement for the containers on the property.



               f.   The name, address and phone number of
the company supplying the containers.



               g.   The dimensions and size of each
container.



               h.   The date of arrival and the date of
removal for each container.



            2.   A fee of $15 per cargo or shipping container
shall be charged to defray the cost of processing the application.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. III, § 1) (Am. Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-2-93;
Am. Ord. 1993-3, passed 2-2-93; Am. Ord. 1997-5, passed - -; Am. Ord.
2002-02, passed 1-15-02; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 11-18-03; Am. Ord. 2004-20,
passed 11-16-04



§ 155.46  SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.



   The regulations set forth in this section qualify or supplement, as the
case may be, the development regulations appearing elsewhere in this chapter.



   (A)   General requirements.



      (1)   The area of a required yard shall be open to the sky and
unobstructed, except for the ordinary projections of window sills, cornices
and other ornamental features.



      (2)   Open and unenclosed building projections, such as
outside stairways, fire escapes, balconies, porches, awnings, terraces, eave
and roof extensions and ornamental features may project into the required
yards not more than three feet. Such projections shall not be located closer
than three feet from any lot line.



      (3)   An enclosed canopy for a gasoline filling station may
extend beyond the building line but shall never be closer to the property
line than 12 feet. The building line of a gasoline filling station shall mean
the actual wall of the building and shall not be interpreted as being the
curb or a walk or driveway or as the front of a canopy or the column
supporting same. Gasoline filling station pumps and pump islands may be
located within a required yard, provided that they are not less than 15 feet
from any street line and not less than 50 feet from the boundary of any
residential district.



      (4)   A carport or canopy may project into the required front
yard, provided that the structure remains at least 15 feet from the property
line.



      (5)   Where an open space is more than 50% surrounded by a
building or buildings creating a court as defined in this chapter, then the
minimum width of the court shall be at least 20 feet for one-story buildings,
30 feet for two-story buildings and 40 feet for three-story buildings.



      (6)   In the case of curvilinear streets and cul-de-sacs, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may authorize a reduction of the otherwise
specified frontage of lot width in residential districts along the front
property line, provided that:



         (a)   The lot width at the building line shall equal the
frontage or lot width required in the district where located;



         (b)   The front lotline shall be not less than 30 feet
in any event; and



         (c)   Such reduction of frontage shall not result in a
reduction of the required lot area.



   (B)   Height requirements.



      (1)   The height regulations prescribed herein shall not apply
to church spires, belfries, tanks, water and fire towers, stage towers or
scenery lofts, cooling towers, spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads,
smokestacks, conveyors, and necessary mechanical appurtenances.



      (2)   Public or semi-public service buildings, hospitals,
institutions, schools or churches, where permitted, may be erected to a
height not exceeding 75 feet when each of the required yards are increased by
one foot for each foot of additional building height above the height
regulations for the district in which the building is located.



      (3)   No structure may be erected to a height in excess of
that permitted by the regulations of such airfield zoning ordinance as may
exist at the time and whose regulations apply to the area in which the
structure is being erected.



   (C)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   Front yard.



         (a)   Where 25% or more of the frontage upon the same
side of a street between two intersecting streets is occupied or partially
occupied by a building or buildings with front yards of less depth than
required by this chapter, or where the configuration of the ground is such
that conformity with the front yard provisions of this chapter would work
hardship, the Board of Adjustment may permit modifications of the front yard
requirements.



         (b)   In any residential district where 25% or more of
the frontage upon the same side of a street between intersecting streets is
occupied or partially occupied by a building or buildings having front yards
of greater depth than is required by this chapter, no other lot upon the same
side of such street between such intersecting streets shall be occupied by a
building with a front yard of less than the least depth of any such existing
front yards, unless by permission of the Board of Adjustment.



         (c)   Where the corner lot is a key lot, the required
front yard shall be provided on both streets.



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   For the purpose of side yard regulations, an
attached dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be considered as one
building occupying one lot.



         (b)   Where a lot of record at the time of the effective
date of this chapter is less than 50 feet in width, the required side yard
may be reduced to provide a minimum buildable width of 30 feet, provided,
however, that no side yard shall be less than five feet.



      (3)   Rear yard. Where a lot abuts upon an alley,½ of the
alley width may be considered as part of the required rear yard.



   (D)   Screening provisions. When a commercial, industrial or
business use is established on a lot or premises located adjacent to any
residential zoning district or when any multiple family dwelling use is
established on a lot or premises adjacent to any property located in a
single-family residential zoning district, a six-foot high solid fence or
wall shall be erected and maintained along the property line to provide
visual screening.



   (E)   Site plan review. The purpose of site plan review is to ensure
compliance with this chapter, harmonious use of land, compliance with
appropriate design standards, safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, parking and loading, adequate water supply, drainage and storm
water management, sanitary facilities and other utilities and services.



      (1)   Site plan review and approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be required for the following:



         (a)   Any apartment development;



         (b)   Any shopping center;



         (c)   Any specific use permit;



         (d)   Any development where more than one main building
or use is proposed on a single lot or tract.  No building permit shall be
issued for any of the above developments unless a site plan is first
submitted to and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. A
certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until all construction and
development conform to the approved site plan.



      (2)   Site plan review and approval by the City Planner shall
be required for all other nonresidential developments. This approval is
required prior to issuing a building permit and a certificate of occupancy
shall not be issued until all construction and development conform to the
approved site plan. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter or
its amendments, the City Planner may, at his or her discretion, require a
site plan for any development to be submitted for approval by the Planning
and Zoning Commission if, in his or her opinion, it is in the best interest
of the city to do so.



      (3)   The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to
approve or deny a site plan shall be final and binding unless an appeal of
said decision is made to the City Council. The appeal shall be filed in
writing with the Planning Department not more than ten days after the date of
action taken by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The appeal shall state
the reasons for dissatisfaction with the action of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. If the City Council, by majority vote, deems the appeal to be
without merit, it may refuse to accept the appeal, and the action of the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall stand. If the City Council, by majority
vote, accepts the appeal, the decision of the City Council to approve,
conditionally approve, request modifications or deny a site plan shall be
final and binding.



      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve,
conditionally approve, request modifications or deny approval of the site
plan. Site plans will be reviewed with respect to:



         (a)   The relationship of the development to adjacent
uses in terms of harmonious design, setbacks and negative impacts;



         (b)   The provision of a safe and efficient vehicular
and pedestrian circulation system;



         (c)   The design and location of off-street parking and
loading facilities;



         (d)   Access provided for fire fighting and emergency
equipment to buildings and the location and width of street designed to
accommodate prospective traffic;



         (e)   Screening and landscaping;



         (f)   Protection and conservation of water courses and
areas subject to flooding;



         (g)   The adequacy of water, drainage, sewerage
facilities and other utilities necessary for the building occupants.



      (5)   The City Planner shall have the authority to approve
minor modifications of an approved site plan, provided that such
modifications do not affect the building location or change the circulation
plan.



      (6)   In order to ensure the submission of adequate site plan
information, the Planning Department is granted the authority to maintain and
distribute a list of specific requirements for site plan review applications.
These requirements may be updated upon periodic review by the Planning
Department. The site plan shall contain sufficient information describing the
project, including but not limited to the following:



         (a)   Location of proposed building(s) and structure;



         (b)   On and off-site circulation;



         (c)   Parking;



         (d)   Grading;



         (e)   Landscaping;



         (f)   Placement of utilities;



         (g)   Screening;



         (h)   Engineering for streets and utilities.



   (F)   Building controls.



      (1)   No building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot
or parcel of land which does not abut upon a public street or have permanent
easement for access to a public street, which easement shall have a minimum
width of 50 feet, unless an easement of lesser width has been approved prior
to the adoption of this chapter.



      (2)   Only one main building for one-family and two-family use
with permitted accessory buildings may be located upon a lot or unplatted
tract.



      (3)   Every dwelling shall face or front upon a public street
or approved place other than an alley, which means of access shall have a
minimum width of 50 feet.



      (4)   Where a lot is used for retail, commercial, industrial
purposes or a combination of same, more than one main building may be located
upon the lot, but only when such buildings conform to all the open space and
parking requirements applicable to the uses and districts and when all such
main buildings face upon a public street other than an alley. Whenever two or
more main buildings or portions thereof are desired to be placed upon a
single lot or tract and such buildings will not face upon a public street,
the same may be permitted when the site plan for such development is approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission so as to comply with the normal
requirements for platting.



      (5)   No parking area, storage area or required open space for
one building shall be computed as being the open space, yard or area
requirements for any other building or use.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. III, § 2) (Am. Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-2-93;
Am. Ord. 2002-25, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2002-02, passed 1-15-02)



§ 155.47  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Parking requirements, residential areas.



      (1)   SF District.



         (a)   Each dwelling shall provide off-street parking for
two automobiles or other vehicles not exceeding 3/4-ton capacity.



         (b)   Where the lot is not large enough to accommodate a
garage or carport, parking shall be permitted on a driveway. The driveway
shall be designed so that two vehicles may be parked and removed without
moving one vehicle to permit the exit of the other.



      (2)   TF District.



         (a)   Two parking spaces for each dwelling unit (total
of four) shall be provided.



         (b)   Other requirements as established for the SF
Districts.



      (3)   MF District. Two spaces for each dwelling unit shall be
provided.



      (4)   MH District. Two spaces for each mobile home lot, plus
one space for each three lots shall be provided.



      (5)   CB District. See § division (E), loading and unloading
requirements.



   (B)   Parking requirements, nonresidential districts.



      (1)   Business and professional offices other than medical or
dental:  One space for each 300 square feet of floor area.



      (2)   Bowling alley:  Six spaces for each lane.



      (3)   Church or other place of public worship:  One space for
each four seats in main auditorium.



      (4)   Commercial outdoor amusement:  Twenty spaces, plus one
space for each 100 square  feet of floor area over 1,000 square feet.



      (5)   Gasoline service station:  Six spaces minimum.



      (6)   Golf course:  Forty spaces for each nine holes.



      (7)   High school or college:  One space for each classroom,
laboratory or instructional area, plus one space for each four students
accommodated in the institution.



      (8)   Hospital:  One space for each two beds, plus one space
for each employee on the largest shift.



      (9)   Hotel or motel:  One space for each room, unit or guest
accommodation.



      (10)   Institutions of a religious or philanthropic nature:
Ten spaces, plus one space for each employee.



      (11)   Library or museum:  Ten spaces, plus one space for
each 300 square feet of floor area.



      (12)   Manufacturing, processing, repairing or wholesale
facility:  One space for each two employees or one space for each 1,000
square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.



      (13)   Medical or dental clinic:  One space for each 1200
square feet of floor area.



      (14)   Mobile home, travel trailer or motor home - new or used
sales lot:  One space for each 1,000 square feet of lot are for outdoor use.



      (15)   Motor vehicle salesrooms and used auto lots:  One
parking space for each 500 square feet of sales floor for indoor uses or one
space for each 1,000 square feet of lot area for outdoor uses.



      (16)   Mortuary or funeral home:  Ten spaces for each parlor.



      (17)   Nursing home:  One space for each two beds.



      (18)   Places of public assembly not listed:  One space for
each three seats provided.



      (19)   Restaurant or cafeteria:  One space for each three
seats under maximum seating arrangement.



      (20)   Retail or personal service:  One space for each 200
square feet of floor area (minimum of five spaces).



      (21)   Schools - elementary or secondary:  One space for each
classroom, plus one space for each four seats in any auditorium, gymnasium or
other place of assembly.



      (22)   Storage or warehouse facility:  One space for each two
employees or one space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area, whichever is
greater.



      (23)   Theaters or meeting rooms:  One space for each three
seats.



   (C)   General parking requirements.



      (1)   Parking space computation.



         (a)   FLOOR AREA shall mean the gross floor area of the
specific use.



         (b)   Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces
required shall be construed to be the nearest whole number.



         (c)   The parking space requirement for a use not
specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of
similar nature.



         (d)   Whenever a building or use constructed or
established after the effective date of this chapter is changed or enlarged
in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating
capacity or otherwise to create a need for an increase of 10% or more in the
number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis
of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to
the effective date of this chapter is enlarged to the extent of 50% or more
in floor area or in the area used, the building or use shall then and
thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein.



         (e)   In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces
required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed
separately.



      (2)   Location of parking spaces. All parking spaces required
herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served,
except as follows:



         (a)   Where an increase in the number of spaces is
required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided
collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the
required spaces may be located not to exceed 300 feet from an institution
building served and not to exceed 500 feet from any other nonresidential
building served;



         (b)   Not more than 50% of the parking spaces required
for:



            1.   Theaters, bowling alleys, dance halls, night
clubs, cafes or similar uses and not more than 80% of the parking spaces
required for a church or school auditorium or similar uses may be provided
and used jointly by;



            2.   Similar uses not normally open, used or
operated during the same hours as those listed in subsection 1; provided,
however, that written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed as
specified below. In any case where the required parking spaces are not
located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces
are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby
assuring their retention for such purposes shall be properly drawn and
executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the City Attorney
and shall be filed with the application for a building permit.



      (3)   Minimum dimensions for off-street parking.



         (a)   Ninety degree angle parking. Each parking space
shall be not less than nine feet wide nor less than 18 feet in length.
Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less
than 24 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line.



         (b)   Sixty degree angle parking. Each parking space
shall be not less than nine feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor
less than 17 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or
parking line. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and
shall be not less than 20 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line.



         (c)   Forty-five degree angle parking. Each parking
space shall be not less than nine feet wide perpendicular to the parking
angle nor less than 16 feet in length when measured at right angles to the
building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be additional to parking
space and shall be not less than 18 feet perpendicular to the building or
parking line.



         (d)   Additional regulations. When off-street parking
facilities are located adjacent to a public alley, the width of the alley may
be assumed to be a portion of the maneuvering space requirement. The
maneuvering space requirement for parking areas shall not include any portion
of an abutting public street or highway. Where off-street parking facilities
are provided but not required by this chapter, the off-street parking
facilities shall comply with the minimum requirements for parking and
maneuvering space herein provided.



      (4)   Development and maintenance of parking space.



         (a)   All off-street parking facilities shall be paved,
graded and drained in accordance with the City of Mount Pleasant
specifications.



         (b)   Parking spaces shall be logically arranged and
clearly marked so vehicles may freely enter and exit or load and unload
merchandise.



         (c)   Whenever parking spaces are located adjacent to
any structure or lot line, a curb of equivalent barrier shall be placed so as
to prevent any vehicle from parking closer than three feet to the structure
or three feet to the lot line.



   (D)   Modifications. The Board of Adjustment shall have the
authority to authorize any modification, reduction or waiver of the foregoing
requirements if the Board shall discover that in a particular case the
peculiar nature of the residential, business, industrial or other use or the
exceptional shape or size of the property or other exceptional situation or
condition would justify such action.



   (E)   Loading and unloading requirements. All retail, commercial and
industrial structures shall provide and maintain off-street facilities for
receiving and loading merchandise within the building or the lot. An
off-street loading space may be adjacent to a public alley, to a private
service drive or may be a truck berth within the structure. Such loading
space or truck berth shall consist of a minimum area of ten feet by 45 feet
and shall be provided according to the following schedule:



 


Retail, Commercial, Industrial and Service Structures



Square Feet of Gross Floor Area in Structure
 
Minimum Required Spaces or Berths




0 to 5,000
 
None


5,000 to 15,000
 
1


15,000 to 40,000
 
2


40,000 to 65,000
 
3


65,000 to 100,000
 
4


Each additional 50,000
 
1 additional




 



 


Hotel, Office Buildings, Restaurants and Similar Establishments



Square Feet of Gross Floor Area in Structure
 
Minimum Required Spaces or Berths


0 to 10,000
 
None


10,000 to 50,000
 
1


50,000 to 100,000
 
2


100,000 to 200,000
 
3


Each additional 200,000
 
1 additional



 



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. III, § 3) (Am. Ord. 2003-14, passed
9-16-03)



§ 155.48  SIGN REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Generally.  The regulations set forth in this section qualify
or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing
elsewhere in this chapter. For the purposes of this section, the term SIGN
shall refer to both single-faced and double-faced signs, with the area of a
double-faced sign calculated on the basis of only one face of the sign.



   (B)   Signs within SF-I, SF-2, TF, MF, MH, NS and FD Districts. 
Signs in these districts shall be limited to:



      (1)   One-and two-family dwelling units are limited to a name
plate of four square feet;



      (2)   One attached owner-identification sign shall be
permitted for each thoroughfare more than one that abuts the property;



      (3)   One detached owner-identification sign shall be
permitted for each thoroughfare more than one that abuts the property;



      (4)   Detached signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in area.



   (C)   Signs within CB District.  Signs in this district shall be
subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   One attached sign pertaining to the occupancy of the
premises or commodities sold thereon shall be permitted for each thoroughfare
more than one that abuts the property;



      (2)   One detached sign pertaining to the occupancy of the
premises or commodities sold thereon shall be permitted for each thoroughfare
more than one that abuts the property;



      (3)   Detached signs shall not exceed 100 square feet in area
on any one street.



   (D)   Signs within GR, C, LI and HI Districts.  Signs in these
districts shall be subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   One attached sign pertaining to the occupancy of the
premises or commodities sold thereon shall be permitted for each thoroughfare
more than one that abuts the property. In addition, attached signs not
exceeding 30 square feet of area are permitted for the non-thoroughfare
elevations. All attached signs not facing a thoroughfare shall be unlighted
when adjoining residential zoning districts;



      (2)   One detached sign pertaining to the occupancy of the
premises or commodities sold thereon shall be permitted for each thoroughfare
more than one that abuts the property;



      (3)   In instances where the abutting thoroughfare is a
designated state or federal highway, detached signs shall not exceed 250
square feet in area on any one such street or thoroughfare;



      (4)   In instances where the abutting thoroughfare is not a
designated state or federal highway, detached signs shall not exceed 200
square feet in area on any one such street or thoroughfare;



      (5)   Signs with three or more surfaces or signs with circular
or spherical surfaces shall be allowed only in GR, C, LI and HI Districts.
The total surface area of such signs shall not exceed 300 square feet in area.



   (E)   Shopping center and shopping mall signs.  Signs for shopping
centers and shopping malls shall be limited to:



      (1)   One attached sign per occupant of a shopping center or
mall shall be permitted for each thoroughfare more than one that abuts the
property;



      (2)   Only one detached sign, identifying the premises and/or
the occupants therein, shall be permitted for each shopping center and/or
mall. Said detached sign may be a single sign or may be a composite of
several signs erected on and supported by the same structure;



      (3)   Single detached signs for shopping centers and/or malls
shall not exceed 250 square feet in area;



      (4)   The aggregate gross area of composite detached signs for
shopping centers and/or malls shall not exceed 300 square feet, with no
single sign thereof exceeding 200 square feet in area;



      (5)   Detached signs for shopping centers and/or malls shall
not be located closer than 25 feet to any street or thoroughfare;



      (6)   In shopping centers or malls containing ten acres or
more, detached signs may be erected up to a maximum height of 75 feet;
provided that such detached signs erected at a height greater than 50 feet
must be set back from all property lines a minimum distance equal to the
height of the sign.



   (F)   Off-premises signs. Off-premises signs other than approved
billboards shall be prohibited in all zoning districts.



   (G)   Billboards.  For the purposes of this section, any single
detached off-premises sign exceeding 250 square feet in gross area and used
as an outdoor display for the purpose of making known, advertising or
displaying anything shall be determined to be a billboard and shall conform
to the following requirements:



      (1)   Billboards shall be allowed only on a lot, tract, or
parcel which is adjacent to and abuts right-of-way property owned by the
Texas Department of Transportation along the I-30 corridor, U.S. Highway 67
and East from Industrial Road to city limits and west from North Edwards to
city limits, and Bill Ratliff Freeway and which is zoned FD, C, LI, or HI.
The location of such lot, tract, or parcel and the placement of such
billboards shall not exceed 100 feet beyond the private property line which
is adjacent to right-of-way owned by TXDOT;



      (2)   Billboards shall not be above 35 feet from ground level;



      (3)   Billboards shall not exceed 672 square feet in gross
area. Billboards which exceed 336 square feet in gross area shall not be
stacked or side-by-side;



      (4)   Billboards shall not be erected closer than 300 feet
apart on the same side of the street;



      (5)   Billboards may not be located closer than 25 feet to any
street;



      (6)   Billboards may not be located within 500 feet of any
public park, public forest or recreational area, public playground, public
school or scenic area designated as such by the city or any other
governmental agency;



      (7)   Eighty percent of the area within cutouts or enclosed
open spaces shall be included in calculating the surface area of a billboard;



      (8)   Billboards with a “V” shape shall be positioned with
an interior angle between faces of not more than 90 degrees with the distance
between the sign faces not exceeding five feet at their closest point;



      (9)   Billboards may be made of conventional advertising
panels and/or electronic message centers (EMC);



      (10)   Billboards which are electronic message centers shall
be permitted at any of the locations where existing billboards are located;



      (11)   Billboards which are electronic message centers shall
have automatic equipment with a sensor or other approved device that
automatically determines the ambient illumination and programed to
automatically dim according to ambient lighting conditions, or that can be
adjusted to comply with the 0.3-foot candle measurement;



      (12)   Billboards which are electronic message centers must
maintain a difference between the off and solid message measurements using
the EMC Measurement Criteria. It shall not exceed 0.3 foot candles at night;



      (13)   Billboards which are electronic message center must
meet all of the standard adopted for such (EMCs) as adopted by the TXDOT. In
the case that there may be a conflict with the city and TXDOT the regulations
adopted by TXDOT shall be enforced.



   (H)   Temporary signs.  Temporary signs shall be allowed only in
the following districts; GR, C, LI, and HI; shall not be attached to
buildings, fences, trees, utility poles or trash receptacles, limited to 25
square feet except where expressly permitted by one of the following sections:



      (1)   Temporary signs shall include but not be limited to real
estate signs, development and construction signs, special promotion, event
and grand opening signs, special event signs in public ways, and political
signs;



      (2)   Temporary signs which contain or are illuminated by
flashing, intermittent, or moving lights are prohibited in all zoning
districts;



      (3)   Off premise temporary signs are prohibited;



      (4)   All temporary signs must be located at least ten feet
from any street and must be located in the required front yard of the
location and if the location has a side street in the required side yard;



      (5)   Real estate signs pertaining to the lease, hire, or sale
of real estate shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and shall be located
on the lot so advertised; provided there shall not exceed one sign on each
street fronting the property;



      (6)   Construction signs pertaining to the construction or
remodeling of a building on the premises shall not exceed 60 square feet in
area and shall be located on the lot only for the duration of the
construction. No more than one shall be permitted on each street fronting the
property;



      (7)   Development signs pertaining to residential office,
commercial, and industrial development shall not exceed 100 square feet in
area and shall be located only within the area being developed. No more than
one sign shall be permitted on each street fronting the property;



      (8)   Special promotion, event, and grand opening signs shall
not exceed 25 square feet in area and shall be located only in the area
specified in division (H)(4) above. No more than one sign shall be permitted
on each street fronting the property, signs under this section are limited to
use for 14 days;



      (9)   Special event signs in public ways shall not be
prohibited in or over public ways subject to the approval of the zoning code
official as to size, location, and method of erection. The Zoning Code
Official shall not approve any event signage that would impair the safety and
convenience of use of public right-of-ways, or obstruct traffic visibility.
Signs under this section are limited to 14 days and must be removed within 72
hours after the event is complete;



      (10)   Requirements in this division (H) do not apply to nor
are meant to conflict with the sign requirements for the Central Business
District, Historical District, Shopping Center, EVMS and garage sales;



      (11)   All temporary signs must be kept in good repair and
installed in accordance with the previous section. Failure to comply will
result in the prohibited signs being removed, confiscated and disposed of by
city personnel.



   (I)   Political signs.  For the purposes of this section, any
detached sign designed to promote the support of a candidate for elected
office or to promote a particular viewpoint on a matter or issue to be voted
upon by the public shall be determined to be a political sign and shall be
subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   Political signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in area;



      (2)   Political signs shall not be located in or permitted to
project into public rights-of-way and shall be located at least ten feet from
any street;



      (3)   Political signs shall not be attached to any trees,
utility poles or trash receptacles;



      (4)   Political signs shall not be placed, located or erected
in any public park, public forest or recreational area, public playground
and/or on any property owned by the city, except that on any day regular or
special elections are held at the Mount Pleasant Civic Center or any other
building owned by the city, political signs shall be allowed beyond the
distance prescribed by the Texas Election Code on the premises surrounding
the voting place from one hour prior to the start of voting to one hour after
the prescribed closing time cited in the Texas Election Code.  All signs
must be removed one hour after the closing of the polls and shall be subject
to removal under division (I)(8) of this section.  Otherwise, all the
requirements of this division (I) shall be in effect as to the regulation of
political signs around the polling places;



      (5)   Political signs shall be removed within ten days after
the primary, run-off or general election to which the signs pertain or after
the termination of candidacy, whichever occurs first;



      (6)   Political signs which contain, include or are
illuminated by flashing, intermittent or moving light or lights are
prohibited in all districts;



      (7)   Political signs which are illuminated by
non-intermittent lighting shall be allowed only in the following districts:
CB, GR, C, LI and HI. Political signs located in all other districts shall
not be illuminated;



      (8)   Political signs placed, located or erected in violation
of these requirements shall be subject to immediate removal, confiscation and
disposal by city personnel.



   (J)   Garage sale signs.  Signs for garage sales shall be limited
to the following requirements:



      (1)   Only one sign shall be allowed for each garage sale, and
the sign shall be located on the same property where the garage sale is
located;



      (2)   Garage sale signs shall not be illuminated;



      (3)   Signs for garage sales shall not exceed 12 square feet
in area;



      (4)   Garage sale signs shall be removed within 24 hours after
the garage sale is concluded.



   (K)   Changeable electronic variable message sign (CEVMS).  The
following regulations shall apply to changeable electronic variable message
signs:



      (1)   CEVMS shall be allowed only in GR, C, LI and HI
Districts;



      (2)   No CEVMS shall exceed 30 square feet in area;



      (3)   (a)   The CEVMS portion of a sign may be illuminated
by incandescent lamps, LED (light emitting diodes), magnetic discs, or other
sources of light. Whatever the light source, undue brightness is prohibited.
For enforcing this provision, prima facie proof of undue brightness is the
illumination of a portion of the sign in excess of the intensity levels
specified below:



            1.   Day: 5,000 nits;



            2.   Night: 1,000 nits;



         (b)   To ensure compliance with this provision, the sign
must have an automatic phased proportional dimmer, which must be used to
reduce nighttime brightness levels (compared to daytime brightness levels).
Further, prior to the issuance of a permit for an CEVMS, the applicant shall
provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light
intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed the levels specified above,
and the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation by
password-protected software or other method as deemed appropriate by the
city. The burden of proof to determine whether these regulations are met
throughout the life of the sign shall be at the expense of the property or
sign owner where the sign is located;



      (4)   Any CEVMS installed prior to June 1, 2008 must also
submit written certification from the sign manufacturer or other persons
deemed appropriate by the city that the sign does not cause undue brightness
and meets the intensity levels specified above. The owner of an electronic
message center has 60 days from the adoption of this section to submit such
certification to the city;



      (5)   A sign owner may modify existing, legal, conforming
structures to a CEVMS only after filing application for a permit, meeting the
regulations of this section and receiving a permit by the city;



      (6)   CEVMS shall comply with applicable federal and state
laws and regulations;



      (7)   Failure to adhere to any of these provisions may result
in the revocation of the CEVMS portion of the permit;



      (8)   Only one CEVMS is allowed per premises;



      (9)   The addition of any CEVMS to any nonconforming
freestanding sign is prohibited.



   (L)   General sign requirements.  These requirements shall apply to
any type of sign within any district:



      (1)   Signs shall be located at least ten feet from any street
(except signs for shopping centers and shopping malls and billboards, which
shall be at least 25 feet from any street);



      (2)   Attached signs shall not exceed the height of the wall
of the building to which they are attached;



      (3)   Signs shall not be located in or permitted to project
into public rights-of-way;



      (4)   When any sign is illuminated, the light or lights shall
be directed, shaded or concealed so that they will not interfere with the
vision of motor vehicle operators or shine directly on residential property;



      (5)   Detached signs shall comply with the following height
restrictions:



         (a)   The top of detached signs in SF-1, SF-2 and TF
Districts shall not exceed a maximum height of ten feet;



         (b)   The top of detached signs in MF, MH, NS and FD
Districts shall not exceed a maximum height of 35 feet;



         (c)   The top of detached signs in the CB District shall
not exceed a maximum height of 50 feet;



         (d)   The top of detached signs in GR, C, LI and HI
Districts shall not exceed a maximum height of 50 feet, unless such detached
signs are located within 500 feet of a designated U.S. interstate highway, in
which event the top of same shall not exceed a maximum height of 75 feet;



         (e)   In shopping centers or malls containing ten acres
or more, detached signs may be erected up to a maximum height of 75 feet;
provided that such detached signs erected at a height greater than 50 feet
must be set back from all property lines a minimum distance equal to the
height of the sign;



         (f)   The top of billboards shall not exceed a maximum
height of 35 feet.



      (6)   Roof-mounted signs shall be permitted provided they
comply with all applicable requirements of the city's Building Code;



      (7)   No sign shall be attached to any trees, utility poles or
trash receptacles;



      (8)   Signs may not be located in such a manner as to obscure
or otherwise interfere with the driver's view of approaching, merging or
intersecting traffic or with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign,
signal or device;



      (9)   All signs shall be maintained in good appearance and
safe structural condition. The general area in the vicinity of any sign shall
be kept free and clear of weeds, debris, trash and litter;



      (10)   All illuminated signs shall be installed and wired in
accordance with the requirements of the current National Electrical Code, as
adopted by the city;



      (11)   No sign shall be erected or installed closer than five
feet to any telecommunications or television cable, power line or street
light standard;



      (12)   Should any sign become insecure, in danger of falling
or otherwise unsafe, the Chief Building Official shall provide the owner
thereof, or the person or firm maintaining same, ten days written notice to
secure the sign in a manner approved by the Chief Building Official or to
remove same. If action to secure and/or remove such sign is not taken within
ten days of such notice, the Chief Building Official may remove such sign at
the expense of the owner thereof or the person or firm maintaining same;



      (13)   Should the city receive an application for permit for a
type of sign that is not specifically addressed in these regulations, then
the permit shall be requested as a specific use permit and shall be subject
to the regulations of § 155.45.



   (M)   Sign permits.



      (1)   Permits shall be required for all detached signs
exceeding 25 square feet in area;



      (2)   All detached signs exceeding 50 square feet in area must
be installed or erected by a licensed and bonded sign contractor after
obtaining a sign permit from the Chief Building Official.



   (N)   Penalty for violation of sign regulations.



      (1)   Any person who violates or fails to comply with any
provision of this section pertaining to sign regulations shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine as provided in § 155.99.



      (2)   Each day that such violation or violations continue
shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. III, § 4)  (Ord. 1983-2, passed - -; Am.
Ord. 1989-12, passed 9-5-89; Am. Ord. 1990-9, passed 6-5-90; Am. Ord.
2003-22, passed 11-4-03; Am. Ord. 2008-13, passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 2009-2,
passed 2-17-09; Am. Ord. 2014-10, passed 8-4-14; Am. Ord. 2016-5, passed
8-2-16; Am. Ord. 2017-9, passed 9-19-17)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.49  NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES OF LAND.



   (A)   General requirements.



      (1)   Lots, structures or uses of land which were lawful prior
to the adoption of this chapter but which would be prohibited under the terms
of this chapter shall be permitted to continue subject to the regulations
specified in this section.



      (2)   Except that any single-family, duplex or apartment use
existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be therefore deemed a
conforming use.



      (3)   A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use
of land or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended
or enlarged after passage of this chapter by attachment on a building or
premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises or by
the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in
the district involved.



      (4)   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall
be deemed to require a change in the plan, construction or designated use of
any building on which the building permit was lawfully obtained prior to the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.



   (B)   Nonconforming use of land.



      (1)   A nonconforming use of land shall not be enlarged,
increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at
the effective date of adoption of this chapter.



      (2)   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in
part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption of this chapter.



      (3)   Nonconforming uses of open land shall specifically
include billboards, posterboards, automobile wrecking yards, trailer and
mobile home parks, auction yards, contractors yards, race tracks, stock
yards, golf driving ranges and miniature golf courses.



   (C)   Nonconforming use of buildings or structures.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the lawful use of a
building or structure existing at the effective date of this chapter may be
continued although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof.



      (2)   If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming
use of a building or structure may be changed to another nonconforming use of
the same or of a more restricted classification.



      (3)   Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more
restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be
changed to a less restricted use.



      (4)   The nonconforming use of a building or structure may be
hereafter extended throughout those parts of a building which were lawfully
and manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of enactment of
this chapter.



      (5)   Should a structure be moved for any reason for any
distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
district in which it is located after it is moved.



      (6)   No such structure shall be enlarged or altered in any
way which increases its nonconformity.



   (D)   Termination of a nonconforming use.



      (1)   No building, structures or land where a nonconforming
use has been discontinued for a period of six months shall again be put to a
nonconforming use.



      (2)   The casual, intermittent, temporary or illegal use of
land, buildings or structures shall not be sufficient to establish the
existence of a nonconforming use, and the existence of a nonconforming use on
a part of the lot or tract shall not be construed to establish a
nonconforming use on the entire lot or tract.



   (E)   Repairs and maintenance. Repairs and maintenance work as
required to keep it in sound condition may be made to a nonconforming
building or structure, provided the total structural repairs and alterations
shall not, during its life subsequent to the date of its becoming a
nonconforming use, exceed 50% of the assessed value of the building or
structure for market value at such date, unless such building is permanently
changed to a conforming use.



   (F)   Destruction of a nonconforming use.



      (1)   No building or structure which has been damaged by any
cause whatsoever to the extent of more than 50% of the physical reproduction
cost of the building or structure immediately prior to damage shall be
restored except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter, and all
rights as a nonconforming use are terminated.



      (2)   If a building or structure is damaged by less than 50%
of the physical reproduction cost, it may be repaired or reconstructed and
used as before the time of damage, provided that such repairs or
reconstruction be substantially completed within 12 months of the date of
such damage.



      (3)   Calculation of physical reproduction cost shall be made
from the quantities and prices of materials and the hours and costs of labor
as of the date immediately prior to damage, reasonably required to reproduce
the building or structure in its condition as of the time of damage.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. III, § 5)



§ 155.50 COMMUNICATION TOWERS/TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



   (A)   (1)   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to
provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the development of
telecommunication facilities and installation of antennas. The regulations
contained herein are designed to protect and promote public health, safety,
community welfare and the aesthetic quality of the city as set forth within
the goals, objectives and policies of the Mt. Pleasant Comprehensive Master
Plan. The following regulations are intended to provide:



         (a)   The appropriate location and development for
wireless communication towers, antennas, and accessory facilities to serve
the residents and businesses of the city;



         (b)   Minimize visual impacts of towers, antennas, and
accessory facilities through careful design, siting, and screening;



         (c)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from
tower failure and falling debris through engineering and careful siting of
tower structures;



         (d)   Maximize use of any new or existing communication
tower to reduce the number of towers needed.



      (2)   Whereas, it is expressly stated that said regulations
are not intended to unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally
equivalent services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting
the provision of personal wireless communication services within the
corporate limits of the city and encourage managed development of
telecommunications infrastructure to insure the city's role in the evolution
of technology.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACCESSORY BUILDING . A building housing electronic and
communication equipment as an associated and permitted part of a wireless
communication system.



      ANTENNA . Any exterior apparatus designed for wireless radio,
television, microwave or telephonic communication through the sending and/or
receiving of electromagnetic waves.



      ANTENNA, BUILDING ATTACHED . Antenna attached to existing
structures in two general forms: (1) roof-mounted, in which antennas are
placed on the roofs of buildings, or (2) building-mounted, in which antennas
are mounted to the sides of buildings. These antennas can also be mounted on
structures such as water tanks, billboards, church steeples, electrical
transmission towers, and the like.



      ANTENNA, MICROWAVE . Also known as "dish" antenna. A dish-shaped
antenna used to link communications sites together by wireless transmission
of voice or data, utilizing electromagnetic radiation frequencies from 3 GHz
to 300 GHz; and using relatively low transmitter power levels when compared
to other forms of transmission.



      ANTENNA, PANEL . Also known as "directional" antenna. An antenna
or array of antennas designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular
area. Panel antennae are typically flat, rectangular devices approximately
six to eight square feet in size.



      ANTENNA, WHIP . Also known as "omni-directional" antenna. Shaped
cylindrically, whip antennas have diameters between two and six inches, and
measure between 1 and 18 feet in height. They are used to emit signals in a
360 degree horizontal plane and a compressed vertical plane.



      BACKHAUL PROVIDER . The ground wire provider that provides the
wire connection between the base transmitting station and the mobile
switching center and between the mobile switching center and the local
telephone network.



      CO-LOCATION . The act of locating wireless communications
equipment for more than one use on a single antenna facility.



      FAA . Federal Aviation Administration.



      FCC. Federal Communications Commission.



      HEIGHT . When referring to an antenna or other structure, the
distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the structure,
even if the highest point is an antenna.



      MONOPOLE . A self-supporting antenna facility composed of a
single spire more than 35 feet tall used to support communications equipment
or other visible items. No guy wires are used or permitted.



      STEALTH FACILITY . A wireless facility that is virtually
transparent or invisible to the surrounding neighborhood. Stealth facilities
may include totally enclosed antennas, wireless towers that replicate or
duplicate the construction of common structures such as flagpoles and
camouflaged wireless towers that are constructed to blend into the
surrounding environment.



      TOWER FACILITY . Any structure that is more than 35 feet tall and
is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or
more antennas, including self supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or
monopoles.



      TOWER, GUYED . Any monopole or lattice tower structure more than
35 feet in height that is used to support antennas, or other visible items
that is secured to the ground by cables for stability.



      TOWER, LATTICE . A self-supporting tower having three or four
support legs with cross-bracing and holding a variety of antennas.



      WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEM . (Antenna support structures for
mobile and land-based telecommunication facilities.) Whip antennas, panel
antennas, microwave antennas, and satellite receive-only antennas, cell
enhancers, and related equipment for wireless transmission from a sender to
one or more receivers, such as for mobile cellular telephones, mobile radio
or television (commercial only) broadcasting towers and transmitting
stations. This definition is inclusive of the placement of the above
referenced equipment on a monopole tower, a lattice tower, a guyed tower, and
any communication tower, which does or does not utilize guy wire support in
addition to existing buildings, accessory buildings, or other independent
support structures. A wireless communication system shall, by definition,
contain only one tower or monopole structure.



   (C)   General requirements.



      (1)   Districts where permitted. Wireless communication
systems other than towers or antennas as stated in division (C)(2) below, may
be permitted in (LI) Light Industrial Zoning District and (HI) Heavy
Industrial Zoning District, or by Specific Use Permit in (MF) Multi-Family
Zoning District, (GR) General Retail Zoning District, (CB) Central Business
Zoning District, (C) Commercial Zoning District, and (PD) Planned Development
Zoning District provided that the proponent of such use has incorporated the
minimum requirements of this section and any other applicable requirements
into the site plan and application materials.



      (2)   Review and approval. Wireless communication systems
shall be approved by the Planning and Building Department pursuant to the
standards of administrative review provided by division (C)(3).  However,
the following wireless systems shall be exempt from said review:



         (a)   Antennas and/or towers owned by federal, state, or
local government entities provided a license, contract or lease authorizing
such antenna or tower has been approved by the governing authority of the
applicable governmental entity.



         (b)   Any amateur radio antenna and/or towers which are
in compliance with FCC Radio Preemption, 101 FCC 2nd 952 (1985) or the
regulations related to amateur radio service adopted under 47 C.F.R. Part 97.



         (c)   Any antenna less than 50 feet in height situated
on a residential site that is intended for television or radio reception.



      (3)   Building permit requirements. The proponent of a new
wireless communication system tower site shall provide the following
documentation for review by the Planning and Building Department prior to the
approval of a building permit:



         (a)   Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for
one or more towers shall provide to the Planning Department an inventory of
its existing towers including specific information about the location,
height, and design of each tower. The Planning Department shall maintain an
inventory of existing towers, including specific information about the
location, height, and design of each tower. The city may share such
information with other persons, organizations or governmental authorities
seeking to locate antennas within the city.



         (b)   Availability of suitable existing wireless
communication systems, tower facilities, or antennas. No new wireless
communication system, tower facility, or antenna may be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates with sufficient evidence to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Planning Department that no existing tower or structure
can accommodate the applicant's proposed wireless communication system, tower
facility, and/or antenna. Applicants need to refer to § division
(D)(3)(f)-(j) as guidelines in preparing sufficient evidence in support of
new towers, antennas, or structures.



         (c)   Site plan. Each applicant requesting a permit
under this section shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation
view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation,
signed and sealed by appropriate professional engineers, showing the location
and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning
topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks,
drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information
necessary to assessment compliance with this section.



         (d)   Residential setback. Towers must be set back a
distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential
structure.



         (e)   Yard setback. Towers and accessory facilities must
satisfy the minimum yard setback requirements for the zoning district in
which they are located.



         (f)   Security fencing. Towers, accessory facilities and
any support structures shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than
eight feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing
device. A fence adjacent to a residential district shall be opaque. No fence
shall contain barbed, razor or electric wire.



         (g)   Aesthetics. Towers shall either maintain a
galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA,
be painted a color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. At the tower site,
the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent
possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that
will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment.
If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and
supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color
that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting
structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.



         (h)   Federal requirements. All towers must meet or
exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other
agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and
antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of
the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring such towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within
six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations.



         (i)   Tower illumination. Towers shall not be
illuminated except as required by the FAA or other applicable federal or
state agencies.



         (j)   Radiation standards. Wireless communication
systems shall comply with current FCC standards for non-ionizing
electromagnetic radiation (NEIR). The applicant shall submit verification
that the proposed site plan ensures compliance with these standards.



         (k)   Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the
structural integrity of towers, antennas and accessory buildings, the owner
shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in
applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that
are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time
to time. If, upon inspection, the tower fails to comply with such codes and
standards and constitutes a danger to persons and property, then upon notice
being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have ten days from
the receipt of notice to contact our office on a plan of action to bring such
tower, antenna(s), or accessory building(s) with such codes and standards
into compliance. If the owner fails to bring such tower, antenna(s) or
accessory building(s) into compliance within the said ten days, the city may
remove such or cause such tower, antenna(s), or accessory building(s) to be
removed at the owner's expense.



      (4)   Removal of abandoned antennas, towers, and accessory
facilities. Any antenna or tower and accessory facilities that is not
operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned,
and the owner of such antenna or tower and accessory facilities shall be
notified and granted ten days from receipt of notice for a plan of action
from the planning department notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such
antenna, tower or accessory facility(s) is not removed within said ten days,
the planning department may cause such antenna or tower and accessory
facilities to be removed at the owner's expense. If there are two or more
users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until
all users cease using the tower.



      (5)   Equipment and storage building. Any accessory building
or associated equipment storage shall be screened from public view,
landscaped for aesthetic purposes, or be incorporated into the stealth
treatment such that it is consistent and complementary with the existing
structures and uses on the premises.



      (6)   Driveway and parking surfaces. All driveways and
required parking surfaces accessing any tower facility, wireless
communication system, and/or accessory building site shall be constructed in
accordance with the city's ordinances for off-street parking facilities
(Ordinance No. 2001-15) and curbs, gutters and driveways (see chapter 98).



      (7)   Limitations. Wireless communication systems and/or tower
facilities shall be limited to stealth facilities and/or monopoles only, as
permitted within the district by these ordinances.



      (8)   Tower facility capacity. Under no condition shall a
tower facility have more than the number and size of antennas attached to it
that are allowed by the tower facility manufacturer's designs and
specifications for maximum wind load requirements.



      (9)   Public easements. Tower facilities shall not be
permitted in any public easement.



      (10)   Maintenance. Wireless communication systems, tower
facilities, or antennas obviously in need of maintenance as determined by the
building official, shall be removed or brought into compliance within 30 days
following notice given by the building official. This shall not preclude
immediate action by the building official to safeguard life, limb, health,
property, and public welfare.



      (11)   Wireless communication systems/tower facility impact
levels. For the purpose of siting wireless communication systems and/or tower
facilities, it has been determined that there exists different levels of
impact for wireless communication systems/tower facilities depending upon
physical location, aesthetics, and land uses compatibility. These impact
levels are defined as follows:



         (a)   Within all zoning districts where wireless
communication systems, tower facilities, antennas, or any related structures
are permitted or granted a specific use permit, a stealth facility may be
erected to where the antenna(s) may be located on any existing structure such
as, but not limited to, a building, water tower, utility tower, steeple, or
light pole. The antenna may be aesthetically painted, constructed, or applied
with material such that even though it may not be out of sight it is
effectively incorporated into the pattern, style, and material or the
structure to effectively render it unnoticeable. A new structure may be
constructed to hold or house the antenna; however, the structure must be
consistent with the overall architectural features of the primary buildings.



         (b)   No tower shall exceed 100 feet in height.



   (D)   Specific use requirements for wireless communication systems,
tower facilities, and/or antennas.



      (1)   A specific use permit must be obtained from the Planning
and Zoning Commission to locate a wireless communication system, tower
facility, and/or antenna in a (MF) Multi-Family Zoning District, (GR) General
Retail Zoning District, (CB) Central Business Zoning District, (C) Commercial
Zoning District or (PD) Planned Development Zoning District as stated in
division (C)(1).



      (2)   In considering whether to grant a specific use permit
from the regulations specified above, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall consider the following:



         (a)   The effect on the value of the surrounding
property;



         (b)   The potential for interference with the enjoyment
of the use of surrounding properties;



         (c)   Aesthetics;



         (d)   The necessity of the specific use permit for the
public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens or for governmental
purposes;



         (e)   The zoning district and the adjoining zoning
districts of the property for which the specific use permit is sought; and



         (f)   The unique conditions that govern reasonable
reception on any given lot.



      (3)   If application is made for a specific use permit, the
applicant must provide the following information:



         (a)   Describe the nature of the antenna site. 
Indicate whether the proposed structure is a monopole or mounted to a
self-supporting structure.  Indicate the proposed height.



         (b)   Provide photos or drawings of all equipment,
structures, and antenna.



         (c)   Describe why the antenna or tower is necessary.



         (d)   State the name(s) of the telecommunications
providers or other users of the antenna or tower and describe the use to be
made by each user.



         (e)   Indicate if this antenna or tower site is to be
connected to other sites; and if so, describe how it will be connected and
who will be the backhaul provider.



         (f)   The applicant must address whether or not they
have made an effort to co-locate the facilities proposed for this antenna or
tower on existing towers or facilities in the same general area.  Identify
the location of these existing sites, and describe in detail these efforts
and explain why these existing sites were not feasible. Refer to division
(C)(3)(b) for a guideline. Attach all studies or tests performed which
demonstrate why the existing site will not provide sufficient signal
coverage.  Provide written documentation from existing sites' owners and/or
operators, which confirm the statements, provided.  Indicate whether or not
the existing sites allow/promote co-location and, if not, describe why not.



         (g)   Indicate whether or not co-location will be
allowed to other telecommunications providers at the requested site.  If
they are not allowed, state every reason and the basis for each reason.



         (h)   Indicate the proposed provider's current coverage
area for the city.  Attach maps showing the areas the proposed provider's
existing antenna currently covers, the areas the applicant's existing sites
and other existing sites would cover, and the areas the applicant's existing
sites and the requested site would cover.



         (i)   Describe the applicant's master antenna and tower
plan for the city.  Submit a site plan, refer to division (C)(3)(c), maps
and other related documentation.  Provide information indicating each phase
of the plan.



         (j)   Describe the applicant's plan to minimize the
number of telecommunication antennas and towers needed to cover the city.



      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission will approve a
requested application subject to the finding that co-location of this
wireless communication system, tower facility, or antenna with a nearby
existing facility is technically not feasible and subject to the following
conditions:



         (a)   Applicant will permit co-location of others at the
site;



         (b)   Applicant will configure its antenna and other
equipment to accommodate other providers;



         (c)   Applicant will identify its backhaul provider
connecting antenna sites; and



         (d)   Applicant will give notice to the city identifying
any provider who co-locates to the site and identify their backhaul provider.



(Ord. 2002-02, passed 1-15-02)



§ 155.51  LANDSCAPE.



   (A)    Purpose and intent.



      (1)   The purpose of this section is to enhance the
beautification of the city and preserve and protect the city's identity and
natural environment. This section is enacted to improve the appearance and
character of certain setback and yard areas, including off-street vehicular
parking and open lot sales and service areas within the city. Further, the
purpose of this section is to protect and preserve the appearance and
character of the surrounding neighborhoods, and therefore promote the general
public safety and welfare by providing for the installation and maintenance
of landscaping and screening. This section is intended to assure that
reasonable provision will be made for such matters as sound and sight
buffers, preservation of scenic views and those elements of site design which
may have substantial effects on adjoining land uses.



      (2)   This section establishes the procedure, regulations and
standards whereby landscape plans and tree preservation measures will be
reviewed by the city for compliance with this section, and specifies the
submittal and content requirements for such landscape plans.



   (B)   Jurisdiction and applicability.



      (1)    The landscape requirements in this section shall apply
to all land within the city limits, as now or hereafter set, in all zoning
districts, except for land zoned FD, SF-1, SF-2, TF, MH, and CB. Areas zoned
as Planned Development Districts containing landscaping standards shall be
regulated by the more restrictive requirements.



      (2)   The landscape requirements shall apply to all public,
private and institutional developments.  Such landscape requirements shall
become applicable to each individual lot at such time as an application for a
building permit on such lot is made. All landscape requirements of this
section shall continue after the building permit is issued to any owner or
subsequent owner.



   (C)    Compliance.



      (1)   All required landscaping and screening shall be
installed as part of the project construction.  All tree planting and plant
screening required by this section must be installed prior to the issuance of
a Certificate of Occupancy, where required, or prior to the commencement of
use. This requirement is intended to assure compliance with the landscape
requirements of this section and the adherence to a specific landscape plan
approved by the city prior to the issuance of a building permit.



      (2)   All landscaping shall be installed in a sound manner and
in accordance with accepted good planting procedures; all elements of
landscaping shall be installed so as to meet all other applicable city
ordinances and policies. Landscape areas, both those proposed and those to be
retained, shall be protected from vehicular encroachment during and after the
construction phase by appropriate barriers.



   (D)    Definitions. In the event of a dispute, the City Planner, or
designee, shall have the authority to interpret the definition of the word as
it relates to this section. As used herein, the following definitions are
applicable:



      BARRICADE AREA FOR EXISTING TREES . A protected area extending in
a radius no less than the drip line from every protected tree that prevents
intrusion by construction equipment, vehicles and people.



      BARRIER . A device or treatment, which controls the management,
circulation, separation, or direction of traffic.  Such treatments include,
but are not limited to, wheelstops, raised islands, dividers or barricades.



      BERM . An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest,
screening and/or decrease noise.



      CALIPER . Diameter of a predominant tree trunk measured six
inches above grade for trees four inches in diameter or less.  For trees
with a larger diameter, the caliper measurement shall be the diameter at
breast height (d.b.h.), measured four and one half feet above grade.



      CANOPY TREE . Any self-supporting woody plant with one
well-defined trunk and a distinct and definite formed crown, which attains a
height of at least 30 feet.



      DECIDUOUS . A plant with foliage that sheds annually.



      DEVELOPMENT . The construction, reconstruction or enlargement of
any structure.



      DRIP LINE . The area beneath the canopy of a tree defined by a
vertical line extending from the outermost edges of the tree branches to the
ground.



      EVERGREEN . A plant with foliage that remains green year-round.



      EXISTING TREE . Any self-supporting woody plant with one
well-defined trunk which exists on the lot prior to development.



      GRASS . Any of numerous grass species that will attain a thick
green cover of turf over the available soil area.



      GROUND COVER . Any woody or herbaceous plant that effectively
shades out sod and will not generally reach a height of over two feet.



      HARD SCAPE SCREENING . Non-living screening materials such as
walls, fences and baffles.



      LANDSCAPE PLAN . The Landscape Site Plan or LANDSCAPE PLAN
information required to be submitted and approved in accordance with this
section.



      LANDSCAPED AREA . An area within the boundary of a property which
is devoted to and consists of plant material, trees, water forms, planters,
brick, stone, aggregate and other features used primarily for landscaping
purposes, but not including the use of smooth concrete or asphalt.



      LANDSCAPING . Changing, rearranging or adding to the original
vegetation or scenery of a piece of land. It may include reshaping the land
by moving the earth, as well as preserving the original vegetation or adding
vegetation.



      NON-CANOPY TREE . Any self-supporting woody plant with one or
more trunks which attains a height of at least 15 feet.



      NON-CONFORMING DEVELOPMENT . A development which was lawful prior
to the adoption of this section but which fails by reason of such adoption to
comply with this section.



      ORNAMENTAL TREE . A tree planted primarily for its decorative
value or for screening purposes; tends to be smaller at maturity than a
canopy tree.



      PARKWAY . The area lying between the right-of-way line of any
public street (which is not an alley) and the curb line of the street; or if
there is no curb line, the shoulder of the street; or if there is no shoulder
or curb, the edge of the pavement of such street.



      PLANT MATERIALS . Living trees, shrubs, vines, grass, ground
covers and flowering annuals, biennials and perennials.



      PROPERTY . The real property included within the boundaries of
any lot approved and recorded in the plat records of Titus County, or an
unplatted tract or parcel of land as described and recorded in the Real
Property Records of Titus County, Texas.



      PROTECTED TREE . A tree that has a barrier constructed in such a
way that the tree is protected from damage due to construction or from normal
vehicular movement.



      SCREENING . A method of visual shielding or obscuring one
abutting or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls and berms
or densely planted vegetation.



      SHRUB . A woody perennial plant distinguished from a perennial
herb by its persistent, woody stem and from a tree by a mature height of less
than 15 feet and having no distinctive elevated crown of foliage.



      STREET YARD . The area of a lot which lies between the street
right-of-way line and the front, side and/or rear wall building line.  See
§ 155.51(J), illustrations 1 thru 6.



      UNDISTURBED AREA . The area of a lot which maintains the original
natural vegetation including trees, shrubs, grasses, groundcover, and plant
materials as approved by the City Planner.



      UNPROTECTED TREE .  A tree that has no specially constructed
protection barriers to prevent damage due to construction or normal vehicular
movement.



      VEGETATED AREA .  Ground area of a site that is covered by
plants, including trees, undergrowth and grasses.



      VEGETATION .  Any type or kind of growing plant material.



      WALL BUILDING LINE .  A line extending along the facade of the
building(s), parallel to the property line(s) abutting a street right-of-way
line.  Such line shall be used to determine the overall area, depth and
shape of the street yard.  See § 155.51(J), Illustrations 1 thru 6.



      WEEDS OR GRASSES .  Weeds and/or grasses or other uncultivated
plants on any premises or right-of-way, which grow in such rank profusion as
to harbor reptiles or rodents, or create a fire hazard; and weeds and/or
grasses, excluding ornamental grasses, or other uncultivated plants on any
premises which are permitted to, or do attain a height greater than 12 inches.



   (E)    Requirements.



      (1)   Landscape area requirements.



         (a)   The landscaping requirements shall be determined
by the total square footage of the lot less any areas exempted by phased
development or classification as floodway or undisturbed area.



         (b)   The minimum required area of landscaping shall be
5% of the total lot area, except for lots zoned for manufacturing. The
minimum area of landscaping for lots zoned LI and HI, shall be 2 1/2% of the
total lot area.



         (c)   Of the required landscape area, a minimum of one
tree per 1,250 square feet, or fraction thereof, shall be required.  A
minimum of one tree shall be required for all development.  Trees planted in
order to satisfy this requirement shall have a minimum caliper of 1 1/2
inches.



            1. Each existing tree which is maintained in a living
and growing condition may be credited towards the required landscaped area,
however, each individual tree may be credited only once according to the
following schedule:



EXISTING SAVED TREES      CREDIT*
10" – 12" caliper         150 square feet of landscaped area
15" or greater caliper         200 square feet of landscaped area




*Credits shall not exceed 25% of the required landscaped area.



            2.  Each existing tree which is maintained in a
living and growing condition may be credited towards the number of required
trees according to the following schedule. A minimum separation of 15 feet is
required between trees to be saved and used for credit.



EXISTING SAVED TREES      CREDIT
10"- 12" caliper         3 trees
15" or greater caliper         4 trees




         (d)   Of the required landscape area, a minimum of one
shrub per 100 square feet, or fraction thereof, shall be required.  Shrubs
planted in order to satisfy this requirement shall be a minimum size of one
gallon.  Each existing tree or newly planted tree which is maintained in a
living and growing condition may be credited towards the required number of
shrubs according to the following schedule:



EXISTING SAVED TREES AND NEWLY PLANTED TREES      CREDIT*
   3" – 6" caliper                        4
shrubs
   7" – 9" caliper                        6
shrubs
   10" – 12" caliper                     8 shrubs
   15" or greater caliper                     10
shrubs




*Credits shall not exceed 50% of the required shrubs.



      (2)   Tree preservation and care during construction.



         (a)   Existing trees to be preserved for landscape
credit must be clearly marked.



         (b)   Existing trees to be saved for landscape credit
shall have a barricade along the tree's drip line prior to grading and
construction.



         (c)   Areas to remain preserved are to be barricaded so
that construction practices in the field will protect existing trees from
compaction of soil, changes in grades and damage from machines.



      (3)   Landscape requirements.



         (a)   For a lot abutting one street, a minimum of 75% of
the landscaping area shall be located in the street yard.  The remaining
percentage of landscaping shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the lot.
The distribution of landscaping may be amended at the discretion of the City
Planner in order to ensure the maximum benefit of the required landscaping.



         (b)   For a corner lot, a minimum of 90% of the
landscaping area shall be located in the street yard. The remaining
percentage of landscaping must be reasonably dispersed throughout the lot. 
The distribution of landscaping may be amended at the discretion of the City
Planner in order to ensure the maximum benefit of the required landscaping.



         (c)   For a lot abutting three or more streets,
landscaping shall be reasonably dispersed so that each street yard has some
landscaping.



         (d)   All existing undergrowth in a protected area shall
remain until construction is complete and may be removed at that time by hand
clearing only.



         (e)   Any surface of the street yard not occupied by
trees, shrubs, planting beds, signs or other permitted fixtures shall be
planted with sod or other suitable groundcover.



         (f)   Every development shall be required to have either
an irrigation system or a hose connection.  The hose connection shall be
within 150 feet of all landscaping.  A 10% reduction in the required
landscape area shall be made when an irrigation system is provided for the
entire landscaped area.



         (g)   Trash dumpsters and other similar refuse
containers are required to be located in  visually screened areas. At a
minimum, screening shall employ a six feet high, solid fence, and/or
landscape material sufficient to screen the dumpster from public view. Trash
dumpsters that are not readily visible from public right of way shall not
require screening.



         (h)   Where parking areas abut residentially zoned
property, and the parking area is not screened from view by a wall, berm or
other screen, a continuous screen of shrubs (minimum five gallons in size)
must be placed adjacent to the parking area. The shrubs should create a
minimum three-foot tall screen in two years. Drought and freeze-resistant
shrubs shall be used; e.g., Photinia, dwarf Burford Holly, dwarf Chinese
Holly or dwarf Yaupon Holly. Other plants may be used with the approval of
the City Planner.



         (i)   Landscaping islands are required in parking lots
in excess of 50,000 square feet at both ends of each row of ten or more
parking spaces. Each separate landscaped area shall contain a minimum of 50
square feet; shall have a minimum dimension of at least five feet; and shall
include at least one tree. The remaining area shall be landscaping material
not to exceed three feet in height.



      (4)   Landscape plan requirements. A landscape plan shall be
required and submitted upon application for a building permit.  The
landscape plan may be a separate site plan, or when feasible, the landscape
plan information may be included on the building site plan. It is recommended
that landscape plans be prepared by a professional landscape architect or
landscape contractor. The landscape plan shall include:



         (a)   The location of existing boundary lines and
dimensions of the lot.



         (b)   The location of existing and proposed utility
easements on or adjacent to the lot and the location of overhead power lines
and any underground utilities.



         (c)   A plant schedule listing the name and size of all
plant materials. Botanical nomenclature as well as common names shall be
listed. All canopy trees shall be identified as containerized or balled and
burlapped.



         (d)   The location, size and type of vegetation of new
and existing plant materials to be planted or retained in the proposed
landscaped areas.



         (e)   An indication of how the developer plans to
barricade existing trees which are to be retained, in order to prevent damage
to the trees during construction. The location and size of the barricade(s)
shall be indicated.



         (f)   The location of the proposed water faucet(s) or a
note indicating the installation of the irrigation system covering the entire
lot.



         (g)   The location of existing development, adjacent
land uses, and roadways.



         (h)   Information necessary for verifying whether the
minimum required landscaping area has been met.



         (i)    A statement indicating the total square footage
of landscaping area required, including the number of trees and shrubs
required, for the proposed development to be in compliance with this section,
and a calculation to verify that the number, size and type of vegetation
listed on the plant schedule shall render the proposed development to be in
compliance with this section.



      (5)   Plan revisions. Minor revisions to landscape plans are
acceptable if there is no reduction in the quality of plant material or no
significant change in size or location of plant materials, and if the new
plants are of the same general category (i.e., shade, ornamental, or
evergreen trees) and have the same general characteristics (mature height,
crown spread) as the materials being replaced. Proposed materials must also
be compatible with the area to ensure healthy plant growth. If these criteria
are not fulfilled, changes to approved plans must be resubmitted and reviewed
for approval.



      (6)   Maintenance.



         (a)   The owner, or agent shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all landscaping, which shall be maintained in good condition
so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance, and shall be kept
free from refuse and debris. Any plant that dies must be replaced with
another living plant that complies with the approved landscape plan within
120 days after death, season permitting.



         (b)   The property owners shall be responsible for
replacement of dead landscaping material.  Replacement must occur within 120
days, season permitting, of notification by the City Planner or designee. 
Replacement material must be of similar character as the dead landscaping
material.



         (c)   The property owner is responsible for any damage
or interference with utility lines or other utility facilities resulting from
the negligence of the property owner, agents or employees in the installation
and maintenance of required landscaping. If a utility crew disturbs a
landscaped area in a utility easement, it shall make every reasonable effort
to preserve the landscaping materials and return them to their prior
locations after the utility work is completed. If nonetheless some plant
materials die, it is the obligation of the property owner to replace the dead
plant materials.



         (d)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit or restrict
a public utility company from trimming or removing trees or other plant
materials that are a hazard to its employees, the public or its facilities,
or that threaten to interfere with the provision of continuous service.



      (7)   Phased development. Each phase of a phased project shall
comply with this section. Phase lines, if drawn, shall be drawn 20 feet or
more from developed site elements (parking, buildings, ponds, and the like).
The portion left for subsequent phases shall remain of developable size and
quality. No building permit shall be issued for a subsequent phase of a
project until all requirements of this section have been met.



      (8)    Floodway. On sites where a floodway exists, the
floodway area will be subtracted from the total lot area when calculating
landscape requirements. Therefore, trees, shrubs or groundcover in this area
will not be applicable in meeting the landscaping requirements for the
development of the property.



      (9)   Parkways. Abutting parkways are required to be planted
with grass and left unpaved except for sidewalks and driveways.



      (10)   Undisturbed area. On sites where the City Planner has
determined that an undisturbed area exists, the area will be subtracted from
the total lot area when calculating landscape requirements.  Therefore,
trees, shrubs, or groundcover in this area will not be applicable in meeting
the landscape requirements for development of the property. No building
permit shall be issued for the development within the undisturbed area until
all requirements of this section have been met.



   (F)   Landscape standards and specifications.



      (1)   Plant criteria.



         (a)   All plant materials planted in order to satisfy
this section shall be of a species which will conform to the selection
criteria of this section.



            1.   Plant materials shall be either acceptable
native plants to the city area, or plants that are known to be acclimated to
the North East Texas region.



            2.   The selection of individual plant materials
shall require that the specie chosen be adaptable to the specific environment
and conditions in which it will be planted; i.e., soils, water availability,
height limitations and shade.



         (b)   Trees and shrubs planted in order to satisfy this
section shall conform to the minimum size specified.



            1.   Canopy trees shall have a minimum caliper of
1 1/2 inches; shall have a minimum branching height of six feet; and shall
have a minimum overall height of eight feet immediately after planting.



            2.   Shrubs shall be a minimum size of one gallon.



         (c)   Trees shall be selected so as to avoid those
species known to cause damage to public improvements.



         (d)   Artificial plants are not acceptable in satisfying
this section.



      (2)    Planting requirements.



         (a)   A professional horticulturist/nurseryman should be
consulted to determine the proper time to move and install plant material so
that stress to the plant is minimized. Planting of all material may be
continued during winter months provided the plant material is not subject to
severe freezing.  In the event weather conditions are not suitable for
planting, with the approval of the City Planner, and prior to issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy, an irrevocable letter of credit assigned to the
city shall be provided to cover the cost of postponed planting.



         (b)   The owner or contractor shall furnish and install
and/or dig, ball, burlap, and transplant all plant materials listed on the
plant schedule.



         (c)   Trees shall not be planted so near to sewers,
sidewalks, or other public improvements as to cause damage to such
improvements.



         (d)   Sight clearance on all sites shall comply with
§§ 98.085 et seq.



         (e)   The owner or contractor shall excavate all plant
pits, vine pits, hedge trenches and shrub beds as follows:



            1.   All pits shall be generally circular in
outline, with vertical sides. The tree pit shall be deep enough to allow
one-eighth of the ball to be above the existing grade. Plants shall rest on
undisturbed existing soil or well-compacted backfill. The tree pit must be a
minimum of nine inches larger on every side than the ball of the tree.



            2.   If areas are designated as shrub beds or
hedge trenches, they shall be cultivated to at least 18 inches in depth.
Areas designated for ground covers and vines shall be cultivated to at least
12 inches in depth.



         (f)   Each tree, shrub or vine shall be pruned in an
appropriate manner, in accordance with accepted standard practice. Broken or
bruised branches shall be removed with clean cuts made on an angle from the
bark ridge to the branch collar, no flush cuts, to minimize the area cut. All
cuts shall be made with sharp tools. Trim all edges smooth.



         (g)   All trenches and shrub beds shall be edged and
cultivated to the lines shown on the drawing. The area around isolated plants
shall be edged and cultivated to the full diameter of the pit.  Sod that has
been removed and stacked shall be used to trim the edges of all excavated
areas to the neat lines of the plant pit saucers, the edges of shrub areas,
hedge trenches and vine pockets.



         (h)   After cultivation, all plant materials shall be
mulched with approved material over the entire area of the bed or saucer
according to generally accepted landscape practices.



   (G)   Non-conforming developments.



      (1)   Classification of non-conforming developments. Land
developed with a building or structure which is in lawful use at the
effective date of this section, and land which does not conform to this
section, but is subsequently annexed to the city, shall have non-conforming
use status with respect to this section.



      (2)   Regulation of non-conforming developments.



         (a)   The lawful use of a building or other development
as described in division (G)(1) above may be continued although such
development does not comply with the requirements thereof. However, voluntary
compliance with these requirements and landscape enhancement is encouraged.



         (b)   The repair or restoration of a building or other
development to its prior condition after being damaged or destroyed by fire,
explosion, wind, flood, tornado or other accident or weather phenomena, shall
not require that such building or other development comply with the
requirements of this section, provided a building permit for the repair or
restoration is obtained within 12 months of the date the damage occurred.



         (c)   The expansion of an existing building, or the
construction of one or more additional buildings on the same lot as the
existing building, shall not require compliance with this section provided:



         1.   That the expansion of the existing building or the
construction of the additional building(s) shall not result in the
encroachment of any wall building line into an existing street yard; or



         2.   Where the expansion of the existing building or
construction of any additional building(s) will result in the encroachment of
a wall building line into an existing street yard, the gross floor area
(g.f.a.) of that portion of the expansion which will extend into the street
yard, or the total gross floor area of all buildings to be constructed in the
street yard, shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of the existing
building.  See division (J), illustration 6.



   (H)   Appeals.



      (1)   Procedure.



         (a)   Appeals may be taken by any person whose
development is affected by this section.  Requested variances from this
section shall be submitted in writing. Such appeal or request for a variance
shall be filed with the Planning Department, shall specify the grounds
thereof, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee. The Planning Department
shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment all of the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.



         (b)    The Board of Adjustment shall consider such
appeals in the same manner as other appeals within its jurisdiction.



         (c)    The Board of Adjustment may authorize a variance
from this section when an undue hardship will result from requiring strict
compliance.  The Board has the responsibility of making the findings herein
below required, and shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of
the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of
persons who will reside or work in the proposed development, and the probable
effect of such variance upon the public health, safety, convenience and
welfare in the vicinity.



      (2)    Variances.



         (a)   No variance may be granted unless the Board of
Adjustment finds:



            1.   That there are special circumstances or
conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of
the provisions of this section would deprive the applicant of the reasonable
use of the land;



            2.   That the variance is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of substantial property right of the applicant;



            3.   That the variance will not be detrimental to
the public health, safety or welfare or be injurious to other property in the
area;



            4.   That the lack of landscaping will not be
detrimental to adjoining property or the health, safety and welfare of the
public; and



            5.   That the hardships and difficulties of the
landscaping and/or screening are greater than the benefits derived by the
public.



         (b)   Such findings of the Board of Adjustment together
with the specific facts upon which the finding is based, shall be
incorporated into the official minutes of the meeting at which such variance
is granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this section so that the public health, safety and
welfare may be secured and substantial justice done.  Monetary hardship to
the developer standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue
hardship.



   (I)   Violation, penalty and enforcement.



      (1)   It is the duty of the Planning Department to enforce
this section. Appeals from the decision of the City Planner may be made to
the Board of Adjustment.



      (2)   Reports of non-compliance with this section should be
directed to the Planning Department.  The Planning Department will accept
complaints from the public. Upon receipt of a complaint, the Planning
Department will investigate and, if non-compliance exists, will inform the
property owner of the violation, giving a reasonable amount of time to
comply. Should the owner fail to comply within the time period, the owner
shall be subject to a fine as set forth in § 155.99.



      (3)   Notice shall:



         (a)   Be in writing;



         (b)   Include a statement of the reason for its issue;



         (c)   Allow a reasonable time for compliance;



         (d)   Be served upon the owner, or agent responsible for
property maintenance provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to
have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has
been served with such notice by any method authorized or required by state
law; and



         (e)   Contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with this section. At the end of such period as
noted above, the Planning Department shall re-inspect, and if such conditions
or practices have not been corrected, further legal action by the city may be
instituted.



   (J)    Illustrations.



   The following six illustrations are included as examples to help
explain the requirements of this section.







 







 







 







 



(Ord. 2003-6, passed 5-20-03)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 155.60  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the
Zoning Officer. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by
a plat drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot or tract of
land to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected, the use of the
property, all means of ingress and egress and such other information as may
be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations.



   (B)   A record of such application and plat shall be kept in the
office of the Building Official. Prior to the issuance of any building
permit, the Building Official shall determine that the application and
improvements to be constructed comply with the requirements and provisions of
this chapter.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. IV, § 1(A))



§ 155.61  BUILDING PERMITS.



   No building permit for the construction of a building or structure upon
any tract, parcel or premise shall be issued and public utilities shall not
be extended or connected to a building or structure unless the site plan is
reviewed by the Zoning Officer prior to being approved by the Building
Official.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. IV, § 2)



§ 155.62  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Membership and meetings.



      (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members to
be appointed by the City Council for a term of two years and removal for
cause by the appointing authority. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment
of a suitable person to serve out the unexpired term of any member whose
place on the Board has become vacant for any cause.



      (2)   The Board is vested with power and authority in
appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards to
make such exceptions to the terms of this chapter in harmony with the general
purpose and intent and in accordance with general or special rules therein
contained for the purpose of rendering full justice and equity to the general
public.



      (3)   The Board of Adjustment may adopt rules to govern the
proceedings; however, such rules shall not be inconsistent with this chapter.



      (4)   Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson who may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
All meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public.



      (5)   The Board shall keep minutes of the proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of official actions, all of
which shall be immediately fled and shall be public record.



   (B)   Appeals.



      (1)   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by the
person affected by any decision of any administrative office with respect to
this chapter. Appeals shall be taken within 15 days after the decision has
been rendered by the administrative office by filing notice of appeal,
specifying the grounds. The Zoning Officer shall transmit to the Board all
the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.



      (2)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal shall have been filed that
by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order which may be
granted by the Board or by a court of record or application on notice to the
officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.



      (3)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for
the public hearing of an appeal, give the public notice as well as due notice
to the parties and decide the same within a reasonable time.  Upon the
hearing, any party may appear in person or by attorney or by agent.



   (C)   Jurisdiction. When in the Board of Adjustment’s judgment the
public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and appropriate
use of the neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently
injured, the Board of Adjustment may, in specific cases, after public notice
and public hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards,
authorize the following special exceptions to the regulations established:



      (1)   Permit reconstruction, extension or enlargement of a
building occupied by a nonconforming use on the lot or tract occupied by such
building, provided such reconstruction does not prevent the return of such
property to a conforming use;



      (2)   Permit such modification of the height, yard, area,
coverage and parking regulations as may be necessary to secure appropriate
development of land which differs from other parcels in the district by being
of such restricted area, shape or slope that it cannot be appropriate
developed with such modification.



   (D)   Powers of the Board. The Board of Adjustment shall also have
the following powers:



      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter;



      (2)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of
this chapter upon which the Board is required to pass under this chapter;



      (3)   To authorize upon appeal in special cases such variances
from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest
where, owing to special conditions, the literal enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done.



   (E)   Reversal and petition.



      (1)   The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall
be necessary to reverse the order, requirement, decision or determination of
any such administrative official or to decide in favor of the application on
any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to affect
any variance in this chapter.



      (2)   Any persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any
decision of the Board or any taxpayer or any officer, department or board of
the municipality may present a petition setting forth that such decision is
illegal, in whole or part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such
petition shall be presented within ten days after the filing of the decision.



   (F)   Procedure for a variance request.



      (1)   Application and fee.



         (a)   An application for a variance shall be completed
and signed by the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent.  The
application shall include the date of the application, the name and address
of the owner, a description of the subject property, and the specific
variance requested.  One copy of a plain metric map showing boundary
dimensions, adjacent property not separated by a street or an alley, and all
existing buildings on the subject property shall also be submitted as part of
the application.



         (b)   A fee of $250.00 shall be charged to defray the
cost of processing an application.



      (2)   Board of Adjustment public hearing.



         (a)   The variance request is scheduled for a public
hearing before the Board of Adjustment at their next regular meeting.



         (b)   Fifteen days prior to the hearing, a notice of
public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city and
all property owners within 200 hundred feet of the subject property shall be
notified.



         (c)   The Board of Adjustment shall approve, approve
conditionally, or deny each application for a variance request.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. IV, § 3) (Am. Ord. 1989-6, passed 5-2-89;
Am. Ord. 2002-25, passed 2-19-02)



§ 155.63  PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Purpose. A Planning and Zoning Commission is created in order
to accomplish the following purposes:



      (1)   Create the best possible urban environment through
adequate regulatory measures and through consistent, fair, equitable and
honest enforcement;



      (2)   Insure the expansion of opportunities for all citizens
of all economic and social levels, including opportunities for housing and
education, employment and income, cultural and recreational, medical and
professional;



      (3)   Prevent conditions causing excessive densities or
overcrowding, causing congestion and unsafe situations or pollution;



      (4)   Progress toward the ultimate goal of sound,
well-planned, well-designed, imaginative, economical and timely programs and
activities, with the utmost use of new techniques, materials and processes.



   (B)   Appointment and terms of office.



      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be composed of
five qualified electors of the city and shall be appointed by the City
Council.



      (2)   The City Council will consider for appointment to the
Commission only those persons who have demonstrated to the Commission their
civic interest, general knowledge of the community, independent judgment,
interest in planning and zoning and availability to prepare for and attend
meetings. It is the intent of the City Council that members shall, by reason
of diversity of their individual occupations, constitute a Commission which
is broadly representative of the community.



      (3)   The terms of three of the members shall expire on
January 31 of each odd-numbered year, and terms of two of the members shall
expire on January 31 of each even-numbered year.



   (C)   Organization.



      (1)   The Commission shall hold an organizational meeting in
February of each year and shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from
among the members before proceeding to any other matters of business. The
Zoning Officer shall serve as Secretary. The Commission shall meet regularly
on the second Monday of each month and have such called meetings as may be
requested by the City Manager or City Council or by majority of the
Commission.



      (2)   The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure
and keep a record of proceedings consistent with provision of this chapter
and the requirement of law.



   (D)   Duties and powers. The Planning and Zoning Commission is
charged with the duty and invested with the authority to:



      (1)   Formulate and recommend to the City Council for adoption
a Comprehensive Plan for the orderly growth and development of the city and
its environs and from time to time recommend such changes in the plan as it
feels will facilitate the movement of people and goods and the health,
recreation, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city.



      (2)   Formulate a zoning plan as may be deemed best to carry
out the goals of the Comprehensive Plan and hold public hearings and make
recommendations to the City Council relating to the creation, amendment and
implementation of zoning regulations and districts as provided in Tex. Local
Gov't Code, §§ 211.001et seq., as amended, authorizing cities and
incorporated villages to pass regulations; all powers granted under said act
are specifically adopted and made a part hereof.



      (3)   Exercise all powers of a commission as to approval or
disapproval of plans, plats or replats and vacations of plans, plats or
replats set out in Tex. Local Gov't Code, §§ 212.001 et seq., 42.001 et
seq. and 43.031 et seq., with the exception of matters expressly reserved to
the City Council by ordinance.



      (4)   Initiate, in the name of the city on its own motion or
upon request by the City Council, for consideration at public hearings,
proposals for the original zoning of annexed areas or for the change of
zoning districts’ boundaries on an area wide basis. No fee shall be
required for the filing of any such proposal in the name of the city.



      (5)   Keep informed with reference to the progress of city
planning in the United States and other countries and recommend improvements
in the adopted plans of the city.



   (E)   Meeting and quorum. Three members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum to transact any business, and the affirmative vote of at
least three members shall be required to make any recommendation to the City
Council, to approve any site plans filed for approval and to transact any
other business before the Commission. When fewer than all the members are
present and when all motions to recommend a given application fail to carry
by three affirmative votes, consideration of the application shall be
continued to the next regular meeting upon motion carried by those present.
Provided further that no request or application shall be continued under this
rule beyond the next regular meeting; failure of the Commission to secure
three concurring votes to approve or recommend approval at said next regular
meeting shall be recorded in the minutes as a denial of the proposal under
this rule.



   (F)   Disqualification from voting. A member shall disqualify
himself or herself from voting whenever he or she finds that he or she has a
personal or monetary interest in the property under appeal or that he or she
will be directly affected by the decision of the Commission.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. IV., § 4) (Am. Ord. 1989-6, passed 5-2-89;
Am. Ord. 2002-25, passed 2-19-02)



§ 155.64  CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   General requirements.



      (1)   The City Council may, from time to time, amend,
supplement or change by ordinance the boundaries of the districts or the
regulations herein established.



      (2)   Before taking any action of any proposed amendment,
supplement or change, the City Council shall submit the same to the Planning
and Zoning Commission for review and recommendations.



      (3)   A public hearing shall be held by the governing body
before adopting any proposed amendment, supplement or change. Notice of such
hearing shall be given by publication one time in the official newspaper of
the city stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be
earlier than 15 days from date of publication.



      (4)   If a protest against such proposed amendment, supplement
or change has been filed with the City Secretary, duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more, either of the area of the lots
included in such proposed change or those immediately adjacent in the rear
thereof, extending 200 feet or if those directly opposite thereto extending
200 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall
not become effective except by three-fourths vote of the governing body, as
per Tex. Local Gov't Code, § 211.006.



   (B)   Procedure for change of zoning request.



      (1)   Application and fee.



         (a)   An application for a zoning change request shall
be completed and signed by the property owner or his or her agent.  The
applicant shall provide a description of the subject property and shall state
the specific zoning classification desired without alternatives.  One copy
of a plain metric map showing boundary dimensions, adjacent property not
separated by a street or alley, and all existing buildings on the subject
property shall be submitted with the zoning change request.



         (b)   A fee of $250.00 shall be charged to defray the
costs of processing an application.



      (2)   Commission public hearing.



         (a)   The zoning change request is scheduled for a
public hearing before the Commission at their next regular meeting.



         (b)   Fifteen days prior to the hearing, a notice of
public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city and
all property owners within 200 feet of the subject property shall be notified.



      (3)   Council public hearing.



         (a)   Public notice of the hearing shall be given not
less than 15 days before the date set for the hearing.



         (b)   The Council may sustain or reverse the approval or
denial of the Commission by a simple majority vote.



         (c)   Action by the City Council is final and the same
request may not be brought before the Commission again for one year.



   (C)   Procedure for specific use in any zoning classification.



      (1)   Application and fee.



         (a)   An application for a specific use shall be
completed in duplicate and signed by the property owner or his or her
authorized agent. The applicant shall provide a description of the subject
property, and shall state the specific use desired.  One copy of a plain
metric map as outlined in this section, must accompany the application.



         (b)   A fee of $250.00 shall be charged to defray the
costs of processing an application.



      (2)   Commission public hearing.



         (a)   Fifteen days prior to the hearing, a notice of
public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city and
all property owners within 200 feet of the subject property stall be notified.



         (b)   The Commission shall make a recommendation to the
City Council.



      (3)   Council public hearing.



         (a)   Public notice of the hearing shall be given not
less than 15 days before the date set for the hearing.



         (b)   The City Council shall approve or deny each
application for a specific use, including the stipulations of additional
conditions and guarantees that such conditions will be complied with when
deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest.



      (4)   Specific use standards.



         (a)   No specific use shall be approved, unless the City
Council shall find that:



            1.   The specific use will not be injurious to the
use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate area for purposes
already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values
within the immediate vicinity;



            2.   The establishment of the specific use will
not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding
vacant property for uses predominant in area;



            3.   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage
and other necessary facilities have been or are being provided;



            4.   Adequate measures have been or will be taken
to provide sufficient off-street parking and loading spaces to serve the
proposed use;



            5.   Adequate measures have been or will be taken
to prevent or control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and vibration, so
that none of these will constitute a nuisance and to control lighted signs
and other lights in such a manner that no disturbance to neighboring
properties will result.



         (b)   Any use permitted under the terms of any specific
use shall be established and conducted in conformity to the terms of such
permit and of any conditions designated in connection therewith.



   (D)   Re-plats which affect zoning classifications. In the event any
re-plat of any property in any manner changes or amends the zoning
classification of any lot or portion of a lot and/or changes or amends a
zoning district boundary line, then such re-plat shall not be approved unless
and until such change or amendment in zoning classification and/or zoning
district boundary line has been approved pursuant to the procedures specified
in this section for a change of zoning request, including the public hearing
and notice requirements contained herein.



   (E)   Procedure for right-of-way closure.



      (1)   Definitions.  THOROUGHFARE means any public street,
alley or other public right-of- way that has been accepted and appropriated
by the city by use, entry, or improvement.



      (2)   Requests.  Requests for thoroughfare closures shall be
made by filing an application with the Planning Department on a city form. 
Such requests must be delivered to the department with the required fee at
least 28 days prior to the public hearing by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.  The following shall also be submitted as part of the
application.



         (a)   A petition signed by the owners of at least 75% of
the property owners adjacent to the subject right-of-way.  Owners of such
adjacent property shall be determined by the latest approved city tax roll.



         (b)   List of surrounding property owners.



         (c)   Authorization of agent.



         (d)   A map and/or plat of the area.



      (3)   Fees.  The applicant shall include with the application
a non-refundable fee in the amount of  $100.00.  Such fee shall be applied
to the cost of processing the application.



      (4)   Notices; before Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Written notices shall be sent to all owners of real property whose property
lies within 200 feet of the requested thoroughfare closure excluding all
rights-of-way.  Such notices shall be given not less than 15 days before the
date of public hearing before the Commission.  Ownership will be determined
by the latest approved city tax roll.  Notices shall contain the date, time
and place of the public hearing, and a description and location of the
requested closure.



      (5)   Public hearings.



         (a)   Commission.  The Commission shall hold at least
one public hearing on all requests.



         (b)   City Council.  The Council shall hold at least
one public hearing an all requests brought before it either by appeal or upon
favorable recommendation by the Commission.



      (6)   Action by Commission.  The Commission shall submit its
recommendation to the Council via the Planning Department.  Requests denied
by the Commission may be appealed to the Council, as herein provided. 
Failure to appeal within the time prescribed shall render the action of the
Commission final.



      (7)   Appeals.  Appeals from the recommendation of denial by
the Commission shall be made by filing a written notice with the Planning
Department not less than ten days after denial by the Commission.



      (8)   Action by Council.  The Council shall hear all requests
for thoroughfare closures affirmatively recommended by the Commission or
appealed to it as herein provided.  The action taken by the Council shall be
final.



      (9)   Re-application.  When a request for a thoroughfare
closure has been denied by the Commission and not appealed to the Council or
has been heard by the Council and denied, similar requests shall not be
accepted by the Planning Department for a period of six months from the date
the  submission of the original requests.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. IV, § 5) (Am. Ord. 1990-16, passed
10-2-90; Am. Ord. 2002-25, passed 2-19-02)



§ 155.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or fail to comply with any of the requirements, or
who shall build or alter any building or use in violation of any detail or
plan submitted and approved hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be liable to a fine of not more than $200.00, and each day shall
constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   The owner of any building or premises where anything in
violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect,
engineer, surveyor, builder, contractor, agent, persons or corporation
employed in connection therewith, and who may have assisted in the commission
of such violations, shall be guilty of a separate offense and, upon
conviction, shall be fined as herein provided.



(`87 Code, Zoning Ordinance, Art. IV, § 1(B))



APPENDIX: USE REGULATION SCHEDULE



 



 
FD
 
SF-1
 
SF-2
 
TF
 
MF
 
MH
 
NS
 
GR
 
CB
 
C
 
LI
 
HI
 

PD



Type Use
 
FD = Future Development District

SF-1 = Single-Family District

SK-2 = Single-Family District

TF = Two-Family District

MF = Multi-Family District
 
MH = Mobile Home District

NS = Neighborhood Service District

GR = General Retail District

CB = Central Business District
 
C = Commercial District

LI = Light Industrial District

HI = Heavy Industrial District

PD = Planned Development District


Fairground or Exhibit Area
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Fraternal Organiza-
tion or Civic Club
 
S
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Home for Care of Alcoholic or Psychiatric Pat.
 
S
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Hospital
 
S
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Institutions of Religious or Philanthropic Nat.
 
P
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Library (Public)
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Nursing Home or Residence for Aged
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Public Park, Playground, Playfield, Swimming P.
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Private or Public School (Primary or Secondary)
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P


Trade or Business School
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   UTILITY, ACCESSORY AND INCIDENTAL USES


Electrical Generating Plant
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 


Electrical Substation
 
P
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Electrical Transmission Lines
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Field or Construction Office (Temporary)
 

Subject to approval by Building Inspector



Fire Station or Similar Public Safety Building
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Local Utility Distribution Lines
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   RESIDENTIAL USES


One-Family Dwelling-Detached
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
P


Two-Family Dwelling
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
P


Multiple-Family Dwelling or Apartment
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P


Modular Home
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
P


Mobile Home or Trailer as Fixed Dwelling
 
 

Not Permitted

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Mobile Home or Trailer Park
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
S
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P


Boarding or Rooming House
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 


Hotel or Motel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P


   EDUCATIONAL AND INSTITUTIONAL USES


Art Gallery or Museum
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Cemetery or Mausoleum
 

Not Permitted



Church or Rectory
 
P
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


College or University
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Communications Towers/Telecommunications Facilities
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
S


Community Center (Public)
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Day Nursery or Kindergarten
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P


Foster Home
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
S


Parking Lot or Building
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Public Bldg., Yard, Shop of Local, State or Federal Govt.
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Sanitary Landfill
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 


Sewage Pumping Station
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Sewage Treatment Plant
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
S


Water Reservoir, Water Pumping Sta. or Well
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Water Treatment Plant
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Commercial Indoor Amusement
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Commercial Outdoor Amusement
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Private Country Club with Golf Course
 
P
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Dance Hall or Night Club
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Fairground or Exhibit Area
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Auto Sales Lot (New, Used- Outside)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Bakery or Confectionary Shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Barber or Beauty Shop
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Bookstore or Card Shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Cafeteria
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Cleaning or Pressing Shop
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Convenience Food Store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Drapery or Weaving Shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Florist or Garden Shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Furniture Store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Gasoline Service Station
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Grocery Store or Delicatessen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Handicraft or Hobby Shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Hardware Shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Job Printing or Newspaper
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Laundry (Self-Service)
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Public Golf Course or Stadium
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Rodeo Grounds
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Roller or Ice Skating Rink
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Private Club Stable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Commercial Rental Stable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Boarding Stable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Swim or Tennis Club
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Theater (Drive-In)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Theater (Other than Drive-In)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   RETAIL AND SERVICE USES


Art Gallery or Museum
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Automobile Laundry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Auto Painting or Body Repair
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Auto Parts Sales (New)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Auto Parts Sales (Used-Inside)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Auto Repair or Sales (Inside)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Mimeograph or Office Supply Shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Mortuary or Funeral Parlor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Office, Professional and Administrative
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Pharmacy or Drug Store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Radio or TV Station
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Restaurant (Drive-In)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Restaurant (Not Drive-In)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Studio-Artist, Health, Photo
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Secondhand or Rummage Store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Tailor Shop
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Trailer, Camper or Mobile Home Sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


   AGRICULTURAL USES


Animal Clinic (Inside Pens)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Animal Clinic (Outside Pens)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Animal Pound (Public/Private)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 


Farm or Ranch
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Greenhouse or Plant Nursery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 


Livestock Auction
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 


Livestock Feeding Plant, Pens or Yard
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 


Poultry Hatchery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 


   COMMERCIAL USES


Airfield or Heliport
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Bakery (Wholesale)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Billboards - Permitted only on those properties which abut the Interstate 30
corridor.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Bus Station or Terminal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Building Material Sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Cabinet or Upholstery Shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Cleaning and Dyeing Plant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Cleaning Plant, Bags or Carpet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Cold Storage Plant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Contractor’s Shop & Storage Yard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Engine and Motor Repair
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Exterminator or Fumigator
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Farm Equipment or Feed Store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Hauling or Storage Yard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Heavy Machinery (Sales/Storage)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Laboratory (Scientific Research)
 
S
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Milk Depot Dairy or Ice Cream Plant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Paint Shop or Plumbing Shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Petroleum Prod. Storage, Wholesale
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Railroad or Motor Freight Terminal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Railroad Passenger Station
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Storage & Sale of Merchandise (Outside)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Terminal-Storage & Baggage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Trade or Commercial School
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Warehouse-Storage or Sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Wholesale Firm; Office Sales, Storage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   INDUSTRIAL USES


Assembly & Fabrication
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P


Manufacturing & Light Industrial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P


Natural Resource Extraction, Storage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 


Heavy Manufacturing & Heavy Industrial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P




 



(Am. Ord. 2002-25, passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord. 2002-2, passed 1-15-02 ; Am. Ord.
2008-13, passed 5-20-08 )



 



   A legend for interpreting schedule:



   P   Use permitted in the district indicated.



   S   Use may be approved as specific use permit, § 155.45.



   Where there is a blank space, the use is prohibited in district
indicated.



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table




         I.   FRANCHISES





         II.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT




TABLE I:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


1988-3
 
4-19-88
 
Granting a natural gas franchise to Arkansas Louisiana Gas Company, a
division of Arkla, Inc., to construct, install, operate and maintain in the
city pipelines and related facilities for the transportation, distribution
and/or sale of gas in the city and providing regulations  and rates for this
franchise.


1995-21
 
12-19-95
 
Amended § 6 of Ord. 1988-3 which grants ARKLA, a division of Noram Energy
Corp. (“ARKLA”), the right to construct, install, operate and maintain
facilities for the transmission, distribution and sale of gas in the city.


1995-22
 
12-19-95
 
Amending the ordinance which grants Southwestern Electric Power Company
(SWEPCO) the right to acquire, construct, maintain and operate a system of
power lines over, across, upon, along and under the highways, roads, streets,
alleys, bridges and other public property in the city.


2007-4
 
6-26-07
 
Granting a franchise to AEP Southwestern Electric Power Company (SWEPCO)  to
enter upon and use streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys, highways, sidewalks,
bridges and other public property in the city for a period of 20 years to
use, sell, distribute and supply electric energy for light, heat, power and
other purposes to the city and it inhabitants.


 
 



 



TABLE II:  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1999-17
 
10-5-99
 
Granting the City Council the power to establish areas known as development
districts; to define the area of such districts; requiring the identification
of all property owners in such district and the like.


2012-7
 
11-6-12
 
Establishing the 2011 Annexation Utility Development District as designated
on Attachment "A" to Ordinance 2012-7.


2015-4
 
3-16-15
 
Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone Number 2015-1
for the expansion of certain manufacturing facilities.


2015-8
 
4-6-15
 
Ordaining the city’s participation in the Texas Enterprise Zone Program.


2015-17
 
10-6-15
 
Ordaining the city’s participation in the Texas Enterprise Zone Program.


2015-18
 
10-6-15
 
Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone Number 2015-2
for the expansion of certain manufacturing facilities.


2015-19
 
10-6-15
 
Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone Number 2015-3
for the expansion of certain manufacturing facilities.


2015-24
 
11-17-15
 
Designating a certain area as a Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone Number 2015-4
for the expansion of certain manufacturing facilities.


2015-25
 
11-17-15
 
Designating a certain area as a Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone Number 2015-5
for the expansion of certain manufacturing facilities.


2016-1
 
1-5-16
 
Ordaining the city’s participation in the Texas Enterprise Zone Program.


2016-25
 
11-29-16
 
Designating an Industrial District to be known as Mount Pleasant Industrial
District No. 1 and authorizing and directing the execution of an agreement
for said district between the city and owner of the land.


2017-5
 
4-4-2017
 
Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone Number 2017-1
for expansion of certain manufacturing facilities.


2017-16
 
10-17-17
 
Designating certain areas as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone Numbers 2017-2,
2017-3 and 2017-4 for industrial tax abatement.


2018-5
 
6-5-18
 
Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone Number 2018-1
for industrial tax abatement.


2018-12
 
9-18-18
 
Designating an Industrial District to be known as Mount Pleasant Industrial
District No. 2 and authorizing and directing the execution of an agreement
for said district between the city and the owner of the land.


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Texas Statutes





References to 1987 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO TEXAS STATUTES



Administrative Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section




169.21 et seq.
 
97.01


229.161 - 229.171
 
96.02


229.173 - 229.175
 
96.02


Ch. 18, Ch. G
 
117.14


Title 30, Ch. 288
 
52.20


Title 43, Ch. B
 
117.09


 




 



Agricultural Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section


143.102
 
97.03


 



 



Alcoholic Beverage Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section


109.33
 
111.01


 
 
 



 



Business and Commerce Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section


36.01 et seq.
 
113.21, 13.22


 



 



Code of Criminal Procedure



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section


Ch. 62   
 
131.01, 131.02, 131.06


Art. 102.0172
 
37.126


 
 
 



 



Family Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section


Ch. 31
 
130.43


51.03
 
130.99


51.08
 
130.99


 



 



Gov’t Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section




441.121 et seq.
 
92.04


552.001 et seq.
 
97.63


843.402(d)
 
33.21


851.001 et seq.
 
33.20


853.401 - 853.404
 
33.21


853.601
 
33.21


854.203
 
33.21


863.402(c)
 
33.21


863.501(d)
 
33.21


 




 



Health and Safety Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section




382.001 et seq.
 
94.01


756.00 - 756.013
 
130.02


822.001 et seq.
 
97.20, 97.39


822.003
 
97.30


822.041 et seq.
 
97.27


822.041(2)(B)
 
97.28


822.042
 
97.28, 97.29


826.001 et seq.
 
97.65


826.033
 
97.03


828.001 et seq.
 
97.72


828.001 et seq.
 
97.80


 
 
 




 



Human Resources Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section


42.002
 
111.01, 111.04


 
 
 



 



Local Gov't Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section




Ch. 42
 
154.02, 154.16


42.001 et seq.
 
155.63


43.031 et seq.
 
155.63


54.001
 
10.99


211.001 et seq.
 
155.63


211.006
 
155.64


Ch. 212
 
154.02


212.001 et seq.
 
155.63


212.0145
 
154.38


214.001 et seq.
 
150.015


215.026
 
97.03


215.031
 
114.68


217.003(d)
 
130.25


Ch. 229
 
130.03


241.014
 
153.098


241.032
 
153.086, 153.093


241.041
 
153.095


241.044
 
153.096


241.901
 
153.097


Ch. 284
 
150.045


284.003
 
150.045


284.055
 
150.045


370.002
 
130.46


 
 
 




 



Occupations Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section


2151.001 et seq.
 
112.26


 



 



Parks and Wildlife Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section


31.001 et seq.
 
90.27


42.021 et seq.
 
97.20


 



 



Penal Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section




Ch. 6.02
 
130.75


8.07
 
130.99


21.01 et seq.
 
113.23


22.01 et seq.
 
113.23


25.01 et seq.
 
113.23


42.01 et seq.
 
97.14


42.01
 
112.27


43.01 et seq.
 
113.23


43.21 et seq.
 
130.05


 
 
 




 



Rev. Civ. Stat.



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section




Art. 46e-1 et seq.
 
153.005


Art. 1026 et seq.
 
37.001


Art. 1066c  4B
 
37.091


Art. 1066(f) § 5
 
Ch. 37, Appendix B


Art. 1110C
 
50.61


Art. 1528b
 
37.076


Art. 4477-1 § 4
 
53.02


Art. 6132a-1
 
113.22


Art. 6146 et seq.
 
114.68


Art. 6701d
 
70.01


Art. 6701d §§ 1-20
 
70.01


Art. 6701d § 24(d)
 
70.08, 70.09


Art. 6701d § 25
 
70.06


Art. 6701d §§ 27(a)(2)
 
70.03, 70.07


Art. 6701d § 39
 
70.25


Art. 6701d § 40
 
70.26


Art. 6701d § 41
 
70.27


Art. 6701d § 42
 
70.28


Art. 6701d § 43
 
70.29


Art. 6701d § 44(b)
 
70.29


Art. 6701d § 170
 
71.068


Art. 6889-7
 
35.02


 




 



Tax Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section




11.01 et seq.
 
37.020, 37.021, 37.023


11.251
 
37.004


191.001 et seq.
 
114.68


312.001 et seq.
 
Ch. 37, Appendix B


312.202
 
37.106


312.202 et seq.
 
37.107


312.204
 
37.111


312.205
 
37.111


312.211
 
37.111


Ch. 351
 
37.035


351.003
 
37.036


 




 



Transportation Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section




313.001 et seq.
 
98.001


502.253
 
72.32


542.202(a)(2)
 
72.01


542.202(a)(3)
 
71.041


542.202(a)(8)
 
70.57


544.002
 
70.45, 70.46


544.003(b)
 
70.57


544.004
 
70.48


544.005
 
70.53


544.006
 
70.52


544.007
 
70.55


544.008
 
70.56


544.010
 
70.57


545.051
 
71.025


545.052
 
71.028


545.053
 
71.027


545.053 - 545.056
 
71.026


545.057
 
71.027


545.062
 
71.038


545.063
 
71.034


545.101
 
71.029


545.103 - 545.107
 
71.030


545.151
 
71.031


545.152
 
71.031


545.153
 
70.57


545.156
 
71.036


545.202(a)(8)
 
71.029


545.251
 
74.04


545.256
 
72.19


545.302
 
72.16


545.303
 
72.22


545.305
 
72.02


545.351 et seq.
 
71.068


545.356
 
71.067


545.363
 
71.068


545.365
 
71.069


545.403
 
71.044


545.404
 
72.15


545.407
 
71.039


545.408
 
71.040


545.425
 
71.055


547.604
 
71.009


547.605
 
71.009


550.061
 
70.30


550.067(c)
 
70.31


552.003
 
71.086


552.005
 
71.087


552.006
 
71.091


552.007
 
71.092, 114.53


552.0071
 
114.53


552.008
 
71.093


552.009
 
71.085, 71.089


552.094
 
71.094


600.001
 
71.006


622.014
 
Ch. 75, Sched. III


623.071 et seq.
 
Ch. 75, Sched. III


681.001 et seq.
 
72.32


683.061 et seq.
 
99.01


 
 
 




 



Utilities Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section


121.201 et seq.
 
150.041, 150.042


 



 



Water Code



 

Texas Statute Cite
 
Code Section


11.039
 
52.45


16.315
 
152.01


 



 



REFERENCES TO 1987 CODE



 

1987 Code Section
 
2002 Code Section




2-3
 
33.01


2-4
 
33.02


2-5
 
33.03


2-6
 
33.04


2-7
 
33.05


2-35
 
31.01


2-36
 
31.02


2-37
 
31.03


2-38
 
31.04


2-39
 
31.05


2-40
 
31.06


2-41
 
31.07


2-42
 
31.08


2-43
 
31.09


2-51
 
92.01


2-52
 
92.02


2-53
 
92.03


2-54
 
92.04


2-61
 
31.20


2-62
 
31.21


2-63
 
31.22


2-64
 
31.23


2-65
 
31.24


2-66
 
31.25


2-67
 
31.26


2-68
 
31.27


2-70
 
31.28


2-71
 
31.29


2-72
 
31.30


2-73
 
31.31


2-74
 
31.32


2-111
 
30.01


2-112
 
30.02


2-113
 
30.03


2-131
 
93.01


2-132
 
93.02


2-133
 
93.03


2-134
 
93.04


2-135
 
93.05


2-136
 
93.06


2-137
 
93.07


2-138
 
93.08


2-139
 
93.09


2-140
 
93.10


2-141
 
93.11


2-142
 
93.12


2-143
 
93.99


2-151
 
36.01


2-152
 
36.02


2-153
 
36.03


2-154
 
36.04


2-155
 
36.05


2-156
 
36.06


2-157
 
37.07


2-158
 
36.08


2-159
 
36.09


2-160
 
36.10


2-161
 
36.11


2-162
 
36.12


2-163
 
36.13


2-164
 
36.14


2-171
 
34.01


2-172
 
34.02


2-173
 
34.03


2-174
 
34.99


2-175
 
34.04


3-17
 
153.005


3-18
 
153.006


3-19
 
153.007


3-20
 
153.007


3-21
 
153.008


3-22
 
153.009


3-23
 
153.010


3-24
 
153.011


3-25
 
153.012


3-27
 
153.013


3-28
 
153.014


3-29
 
153.015


3-30
 
153.016


3-31
 
153.017


6-1
 
91.01


6-2
 
91.01


6-13
 
91.15


6-14
 
91.16


6-15
 
91.17


6-16
 
91.18


6-17
 
91.19


6-18
 
91.20


6-19
 
91.21


6-20
 
91.22


6-22
 
91.23


6-23
 
91.24


6-24
 
91.25


6-25
 
91.26


6-26
 
91.27


6-27
 
91.28


6-28
 
91.40


6-29
 
91.41


6-30
 
91.42


6-31
 
91.43


6-32
 
91.44


6-33
 
91.45


6-34
 
91.46


6-35
 
91.47


6-36
 
91.48


6-37
 
91.49


6-38
 
91.50


6-39
 
91.51


6-40
 
91.52


6-41
 
91.53


6-42
 
91.54


6-43
 
91.55


6-44
 
91.56


6-45
 
91.56


7-69
 
117.20


8-1
 
35.01


8-2
 
35.02


8-3
 
35.03


8-4
 
35.04


8-5
 
35.05


8-6
 
35.06


8-7
 
35.07


8-8(A–C)
 
35.08


8-8(D)
 
35.99


8-9
 
35.09


12-2
 
95.01


12-3
 
95.01


12-4
 
95.01


12-5
 
95.01


12-6
 
95.01


12-7
 
95.01


12-11
 
95.21


12-12
 
95.22


12-13
 
95.23


12-14
 
95.24


12-15
 
95.25


12-16
 
95.26


12-28
 
95.35


12-29
 
95.36


12-30
 
95.36


12-31
 
95.36


12-32
 
95.36


12-33
 
95.36


12-34
 
95.36


12-35
 
95.37


12-36
 
95.38


12-37
 
95.39


12-38
 
95.40


12-39
 
95.41


14-1
 
130.01


14-2
 
130.02


14-4
 
130.03


14-9
 
130.04


14-10
 
130.05


14-11
 
130.06


14-12
 
130.07


14-13
 
130.08


14-21
 
130.25


14-22
 
130.26


14-61
 
110.01


14-62
 
110.02


14-63
 
110.03


14-91
 
110.15


14-92
 
110.16


14-93
 
110.17


14-94
 
110.18


14-101
 
112.01


14-112
 
112.15


14-113
 
112.15


14-118
 
112.17


14-120
 
112.19


14-121
 
112.20


14-123
 
112.21


14-124
 
112.22


14-125
 
112.23


14-126
 
112.24


14-127
 
112.25


14-128
 
112.26


14-129
 
112.27


14-130
 
112.28


14-135
 
112.40


14-136
 
112.41


14-137
 
112.42


14-138
 
112.42


14-139
 
112.44


14-140
 
112.45


14-141
 
112.46


14-142
 
112.47


14-151
 
112.48


14-152
 
112.49


14-153
 
112.50


14-154
 
112.51


14-155
 
112.52


14-156
 
112.53


14-157
 
112.54


14-158
 
112.55


14-159
 
112.56


14-170
 
113.01


14-171
 
113.02


14-172
 
113.03


14-173
 
113.04


14-174
 
113.05


14-175
 
113.06


14-176
 
113.07


14-177
 
113.20


14-178
 
113.21


14-179
 
113.22


14-180
 
113.23


14-181
 
113.24


14-182
 
113.25


14-183
 
113.26


14-184
 
113.27


14-185
 
113.28


14-186
 
113.29


14-187
 
113.30


14-188
 
113.31


14-189
 
113.32


15-1
 
31.45


15-2
 
31.46


15-3
 
31.47


15-4
 
31.48


15-5
 
31.49


15-6
 
31.50


15-7
 
31.51


15-8
 
31.52


15-10
 
31.53


15-11
 
31.54


15-12
 
31.55


15-13
 
31.56


15-14
 
31.57


15-15
 
31.57


15-21
 
90.20


15-22
 
90.21


15-23
 
90.22


15-24
 
90.23


15-25
 
90.24


15-26
 
90.25


15-27
 
90.26


15-28
 
90.27


15-29
 
90.28


15-30
 
90.29


15-61
 
90.40


15-62
 
90.41


15-63
 
90.42


15-64
 
90.43


15-65
 
90.44


15-66
 
90.45


15-67
 
90.46


16-1
 
114.01


16-2
 
114.02


16-3
 
114.03


16-4
 
114.04


16-5
 
114.05


16-6
 
114.06


16-7
 
114.99


16-17
 
114.20


16-18
 
114.07


16-19
 
114.21


16-20
 
114.22


16-21
 
114.23


16-22
 
114.24


16-23
 
114.25


16-24
 
114.26


16-25
 
114.27


16-27
 
114.28


16-28
 
114.29


16-29
 
114.30


16-30
 
114.31


16-31
 
114.99


16-40
 
114.45


16-41
 
114.46


16-42
 
114.47


16-43
 
114.48


16-44
 
114.49


16-45
 
114.50


16-46
 
114.51


16-47
 
114.52


16-48
 
114.99


16-51
 
114.65


16-52
 
114.66


16-53
 
114.66


16-54
 
114.68


17-1
 
32.01


17-2
 
32.02


17-3
 
32.02


17-4
 
32.02


17-5
 
32.03


17-6
 
32.04


17-11
 
32.15


17-12
 
32.16


17-13
 
32.17


17-14
 
32.18


17-15
 
32.19


17-16
 
32.20


17-17
 
32.21


17-18
 
32.22


17-19
 
32.22


17-20
 
32.22


17-21
 
32.23


17-22
 
32.24


17-23
 
32.25


17-24
 
32.26


17-25
 
32.27


17-31
 
73.01


17-36
 
73.15


17-37
 
73.16


17-38
 
73.17


17-39
 
73.18


17-40
 
73.19


17-41
 
73.20


17-42
 
73.21


17-43
 
73.22


17-44
 
73.23


17-45
 
73.24


17-46
 
73.25


17-51
 
117.01


17-52
 
117.02


17-53
 
117.03


17-54
 
117.04


17-55
 
117.05


17-56
 
117.06


17-57
 
117.07


17-58
 
117.08, 117.09


17-59
 
117.10


17-60
 
117.11


17-61
 
117.12


17-62
 
117.13


17-64
 
117.15


17-65
 
117.16


17-66
 
117.17


17-67
 
117.18


17-68
 
117.19


17-72
 
115.02


17-73
 
115.03


17-151
 
70.01


17-152
 
70.02


17-153
 
70.03


17-154
 
70.04


17-155
 
70.05


17-156
 
70.06


17-157
 
70.07


17-158
 
70.08


17-159
 
70.09


17-161
 
71.001


17-162
 
71.002


17-163
 
71.003


17-164
 
71.004


17-165
 
71.005


17-166
 
71.006


17-167
 
71.007


17-168
 
71.008


17-169
 
71.009


17-181
 
70.25


17-182
 
70.25


17-183
 
70.27


17-184
 
70.28


17-185
 
70.29


17-187
 
70.30


17-188
 
70.31


17-189
 
70.32


17-190
 
70.33


17-201
 
71.025


17-202
 
71.026


17-203
 
71.027


17-204
 
71.027


17-205
 
71.028


17-206
 
71.029


17-207
 
71.030


17-208
 
71.030


17-209
 
71.031


17-210
 
71.031


17-211
 
71.032


17-212
 
71.033


17-213
 
71.034


17-214
 
71.035


17-215
 
71.036


17-216
 
71.037


17-217
 
71.037


17-218
 
71.038


17-219
 
71.039


17-220
 
71.040


17-221
 
71.041


17-222
 
71.042


17-223
 
71.043


17-224
 
71.044


17-225
 
71.045


17-226
 
71.046


17-227
 
71.047


17-228
 
71.048


17-229
 
71.049


17-230
 
71.050


17-231
 
71.051


17-232
 
71.052


17-233
 
71.053


17-234
 
71.054


17-241
 
70.45


17-242
 
70.46


17-243
 
70.47


17-244
 
70.48


17-245
 
70.49


17-246
 
70.50


17-247
 
70.51


17-248
 
70.52


17-249
 
70.53


17-250
 
70.54


17-251
 
70.55


17-252
 
70.56


17-253
 
70.57


17-254
 
70.58


17-255
 
70.59


17-257
 
70.61


17-258
 
70.62


17-259
 
74.11; Ch. 75, Sched. I


17-260
 
74.11; Ch. 75, Sched. II


17-271
 
71.065


17-272
 
71.066


17-273
 
71.067


17-275
 
71.067


17-276
 
71.069


17-277
 
71.070


17-278
 
71.071


17-279
 
71.072


17-291
 
72.01


17-292
 
72.02


17-293
 
72.02


17-294
 
72.02


17-295
 
72.15


17-296
 
72.16


17-297
 
72.17


17-298
 
72.18


17-299
 
72.19


17-300
 
72.20


17-301
 
72.21


17-302
 
72.22


17-303
 
72.23


17-304
 
72.24


17-305
 
72.25


17-306
 
72.26


17-307
 
72.26


17-308
 
72.26


17-309
 
72.26


17-310
 
72.27


17-311
 
72.28


17-312
 
72.29


17-313
 
72.30


17-314
 
72.31


17-315
 
72.32


17-335
 
71.085


17-336
 
71.086


17-337
 
71.087


17-338
 
71.088


17-339
 
71.089


17-340
 
71.090


17-341
 
71.091


17-342
 
71.092


17-343
 
71.093


17-344
 
71.094


17-345
 
71.095


17-352
 
74.01


17-354
 
74.02


17-355
 
74.03


17-356
 
74.04


17-357
 
74.05


17-358
 
74.05


17-359
 
74.07


17-360
 
74.08


17-361
 
74.09


17-362
 
74.10


17-363
 
74.11


20-1
 
98.001


20-3
 
98.002


20-4
 
98.003


20-5
 
98.004


20-7
 
98.005


20-8
 
98.006


20-9
 
98.006


20-10
 
98.007


20-11
 
98.008


20-12
 
98.009


20-21
 
98.025


20-22
 
98.026


20-23
 
98.027


20-24
 
98.028


20-25
 
98.029


20-26
 
98.030


20-27
 
98.031


20-28
 
98.032


20-29
 
98.033


20-30
 
98.034


20-31
 
98.035


20-32
 
98.036


20-33
 
98.037


20-34
 
98.038


20-35
 
98.039


20-36
 
98.040


20-37
 
98.041


20-39
 
98.055


20-40
 
98.056


20-41
 
98.057


20-42
 
98.058


20-43
 
98.059


20-54
 
98.070


20-55
 
98.071


20-57
 
98.072


20-58
 
98.073


20-70
 
98.085


20-71
 
98.086


20-72
 
98.087


20-73
 
98.088


20-74
 
98.089


20-75
 
98.090


20-80
 
98.105


20-81
 
98.106


20-82
 
98.107


20-83
 
98.108


Ch. 22, Attachment 1
 
37.999; Ch. 37, Appendix A


Ch. 22, Attachment 2
 
37.999; Ch. 37, Appendix B


22-1
 
37.001


22-2
 
37.002


22-6
 
37.003


22-6.5
 
37.004


22-7
 
37.020


22-8
 
37.021


22-9
 
37.022


22-10
 
37.023


22-30
 
37.03


22-31
 
37.036


22-32
 
37.037


22-46
 
37.043


22-57
 
37.070


22-58
 
37.071


22-59
 
37.072


22-60
 
37.073


22-61
 
37.074


22-62
 
37.999


22-63
 
37.075


22-71
 
37.076


22-72
 
37.076


22-81
 
37.090


22-82
 
37.091


22-83
 
37.092


22-84
 
37.093


22-91
 
37.105


22-92
 
37.106


22-93
 
37.107


22-94
 
37.108


22-95
 
37.109


22-96
 
37.110


22-97
 
37.111


24-91
 
116.01


24-92
 
116.02


24-96
 
116.03


24-97
 
116.04


24-98
 
116.05


24-99
 
116.06


24-100
 
116.07


24-101
 
116.08


24-102
 
116.09


24-103
 
116.10


24-104
 
116.11


29-1
 
150.001


29-3
 
150.999


29-4
 
150.002


29-5
 
150.002


29-6
 
150.002


29-7
 
150.002


29-8
 
150.002


29-9
 
150.003


29-38
 
150.040


29-40
 
150.041


29-41
 
150.042


29-42
 
150.043


29-50
 
150.095


29-51
 
150.096


29-52
 
150.097


29-53
 
150.098


29-54
 
150.099


29-55
 
150.100


29-56
 
150.100


29-57
 
150.100


29-58
 
150.101


29-64
 
150.102


29-65
 
150.103


29-66
 
150.104


29-67
 
150.105


29-68
 
150.106


29-69
 
150.107


29-70
 
150.108


29-71
 
150.109


29-72
 
150.110


30-1
 
151.001


30-2
 
151.002


30-3
 
151.003


30-4
 
151.004


30-5
 
151.005


30-11
 
151.020


30-12
 
151.021


30-13
 
151.022


30-14
 
151.023


30-15
 
151.024


30-16
 
151.025


30-17
 
151.026


30-25
 
151.040


30-26
 
151.041


30-27
 
151.042


30-28
 
151.043


30-29
 
151.044


30-30
 
151.045


30-31
 
151.046


30-32
 
151.047


30-33
 
151.048


30-34
 
151.049


30-35
 
151.050


30-36
 
151.051


30-42
 
151.065


30-43
 
151.066


30-44
 
151.067


30-45
 
151.068


30-47
 
151.069


30-48
 
151.070


30-49
 
151.071


30-50
 
151.072


30-51
 
151.073


30-52
 
151.074


30-53
 
151.075


30-54
 
151.076


30-56
 
151.077


30-57
 
151.078


30-58
 
151.079


30-66
 
151.095


30-67
 
151.096


30-68
 
151.097


30-69
 
151.098


30-70
 
151.099


30-71
 
151.100


30-72
 
151.101


30-73
 
151.102


30-74
 
151.103


30-75
 
151.104


30-76
 
151.105


30-77
 
151.106


30-79
 
151.999


31-1
 
150.055


31-2
 
150.056


32-1
 
150.070


32-2
 
150.071


32-3
 
150.072


32-4
 
150.073


32-41
 
150.074


32-51
 
150.075


32-52
 
150.076


32-53
 
150.077


32-54
 
150.078


32-61
 
150.079


32-62
 
150.080


33-1
 
150.004


33-2
 
150.004


33-3
 
150.004


 
 
 




 



Zoning Ord. Section



 

1987 Code Section
 
2002 Code Section




Art. I, § 1
 
155.01


Art. I, § 2
 
155.02


Art. I, § 3
 
155.03


Art. I, § 4
 
155.04


Art. I, § 5
 
155.05


Art. I, § 6
 
155.06


Art. II, § 1
 
155.20


Art. II, § 2
 
155.21


Art. II, § 3
 
155.22


Art. II, § 4
 
155.23


Art. II, § 5
 
155.24


Art. II, § 6
 
155.25


Art. II, § 7
 
155.26


Art. II, § 8
 
155.27


Art. II, § 9
 
155.27


Art. II, § 10
 
155.29


Art. II, § 11
 
155.30


Art. II, § 12
 
155.31


Art. II, § 13
 
155.32


Art. II, § 14
 
155.32


Art. III  § 1
 
155.45


Art. III, § 2
 
155.46


Art. III, § 3
 
155.47


Art. III, § 4
 
155.48


Art. III, § 5
 
155.49


Art. IV, § 1(A)
 
155.60


Art. IV, § 2
 
155.61


Art. IV, § 3
 
155.62


Art. IV. § 4
 
155.63


Art. IV, § 5
 
155.64


Art. IV, § 1(B)
 
155.99


 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




- -
 
7-6-48
 
51.01


- -
 
2-15-49
 
150.002


- -
 
5-17-49
 
98.073


- -
 
9-19-50
 
91.01


- -
 
9-2-52
 
32.04


- -
 
11-17-53
 
53.44


- -
 
5-4-54
 
116.01; 116.03-116.11


- -
 
12-20-55
 
50.21, 50.22, 52.05


- -
 
4-16-57
 
90.40–90.46


- -
 
6-17-58
 
150.002


- -
 
8-18-59
 
53.05


- -
 
8-2-60
 
50.02


- -
 
4-21-61
 
114.06


- -
 
2-4-64
 
112.01


- -
 
8-4-64
 
98.072


- -
 
4-6-65
 
98.002


- -
 
4-20-65
 
71.070


- -
 
7-20-65
 
71.041


- -
 
9-21-65
 
70.46–70.48; 70.50; 70.51; 70.57-70.59; 70.61; 72.20; 72.26; 74.11


- -
 
3-1-66
 
Ch. 75,  Sched. I


- -
 
11-1-66
 
50.45


- -
 
1-3-67
 
98.055–98.059


- -
 
1-17-67
 
32.15–32.27


- -
 
4-4-67
 
51.55, 51.57-51.60


- -
 
5-16-67
 
53.01, 53.44, 95.21


- -
 
6-20-67
 
150.096, 150.101, 150.102, 150.105, 150.106


- -
 
7-3-67
 
31.20–31.32; 31.45-31.57; 91.15-91.28; 153.005-153.017


1968-3
 
5-7-68
 
150.004


1968-4
 
6-18-68
 
33.03


1968-8
 
12-3-68
 
71.053


1968-9
 
12-17-68
 
150.004


1969-1
 
1-23-69
 
31.32, 92.01


1969-5
 
3-4-69
 
53.45


1969-9
 
6-3-69
 
33.04


1969-12
 
7-1-69
 
52.01


1970-1
 
1-6-70
 
117.17


1971-2
 
2-2-71
 
51.59, 52.06, 52.46


1971-3
 
4-6-71
 
53.46, 53.47


1971-4
 
4-6-71
 
52.06


1971-5
 
4-6-71
 
52.06


1971-6
 
5-4-71
 
71.054, 71.071


1971-8
 
6-21-71
 
50.03


1971-9
 
9-7-71
 
51.01


1971-11
 
9-21-71
 
53.48


1971-13
 
12-17-71
 
92.04


1972-8
 
8-15-72
 
37.035, 37.038


1973-2
 
1-16-73
 
51.21–51.43, 51.99


1973-3
 
2-6-73
 
51.60


1973-4
 
4-17-73
 
53.60


1973-11
 
9-18-73
 
98.090


1973-13
 
9-18-73
 
112.01


1974-3
 
7-16-74
 
53.21


1974-5
 
11-19-74
 
72.29


1975-3
 
7-1-75
 
114.45


4-1976
 
1-6-76
 
50.24,  51.56; 52.03


6-1976
 
4-20-76
 
150.102


1977-3
 
5-3-77
 
91.40–91.52, 91.55, 91.56


1977-6
 
9-20-77
 
51.35


1978-4
 
4-4-78
 
114.99


1978-6
 
5-16-78
 
50.22


1978-5
 
8-1-78
 
51.36


1979-4
 
8-7-79
 
94.40


1980-1
 
1-8-80
 
37.070–37.074, 37.999


1980-2, § 2
 
4-7-80
 
Charter, Art. II, § 10


1980-3
 
4-1-80
 
150.003


1980-8
 
5-20-80
 
33.01


1980-10
 
9-16-80
 
51.60


1980-11
 
10-7-80
 
33.05


1980-12
 
10-21-80
 
150.002


1981-3
 
4-7-81
 
71.072


1981-4
 
4-21-81
 
95.21


1981-7
 
6-2-81
 
53.01, 53.21


1981-8
 
6-16-81
 
72.30


1981-9
 
6-16-81
 
91.46


1981-10
 
10-20-81
 
50.24, 150.002, 150.074, 150.105


1981-13
 
11-3-81
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


1982-3
 
8-3-82
 
91.53


1982-4
 
9-21-82
 
51.57


1983-13
 
1-15-83
 
150.074


1983-1
 
6-21-83
 
53.20, 53.21, 53.40


1983-2
 
- -
 
155.46


1984-3
 
6-21-83
 
72.32


1983-3
 
10-4-83
 
51.56, 52.03


1983-6
 
11-1-83
 
72.21


1983-11
 
11-15-83
 
150.055, 150.056


1983-12
 
11-15-83
 
150.079, 150.080


1983-13
 
11-15-83
 
150.075


1987-4
 
2-17-84
 
36.07, 36.08, 36.14, 31.46


1984-7
 
6-5-84
 
72.31


1984-9
 
8-21-84
 
53.02


1984-10
 
8-21-84
 
114.06


1984-15
 
12-4-84
 
50.55


1984-17
 
12-18-84
 
50.44


1985-1
 
1-15-85
 
90.29


1985-2
 
2-5-85
 
114.06, 114.99


1985-5
 
3-5-85
 
50.55, 50.57, 50.60, 50.61


1985-12
 
5-7-85
 
112.01


1985-14
 
6-4-85
 
95.25, 95.26


1985-18
 
6-18-85
 
52.08


1985-27
 
9-17-85
 
50.23, 51.60, 52.01


1985-29
 
11-19-85
 
151.999


1986-2
 
2-18-86
 
150.001, 150.999


1986-4
 
3-16-86
 
110.18


1986-6
 
3-18-86
 
35.01–35.09, 35.99


1986-11
 
6-3-86
 
52.06


1986-15
 
8-19-86
 
30.01–30.03


1986-21
 
10-20-86
 
93.01–93.12, 93.99


1986-23
 
10-21-86
 
37.076


1987-2
 
1-20-87
 
91.46


1987-4
 
2-17-87
 
36.01–36.04; 36.06-09; 36.11-36.14


1987-7
 
5-19-87
 
37.090–37.093


1987-11
 
8-4-87
 
155.32


1987-17
 
10-6-87
 
153.006


1987-21
 
12-1-87
 
51.32


1988-1
 
3-1-88
 
150.041–150.043


1988-2
 
3-29-88
 
98.025–98.041


1988-3
 
4-19-88
 
TSO I


1988-5
 
7-5-88
 
110.18


1988-8
 
9-6-88
 
50.24, 51.56. 52.03


1988-12
 
10-20-88
 
30.02, 30.03


1989-1
 
1-5-89
 
155.27


1989-2
 
2-7-89
 
91.46


1989-4
 
4-4-89
 
37.020–37.023


1989-6
 
5-2-89
 
155.62, 155.63


1989-12
 
9-5-89
 
155.46


1989-16
 
10-3-89
 
30.01, 30.03


1989-20
 
12-5-89
 
37.004


1990-3
 
2-6-90
 
98.071–98.073


1990-9
 
6-5-90
 
155.03, 155.48


1990-10
 
6-19-90
 
71.005


1990-16
 
10-2-90
 
155.64


1990-18
 
11-6-90
 
34.01–34.04, 34.99


1991-4
 
9-11-91
 
52.08, 53.61


1991-5
 
10-1-91
 
30.01


1991-8
 
11-5-91
 
36.01–36.14


1992-2
 
2-18-92
 
31.21, 31.24


1992-5
 
6-16-92
 
94.20, 94.21


1992-14
 
9-15-92
 
37.036


1993-1
 
1-5-93
 
52.01, 52.02


1993-2
 
2-2-93
 
155.45, 155.46


1993-3
 
2-2-93
 
155.03, 155.45


1993-5
 
3-16-93
 
150.001, 150.999


1993-8
 
4-6-93
 
150.040


1993-11
 
6-1-93
 
151.044, 151.106


1993-18
 
10-19-93
 
98.009, 98.028, 98.029, 98.040


1993-20
 
12-7-93
 
98.071


1994-1
 
3-1-94
 
95.01


1994-5
 
6-7-94
 
112.15; 112.17; 112.19-112.24; 112.26-112.28


1994-7
 
6-7-94
 
130.03


1994-8
 
6-21-94
 
71.007


1994-9
 
6-21-94
 
130.26


1994-10
 
7-19-94
 
51.58, 51.59, 52.05


1994-11
 
7-19-94
 
98.105–98.108


1994-13
 
8-16-94
 
155.27


1994-12
 
9-6-94
 
90.20–90.29


1994-16
 
9-20-94
 
113.01–113.07; 113.20-113.32


1995-2
 
1-10-95
 
50.55–50.61


1995-3
 
2-7-95
 
51.01


1995-7
 
4-4-95
 
95.21–95.26


1995-8
 
6-1-95
 
37.105–37.108, 37.110, 37.111


1995-10
 
6-20-95
 
112.25


1995-12
 
8-1-95
 
130.07


1995-13
 
8-15-95
 
114.01, 114.07, 114.20, 114.21


1995-20
 
11-21-95
 
37.070, 37.075


1995-23
 
12-5-95
 
53.49


1995-18
 
12-19-95
 
33.20


1995-21
 
12-19-95
 
TSO I


1995-22
 
12-19-95
 
TSO I


1995-24
 
12-19-95
 
33.20


1996-14
 
10-15-96
 
155.25


1996-6
 
11-5-96
 
99.01– 99.03


1996-17
 
12-3-96
 
98.070; 98.072; 98.073; 98.108; Ch. 98, Appendices A & B


1997-1
 
2-4-97
 
95.21


1997-3
 
4-1-97
 
90.01, 91.02


1997-5
 
- -
 
155.45


1997-9
 
9-16-97
 
52.04


1997-11
 
10-7-97
 
37.125


1997-12
 
12-2-97
 
94.01–94.03; 94.20-94.29; 94.40-94.42


1998-1
 
2-3-98
 
115.01; 115.04-115.12


1998-3
 
2-3-98
 
114.01, 114.04, 114.06, 114.07


1998-5
 
2-3-98
 
90.02–90.07


1998-2
 
4-7-98
 
150.015–150.025


1998-11
 
6-30-98
 
51.58–51.60


1998-15
 
9-15-98
 
52.04


1998-16
 
9-15-98
 
33.20


1999-1
 
2-16-99
 
152.01–152.12; 152.25-152.29; 152.40-152.43


1999-3
 
4-21-99
 
151.068


1999-7
 
7-6-99
 
117.01–117.20


1999-13
 
9-7-99
 
37.126


1999-14
 
9-21-99
 
53.60


1999-17
 
10-5-99
 
TSO II


2000-3
 
- -00
 
155.27


2000-17
 
9-5-00
 
53.60


2000-18
 
9-18-00
 
153.085–153.098, 153.999


2000-21
 
11-9-00
 
71.091


2001-3
 
4-17-01
 
52.35–52.45


2001-4
 
4-17-01
 
52.20–52.24


2001-8
 
4-17-01
 
155.27


2001-9
 
6-5-01
 
100.01–100.10, 100.99


2001-14
 
9-4-01
 
33.21


2001-13
 
9-18-01
 
53.60


2001-18
 
11-6-01
 
50.20–50.24; 50.40-50.45; 51.55; 51.56; 51.58-51.60; 52.01; 52.03-52.05;
52.08


2001-20
 
11-20-01
 
31.32, 92.04


2001-23
 
12-18-01
 
74.11; Ch. 75, Sched. III


2002-3
 
2-5-02
 
32.02


2002-4
 
2-5-02
 
70.08, 70.27, 70.29, 70.46, 70.47


2002-5
 
2-5-02
 
71.007, 71.066


2002-9
 
2-5-02
 
114.22


2002-10
 
2-5-02
 
130.26


2002-11
 
2-5-02
 
95.35


2002-12
 
2-5-02
 
96.01–96.12


2002-1
 
2-19-02
 
97.01–97.14; 97.20; 97.25–27; 97.35, 97.38, 97.39; 97.45–97.52;
97.60–97.65; 97.70–97.80; 97.99


2002-2
 
1-15-02
 
155.27, 155.45, 155.46, 155.50, Ch. 155, Appendix


2002-13
 
2-19-02
 
30.01, 30.03


2002-14
 
2-19-02
 
31.01–31.03


2002-15
 
2-19-02
 
33.20


2002-19
 
2-19-02
 
150.002, 150.040-150.042


2002-20
 
2-19-02
 
150.055, 150.056


2002-22
 
2-19-02
 
151.044, 151.076, 151.077, 151.106


2002-23
 
2-19-02
 
150.074, 150.075, 151.079


2002-24
 
2-19-02
 
93.99


2002-25
 
2-19-02
 
155.05; 155.20; 155.46; 155.62-155.64; 155.99; Ch. 155, Appendix


2002-28
 
2-19-02
 
94.03, 94.42


2002-29
 
3-5-02
 
98.002; 98.027; 98.032, 98.035; 98.070; 98.072; 98.106-98.108


2002-30
 
3-5-02
 
50.55


2002-31
 
3-5-02
 
51.03, 51.32, 51.43


2002-32
 
3-5-02
 
91.54


2002-33
 
3-5-02
 
90.06


2002-28
 
3-19-02
 
94.40


2002-28
 
3-19-02
 
94.40


2002-38
 
4-16-02
 
130.25, 130.26


2002-40
 
5-7-02
 
90.01


2002-39
 
5-21-02
 
155.32


2002-47
 
9-17-02
 
53.60


2002-48
 
9-17-02
 
51.58, 51.59, 52.04


2003-2
 
3-18-03
 
90.06


2003-6
 
5-20-03
 
155.51


2003-8
 
8-19-03
 
153.001, 153.002, 153.005 - 153.017, 153.020 - 153.037, 153.045, 153.060 -
153.069, 153.998


2003-12
 
9-2-03
 
53.60


2003-13
 
9-2-03
 
90.06


2003-14
 
9-16-03
 
155.24, 155.27, 155.47


2003-19
 
10-21-03
 
52.08


2003-20
 
10-21-03
 
51.56, 52.03


2003-21
 
11-18-03
 
155.03, 155.45


2003-22
 
11-4-03
 
155.48


2004-2
 
1-20-04
 
150.001


2004-3
 
1-20-04
 
150.074, 150.075, 150.079, 150.080


2004-4
 
1-20-04
 
150.002, 150.040


2004-5
 
1-20-04
 
150.055, 150.056


2004-6
 
2-3-04
 
94.40, 94.43


2004-10
 
5-18-04
 
150.125 - 150.131, 150.999


2004-17
 
10-5-04
 
97.49


2004-20
 
11-16-04
 
155.45


2004-21
 
11-16-04
 
150.125 - 150.131, 150.999


2004-22
 
12-21-04
 
35.10


2005-1
 
2-15-05
 
153.006


2005-3
 
4-19-05
 
52.21 - 52.23, 52.25


2005-5
 
8-16-05
 
37.126


2005-6, § 1.1
 
9-20-05
 
154.01


2005-6, § 1.2
 
9-20-05
 
154.02


2005-6, § 1.3
 
9-20-05
 
154.03


2005-6, § 1.4
 
9-20-05
 
154.04


2005-6, § 1.5
 
9-20-05
 
154.05


2005-6, § 1.6
 
9-20-05
 
154.06


2005-6, § 1.7
 
9-20-05
 
154.07


2005-6, § 1.8
 
9-20-05
 
154.08


2005-6, § 1.9
 
9-20-05
 
154.09


2005-6, § 1.10
 
9-20-05
 
154.10


2005-6, § 1.11
 
9-20-05
 
154.11


2005-6, § 1.12
 
9-20-05
 
154.12


2005-6, § 1.13
 
9-20-05
 
154.13


2005-6, § 1.14
 
9-20-05
 
154.14


2005-6, § 1.15
 
9-20-05
 
154.15, 154.99


2005-6, Art. 2
 
9-20-05
 
154.16


2005-6, § 3.1
 
9-20-05
 
154.30


2005-6, § 3.2
 
9-20-05
 
154.31


2005-6, § 3.3
 
9-20-05
 
154.32


2005-6, § 3.4
 
9-20-05
 
154.33


2005-6, § 3.5
 
9-20-05
 
154.34


2005-6, § 3.6
 
9-20-05
 
154.35


2005-6, § 3.7
 
9-20-05
 
154.36


2005-6, § 3.8
 
9-20-05
 
154.37


2005-6, § 3.9
 
9-20-05
 
154.38


2005-6, § 3.10
 
9-20-05
 
154.39


2005-6, § 4.1
 
9-20-05
 
154.50


2005-6, § 4.2
 
9-20-05
 
154.51


2005-6, § 4.3
 
9-20-05
 
154.52


2005-6, § 4.4
 
9-20-05
 
154.53


2005-6, § 4.5
 
9-20-05
 
154.54


2005-6, § 4.6
 
9-20-05
 
154.55


2005-6, § 4.7
 
9-20-05
 
154.56


2005-6, § 4.8
 
9-20-05
 
154.57


2005-6, § 4.9
 
9-20-05
 
154.58


2005-6, § 4.10
 
9-20-05
 
154.59


2005-6, § 4.11
 
9-20-05
 
154.60


2005-6, § 5.1
 
9-20-05
 
154.75


2005-6, § 5.2
 
9-20-05
 
154.76


2005-6, § 5.3
 
9-20-05
 
154.77


2005-6, § 5.4
 
9-20-05
 
154.78


2005-6, § 5.5
 
9-20-05
 
154.79


2005-6, § 5.6
 
9-20-05
 
154.80


2005-6, § 5.7
 
9-20-05
 
154.81


2005-6, § 5.8
 
9-20-05
 
154.82


2005-9
 
9-6-05
 
53.60


2005-11
 
10-4-05
 
114.01 - 114.07, 114.20 - 114.31


2005-15
 
12-6-05
 
96.01, 96.031


2006-6
 
2-7-06
 
151.107


2006-14
 
9-5-06
 
52.04


2006-15
 
9-5-06
 
53.60


2007-1
 
2-6-07
 
114.52


2007-4
 
6-26-07
 
TSO I


2007-5
 
6-26-07
 
117.11


2007-9
 
9-18-07
 
51.58, 51.59


2007-10
 
9-18-07
 
53.60


2007-15
 
11-20-07
 
113.01, 113.05, 113.23, 113.24


2007-16
 
12-18-07
 
93.02 - 93.05


2007-17
 
12-18-07
 
90.01


2008-1
 
2-5-08
 
52.06, 52.07


2008-3
 
2-5-08
 
97.01, 97.26 - 97.32, 97.39, 97.49, 97.99


2008-4
 
3-4-08
 
53.20, 53.21


2008-7
 
3-18-08
 
52.22, 52.24


2008-13
 
5-20-08
 
155.03, 155.48, Ch. 155, Appendix


2008-14
 
5-20-08
 
90.06


2008-16
 
6-17-08
 
130.60, 130.61, 130.99


2008-17
 
8-5-08
 
37.035 - 37.044, 37.999


2008-18
 
8-19-08
 
97.51


2008-22
 
9-16-08
 
52.04


2008-25
 
11-18-08
 
97.02


2009-2
 
2-17-09
 
155.48


2009-3
 
3-17-09
 
31.21


2009-4
 
4-7-09
 
52.20 - 52.25, 52.35 - 52.45


2009-5
 
4-21-09
 
130.40 - 130.46, 130.99


2009-7
 
6-16-09
 
91.46, 91.51


2009-12
 
9-15-09
 
53.60


2009-15
 
10-6-09
 
112.15 - 112.17, 112.19 - 112.28


2009-16
 
12-15-09
 
90.06


2010-8
 
6-15-10
 
152.01 - 152.12, 152.25 - 152.29, 152.40 - 152.43, 152.99


2010-11
 
9-7-10
 
130.75 - 130.77, 130.99


2010-14
 
9-21-10
 
53.60


2011-1
 
4-5-11
 
53.21


2011-8
 
9-6-11
 
53.60


2011-14
 
10-18-11
 
94.40, 94.43


2011-15
 
10-18-11
 
150.055, 150.056


2011-16
 
10-18-11
 
150.074, 150.075, 150.079, 150.080


2011-17
 
10-18-11
 
150.002, 150.040


2011-18
 
10-18-11
 
150.001


2011-19
 
10-18-11
 
151.044, 151.106


2012-6
 
11-6-12
 
94.04


2012-7
 
11-6-12
 
TSO II


2013-7
 
8-20-13
 
155.28


2013-14
 
11-5-13
 
150.140 - 150.162, 150.999


2014-1
 
3-17-14
 
52.20 - 52.26, 52.35 - 52.45


2014-3
 
5-5-14
 
130.40 - 130.46, 130.99


2014-5
 
6-2-14
 
150.001


2014-6
 
6-2-14
 
150.040


2014-7
 
6-2-14
 
150.055


2014-8
 
6-2-14
 
150.075, 150.079


2014-9
 
6-2-14
 
151.106


2014-10
 
8-4-14
 
155.48


2014-11
 
8-18-14
 
71.067


2014-14
 
9-15-14
 
53.60


2014-19
 
12-15-14
 
94.55 - 94.58


2014-20
 
12-15-14
 
130.03


2015-1
 
1-20-15
 
96.01 - 96.12, 96.99


2015-2
 
1-20-15
 
95.50 - 95.55


2015-3
 
1-20-15
 
72.33


2015-4
 
3-16-15
 
TSO II


2015-8
 
4-6-15
 
TSO II


2015-9
 
6-2-15
 
111.20, 111.21


2015-10
 
8-4-15
 
71.067


2015-11
 
8-4-15
 
114.01, 114.02, 114.03, 114.04, 114.05, 114.28, 114.30


2015-17
 
10-6-15
 
TSO II


2015-18
 
10-6-15
 
TSO II


2015-19
 
10-6-15
 
TSO II


2015-20
 
10-20-15
 
111.01 - 111.07, 111.99


2015-21
 
10-20-15
 
114.53


2015-24
 
11-17-15
 
TSO II


2015-25
 
11-17-15
 
TSO II


2016-1
 
1-5-16
 
TSO II


2016-5
 
8-2-16
 
155.48


2016-6
 
8-2-16
 
91.01, 91.02, 91.15 - 91.28, 91.40 - 91.56, 91.99


2016-7
 
8-2-16
 
51.60


2016-9
 
8-15-16
 
71.055


2016-14
 
9-20-16
 
52.04


2016-15
 
9-20-16
 
51.58, 51.59


2016-17
 
11-1-16
 
52.22


2016-18
 
11-1-16
 
52.08


2016-25
 
11-29-16
 
TSO II


2017-1
 
1-17-17
 
97.01 - 97.15, 97.20, 97.25 - 97.32, 97.35, 97.38, 97.39, 97.45 - 97.52,
97.60 - 97.65, 97.70 - 97.80, 97.99


2017-5
 
4-4-17
 
TSO II


2017-7
 
4-18-17
 
90.30


2017-8
 
8-1-17
 
112.15, 112.18, 112.19, 112.24 - 112.27


2017-9
 
9-19-17
 
155.48


2017-13
 
9-5-17
 
53.60


2017-15
 
10-17-17
 
150.045


2017-16
 
10-17-17
 
TSO II


2017-17
 
11-21-17
 
111.03


2017-19
 
11-21-17
 
130.40 - 130.46, 130.99


2017-21
 
12-19-17
 
97.01 - 97.15, 97.20, 97.25 - 97.32, 97.35, 97.38, 97.39, 97.45 - 97.52,
97.60 - 97.65, 97.70 - 97.80, 97.99


2018-3
 
4-3-18
 
95.20 - 95.26


2018-4
 
4-3-18   
 
96.09


2018-5
 
6-5-18
 
TSO II


2018-9
 
9-18-18
 
52.04, 52.08


2018-10
 
9-18-18
 
51.58, 51.59


2018-11
 
9-18-18
 
53.60


2018-12
 
9-18-18
 
TSO II


2018-13
 
12-4-18
 
131.01 - 131.06, 131.99


2018-14
 
12-18-18
 
90.08


2019-01
 
2-5-19
 
131.06


 
 
 
 
 




 


