APPENDIX A

ZONING  ORDINANCE*
 

 
Art;"l.. Art. 2.
Art. s.
Art. 4.
Art. 5.
 
Enacting Clause
Establishment of Districts and Provision for Official Zon. ing Map
Rules for Interpretation  of District Boundaries Application of District Regulations
Nonconforming Lots, Nonconforming Uses of Land, Non· conforming Structures, Nonconforming Uses of Structure and Premises and Nonconforming Characteristics of Use
 
Art. 6.	District Regulations
Art. 7,.	Definitions
Art. 8.	Administration and Enforcement
Art. 9.	Board of Adjustment; Establishment and Procedure Art.  10.	Procedure for Amendments or Special Use Permits Art.  11.	Violation and Penalty
Art. 12.	'	Saving Clause
Art.  13.	Invalidity of a Part Art. 14.	Repeal
Appl). A an<l B. Reee?Ved ··
App. C.	Mobile Home'Park Facilities

An Ordinance to regulate and restrict the use of land and the location of buildings designed for specific uses; to regulate and limit the height of buildings hereafter erected or altered; to regulte and determine the size and area of yards, courts, and other open spaces; to regulate and limit the density of population; to divide the municipality into districts and establish, by refer­ ence to a map, the boundaries of said districts for said purposes; to provide for off-street parking and loading; to provide for definition; to provide for its interpretations and amendments hereto; to provide for its enforcement and penalties for violation

 
*Editor's note-Appendix A sets out the zoning ordinance of the city as the same was originally enacted by the city on May 12, 1970. Due to the statutory requirements relative to the enactment and amendment of such an ordinance, incorporation thereof into a Code of Ordinances is not deemed advisable, hence its inclusion as an appendix hereto for the benefit and convenience of the user of this Code.
Cross references-:--Building, ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, ch. 12; health and sanitation, ch. 15; housing, ch. 16; mobile homes, ch. 17; planning and zoning, ch. 20; plumbing, ch. 21; signs, ch. 24; streets and sidewalks, ch. 25; utilities, ch. 28; subdivisions, App. B; flood protection, § 7-17 et seq.

\
\	Supp. No. 11	1589
 
MARLIN  CODE	 
of its powers and duties; to provide for permits, to provide for invalidity of a ,part and for repeal of  all ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with this Ordinance.
For the purposes of promoting health, safety and/or the general welfare of the community, the City Council of Marlin deems it necessary to adopt these regulations made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportatio:d, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUN­
CIL OF MARLIN, TEXAS:

ARTICLE 1. ENACTING CLAUSE
'lg be prepared by the City Attorney.

ARTICLE 2. ESTABLISHI\fENT OF DISTRICTS AND
PROVISION FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAP

2-100. Official zoning map.
The City is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.










Supp. No. 11	1590
 


. . ·. ·. .
1-:::·_·._: ::·::.-:
. .
 
APPENDIX  A-ZONING	Art. 3

No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Ordinance. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation  of  this  Ordinance and punishable as provided under Article 11.
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map, which shall be located in the office of the City Secretary, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings and other structures in the City.
 

2-200. Replacement of official zoning map.
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the City Commission may, by resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning Map which  shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map.
The new  Official  Zoning  Map may  correct  drafting  or other t .		error8 or omissions in the prior  Official  Zoning Map, but  no such	correction	shall	have	the	effect	of	amending	the
original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof.

ARTICLE 3.

RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES

3-100.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
a. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;

1591
 
Art. 3	MARLIN  CODE	.- .-.·.·..
·.·..-·:·:.··.·
·.·	._.:_.,.
b.	Boundaries   indicated   as  approximately   following
platted  lot lines  shall  be  construed  as following such lot lines,;
c.	Boundaries indicated as approxim ately following City limits shall be construed as following such City limits;
d.	Boundaries indicated as following railroad rights·of­ way shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks;
e.	Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines and, in the event of change in the shore line, shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines;
f. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in Subsections a. through e. above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map;
g. Where physical or cultural features existing on  the ground are at vanance with those shown on the Officiru Zoning Map or in other circumstances not covered by Subsections a. through f. above, the Board of Adjustment  shall interpret the district boundaries;
h. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this Ordinance, the Board of Adjustment may permit, upon application of the owner, as a special exception the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot into the remaining portion of the lot.




1592
 

F:: ::::·::·· ·.
 
APPENDIX  A-ZONING	Art. 4

ARTICLE 4.
APPLICA'rION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 4-100.
The regulations set by this Ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided:
a.	No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, recon­ structed,   moved,   or   structurally  ·altered  except  in
'*		conformity with all of the regulations herein specified. . for the district in which it is located.
b.	No building or other structure shall  hereafter  be erected or altered:
 
1.	To exceed the height or bulk as set forth herein;
2.	To  accommodate  or  house  a  greater  number  of
-	families  as set forth  herein;
3.	To occupy a greater percentage of lot area as set forth herein;
4. To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance.
c.	No part of a yard ·or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this Ordinance shall be included  as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for  any  other building.
d.	No yard or lot existing at the time of passage or application of this Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements
1593

-
 
Art. 4	MARLIN  CODE

set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Ordi­ nance.
e.	All .territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City shall be considered to be agricultural until otherwise classified.

ARTICLE 5.

NONCONFORMING LOTS, NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND, NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES, NONCONFORMING  USES
OF STRUCTURE AND PREMISES AND NONCONFORMING CHARACTERISTICS OF USE
 
..·... .-- :_.._. ....
 

5-100. Intent.
Within	the	districts	established	by	this	Ordinance	or	- amendments that may later be adopted, there exist:
1.	Lots,
2.	Structures,
3.	Uses of land and structures, or
4.	Characteristics  of  use
·-vhich were lawful before  this Ordinance was passed or amended but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or future amendment. It is the intent of this Ordinance  to  permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed or abandoned, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as the grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.

1594
 

. .
:.	.
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	Art. 5
 
'.· .	A nonconforming  use of a structure, a nonconforming use
of land or a nonconforming use of structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged by any of the following by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises or by'..the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved.
To avoid undue hardship,  nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was	lawfully	begun	prior	to	the  effective	date   of  this Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been	carried  on  diligently.  Actual  construction  is  hereby defined		to	be		the		placing		of		construction	materials	in permanent  position  and  fastened  in  a  permanent  manner. Where	excavation,	demolition  or  removal	of  an  existing . building		has  · been  ·substantially	begun	preparatory	to rebuilding,  such  excavation  or demolition  or removal  and new construction shall be carried on diligently and without interruption.

5-200. Nonconforming lots of record.
In any district in which single family dwellings are permitted, a single family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Ordinance. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than these applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Adjustment.
If  two  or more  lots  or  portions  of  lots with  continuous frontage  in single ownership  are of record  on the effective
1595
 
Art. 5	MARLIN CODE

date of this Ordinance and if all or part of the lots do not meet the  requirements established for  lot width  and  area, the lands involved shall be considered  to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this Ordinance. No portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width  and area requirements estab- lished by this Ordinance. No division of any parcel may be made which creates a lot with depth, width or area less than the requirements stated in this Ordinance.
5-300. Nonconforming	uses	of	land	{or land	with minor structures only).
Where at the time of passage of this Ordinance lawful u e of land exists which would not be permitted  by  the regulations imposed by this Ordinance and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding $1,000.00, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:
a.	No	such   nonconforming	use	shall  be	enlarged	or increased  nor  extended  to  occupy  a  greater  area  of
 

·:.·_._;_:·_ :_. ··.
...j
 
land	than	was	occupied	at	the	effective	date	of	·.- adoption or amendment of this Ordinance;
b.	No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance;
c.	If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than thirty (30) days, any subsequent use of such land shall conforni to the regulations specified by this Ordinance for the district in which such land is located;
d.	No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this Ordinance shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.
5-400. Non conforming structures.
Where	lawful	structure	exists  at  the  effective  date  of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that could not be
1596
 

. ...
 

..   . -
 
APPENDIX  A-ZONING	Art. 5
 
1;_· ....:::- ....'. :·






























































\
 
built under the terms of this Ordinance by reason or restriction on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the . lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
a.	No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way  which  increases  its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity;
b.	Should such nonconforming structure or nonconform­ ing portion  of  structure  be  destroyed  by  any means to  an  extent  of  more than fifty percent  (50%)  of its
...replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance;
c.	Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which  it is located after it is moved.

5-500. Nonconforming uses of structures or of struc­ tures and premises in combination.
If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of $1,000.00 or more or of structures and premises in combination exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this Ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
a.	No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstruct­ ed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of  the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located;
b.	Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any   parts   of   a   building   which   were   manifestly

1597
 
Art. 5	MARLIN CODE
 

.......... . .
 
arranged  or  designed · for  such  use  at  the  time  of	··... adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, but no such
use sall be extended to occupy any land outside such building;
c.	If 'no structural alterations are made, any nonconform­ ing use of a structure, or  structure  and  premises, may as a special exception be changed to another nonconforming use, provided that the Board of Adjustment, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropri­ ate to the district than the existing nonconforming useJ. In permitting such change the Board of Adjustment may require appropriate  conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this Ordinance;
d.	Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a   permitted   use   shall  thereaf ter  conform  to  the
regulations for the district, and the nonconforming  use	.  i
may not thereafter be resumed;	'
e.	When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises . in · combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six (6) consecutive months or for eighteen (18) months during any three (3) year period (except when governmet .action impedes access to the premises), the structure or structure and premises in combination shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located;
f. Where nonconforming use status applied to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) (or other figure) of the replacement cost at time of destruction.

1598
 
APPENDIX  A-ZONING	Art. 5

5-600. Repairs and maintenance.
On any nonconforming  structure or portion of a structure· containing a nonconforming  use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs or  on repair  or replacement  of  nonbearing  walls,  fixtures, wiring, or plumbing to an extent not exceeding ten percent (10%) of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure  or  nonconforming  portion  of the structure as the case may [be], provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased.

If a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlaful due to lack of repairs and maintenance and is declared by  any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawf ul by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the
i
(		strengthening	·or	restoring	to	a	safe	condition	of	any building  or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official
charged with protecting the public safety upon order of such official.

5-700. Uses  under	special  exception  provisions  not nonconforming  uses.
Any use which is permitted as a special exception in a district · under the terms of this Ordince (other than a change through Board of Adjustment action · from a nonconforming use to another use not generally permitted in the district) shall not be deemed a nonconforming  use in such district but shall, without further action, be considered a conforming use.





1599
'    .
 
Art. 6	MARLIN CODE
ARTICLE 6.	 
DISTRICT  REGULATIONS

6-100.
• "
The  City  of  Marlin,  Texas,  is  hereby  divided  into  the following Zoning  Districts. All land, buildings, structures·or
appurtenances thereon located within the City which are hereafter occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed and erected shall be in conformance with the Zoning Regulation prescribed in which such land or building is located, as hereinafter provided.

6-200. z·oning districts enumerated.
Abbreviated
designation	Zoning District
 
R-8,400 R-4,200 R-2,100 C-0
C-1
C-2
C-3
M-1
M-2
P-D
 
One-family, Residential District Two-family, Residential District Multi-family, Residential District Office District
Restricted  Business District Commercial Business District Central  Business  District Industrial  Park  District General  Industrial  District Planned Development  District
 




..	-
 

 
6-300. Zoning district use regulations.
No land shall hereafter be used and no building· or structure shall hereafter be erected, moved or altered which is arranged or designed or used for other than those uses specified and set forth by the following schedule of uses.
Nou: All  of  the  uses	listed  are  subject   to  standards  of performance as set forth in Article 6-400.
Key to sched ule use	Use Allowed in District
Requires	Special	Use	Permit (See Section 6.700 for Procedure)
1600
 












. .  . ).lIf
 

 
/--	,---·-
 

/..... .' '
. . .
..· ..
: .·'..·'
 




 


TYPE USE
 
.
REMARKS
 

S.301   RESIDENTIAL USES	See Article S.400.

 











1-l
 


One-Family Dwelling Detached
One-Family Dwelling Attached Two-Family  Dwellin
Multiple-Family Dwelling or Apartment

Community Unit Development . Boarding or Rooming House
Hotel or Motel
 
-
••
•••
 

•
t
•
•.•;
 

Trailer or Mobile Home
 
.s: S
 
: See Article S.700 and
s ·  Definition, Art. 7
 







,g_,
1...,; ci I C'4 '.-4	Q	en
 
TYPE USE
 
' 0:: J:
 
0 J CJ 0	-	REMARKS
;
 
6-302   EDUCATIONAL, INSTITUTIONAL	-See Article 6-400·
 
.A   .Qlery or Musum	·-  . . -·	I-Ill .
 

•••
 
•	,..	..	...   . ...  •	-	I	. .. ..
 
1 ;,,.,;.,•  .;;:. . .,
,
 
II•
 
_C	r.Y or Ma.usolemn	· ill•1• ..	••
 
,..	:•e:
 
r-9
 
• •• •
,.
 
I-'
 
hll!ch_ or Rectol"Y. . ..  .
 
.


...
 
.1•	.1•	e; ••
 
s ;·s
 
,.	••..••
 
z
(")
 
yo e .  r Universiy .  _
 
$ •!
••
 
. .	0
••••
 
Qomm.u.nity Center. (!'ulic)	••,	'•
 
t%j
 
Day Camp	.·	.s ·s: s ·S a s s s s 9.
Day Nursery or Kindergarten	..	S. 81  si	s: s· B· s S. S· Subject to Health Dept. Fairground or Exhibit_ion Area				81 s. S; s, s
Fraternal Organization, Lodge
    or Civic Club		s. S S. S. s . s. s
Home for Care of Alconouc, Nar-
cotic or Psychiatric Patients	. .	· Si ·S' sr s·	Subject to Health Dept.


 
'	- ·
 
• '
. ....
 

--	---	· ·
..'...
. "



 
§ § g
.,; ""!.
 

..... i
 
lJ:
 
lI..... e-a I	Q
 
TYPE USE	0
 
I
0	(.)
 
:s	REMARKS
 
Hospital (Gener Acute Care)	•· •·• • •••1•
Hospital (Chronic Care)	•••••••
Philanthropic  Nature	••••••••	?;
 

Library (Public)
 
·s. si •••••••
 
.....
 
a·
Monastery_or  Convent	• s _$
 
"'ti
tzJ
 

O')
0
Cl)
 

Nursing Home or Residence Home for Aged
 

Si $  s s	Subject to Health Dept.
 
:><

N
 
Community Center	••• ••••••••	z
 
...
 
..•.:•••
 
School, Private, Primary	0
or Secondary	S. .s ·s _$· s s
 
School, Public or Denominational
 
..	••••••: ••
•
 
School, Business or Trade
 
- ...:
 


O>
 







 


.-4
t:i
TYPE USE	. J J
 


0 .-4	Ct)	IN i::i
I
0 0 (.) C) ::it ::g	REMARKS
'
 
6. -3. 03 UTIUT...Y.
 
, ACCESSORY
 
A. .N..D. IN·C- IDEN..TAL.i	See Article 6-400
 

 
I	"
Accessory B"uilding	14 •	•••••••
 


See Definition
 

Community Center (Private) . .
Electrical Generating .Plant
 
••••••••  ••• •
••• ••	-z
 
Electrical  Transmission  Line	.el •••
 
••••••
 




t:r:l
 
.E.lecmal .S.yhi,j{l.tjon	.•
Field or Construction Office
 
s .S

••
 
:   I	1•·••·••
•• •••• ••
 
Subject to Approval by
 
0
t:1
 
(Temporary)
 
•.I
 
i• •	•
 
Building Inspector
 
Fire Station or Similar Public Safety Building
 
•	•••••• •••
 
Gas Transmission  Line and	. .
Metering  Station	.
 
••••
 
Hoe Occupation	·t •••	See DP.finition
•1 ••
Local Utility Distribution Lines	·i• ••i •••,


 
\	ti
 

"""- ' .·.·.
 

,,,,...- .	..	·-.- -,	.-.·..

 


i8....
1	cf
 


I 1 er.>	lQ
 
. . .
. ·'. '. ·.·
 
TYPE USE	a:=.	0 0 0 0 :s	REMARKS
 

Off-Street Parking Incidental
tQ main Use	- -
 
.•:
 
•..
 
••• •• ••
 
Private Utiliy_ Shp or Storage	•••••
 









1-4
 
Public Building, Shop or Yard
of Local, State or Federal Govmment Radio or Television Mciro-Wave
Tower

Servants' Quarters or Caretakers'
 
•••·••••
••• ••	z
••••••••••	tj
 
01	Sewage Treatment Plant	s s
 
•••	!
 
Swimming Pool (Private)	·••• •••••••	-z
Telephone, Business Office	-	s s. s
Telephone Line and Exchange
Switching or Relay Station	s. 8 s
Water Reservoir, Water Pumping
Station or Well	s s s
 
Water Treatment Plant	s s s
 
•••••• • •
 

0)
 







 



TYPE USE
 
§
1.     f11u    1u71C7)   1011111p..	REMARKS
 
:>
;4-
0'l
 

6-304   RECREATIONAL & ENTERTAINMENT	See Article 6-40.0



 
Amusement, Commercial (Outdoor)
 
•t et •l•t•
 




........
m
0
0)
 
Amusement, Commercial (Indoor)	- " •l•l•l•l•l•
Country Club (Private) with
Golf Course	.$LSI  sJelel•l•1•1•1e
Golf Course (Public)	1'9'    9;lelelelelel•lele
Golf Course (Commercial)	.Sf SI s.J •i9tele·1e1e1e
 

2
0
0
t:l
M
 
Park or Playground (Public) Playfield or Stadium (Public)
 
-•I•I•I•t el•I•I•t•·
Sl	. I S 1 •1el.9' •1elet e
 
Private Club	•1 fl	e·Iei •·I•
 


Stable, Private Club

Stable, Comercial Rental
 
S S'I SilSI S·l SJ S'I.S•,•I..S
 

:··

 
·	-----
 
.   ::.:·:':
 

,,..-.	,,,--·	,,,,-. ·.
·· ..·.·.:·
.	. .

















 


,._,,

-..:]
 
lz':'.l
s;;


2
0
 






>
;l-
0)











 

......
0
00
 
-z
0
0
t:1
tx.l
 














 
....
 
.......
 
\	"-" -
 
)	: .· . ·. ·:
:.·..·
 

 
....---	,,.-- -
 
.,,,,-.:·.:-.
. . .
... .
 
















 






!-I­
CJ')
0
 
s
t
z
z
0










CJ)
 






 
8 § 8
1le-fI.... c:-:1 Cf)  ....	O·
 
>
;4-
0)
 
TYPE USE	.	0
Bakery or Confectionery Shop
 
I  I  I	I
0 () 0 )1·
 
::s d.
 

REMARKS
 
(Re_tail)	•••	•
•••••••
 
Cafeteria
Cleaning and Pressing Small
. Shop and Pick-Up
 
•••	•
 

Custom, Personal $_ervice Shop Drapery, Needlework or Weaving
 
Shop
0)
 
. -  - -	-   -·
 
•••	•
 
tz_--4
 
0	Florist _or Garden Shop		-
 
•••	•	()
 

Greenhouse Plants or Nursery
.. $tock (Retail)
 
•·••••	tj
 
Household Appliance Service
d Repair
 

Laundry or Cleaning Self-Service
 
•••	•
 
Mimeograph,  Stationery or Letter Shop
 
Mortuary  or Funeral Parlor Offices, Professional and Ad-
ministrative
 
•• •••••
•• •••••
 

. . .
. .

 
-	'5t .
 
'9··" .
 

 

.--··
. '
 
..-·'·,···
. ·.·.··.·
 





§	.
111l' i t i i i	·	I
TYPE USE	o:=.	u o u o ::e	REMARKS

 















1-l
:7)
1-l
1-l
 
Pawt?-. Sho.P_ _	• e e	e
Restaurant without Drive-In
Service	•e. •• e. • •
Rest_aurt with Drive-In Servic	• e e e e
Retail Stores and Shops Other
.. .Than Liste4	•le •	•
Studio for Photographer, Musi-	.
clan. Artist or Health	•· e e e • e •
Secondhand  Store, Used  Furniture	·
or Rummage Sale	• e e e e •
Tool or Trailer Rental	I• e e e e


See Article 6-1200 for
6-308  SIGNS & IDENTIFICATION USES:	additional information


Nrune Plate	9 e • 9 e • 9 • • • t
 


zs
N
0zz
0










O>
 






>
en













 

t..::>
 



t;1
ts=-1
 















."

 
'	'""'
 
· ····
 

 
,,--	/ -..
 

r . '
 

















 


".O.".">.'
 



>


c;')













CJ)
 







 
§
1l j ....	i	0
 
>
0')
 
TYPE USE	• 0:.
Cleaning Plant, Rugs or Carpets (S	Equipmen) . _
Clothing Manufacture or Llght
 
I I
0 0 0
••
••·
 
I
:s
••••• •
••
 
REM. ARKS
 
...C9mpo<lj11_g  or. Fabriati9n
 
•!
••
;• •••
 
Contractors Shop and Storage
.  Yard
 
.....
.....
 
ne and Mot Repairing
Feed Store

Heavy Machinery Sales & Storage

Printing
 
.,•., •
•••••	CJ
••••
 
Job Printing or Newspaper
Laundry Plant (Commercial)	•••• ••
 
t:)
tzj
 
Milk Depot, Dairy or Ice Cream
Plant

Paint Shop
Petroleum Products Storaie
·- Wholese
 
•••
•••••
•••
 
Plumbing Shop
 
•••• •• ••
 

. \

\;-·· ..•·
 
.. . . .
. . •  .
. . . . .
:<·:"· ·
 

,,,-	,,...-- '	<'--
 







TYPE USE

Scientific or Research Labs Storage and Sale of Furniture
or Appliances Outside Building

Storage or Sales Warhouse
 



-	8
C'il
J 0	MMAJU(S

•••	•
••
 
·, , ' r    '



.. ·.









?;
 



0'"")"
t-l
C71
 
Trade or Commercial School

Trailer Rental or Sales Transfer, Storage & Baggage
T.erminal
Wholesale Office & Sample Room
 
- -	z
><


z
0
 




6-311 NATURAL RESOURCES EXTRACTION


Extraction and Storage of Sand, Caliche, Stone or Gravel
 










 
TYPE·USE
Mining or Storage of Mining
_ ...Wastes
 
REMARKS
 





 



.....
(:7)
 
&312 : SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL PROCESS_,


Asphalt or Concrete Batching
Plant (Tempor)
Asphalt or Concrete Batching
Platlt (Permanent)
 
See Articles 6-405 -6-406
 

2
CJ
t:i
ttj
 
Cement or Hydrated Lime Manu­ facture
Dump or Sanitary Fill Area Open Salvage Yard for Rags,
. ._Machinery, Etc.

Meat Packing Plant Smelter or Refinery
 

.,, , .
 

'  .
. '
 
'	'-' . .
 
--:·. ,_
 

,,,	/ -	<- .'.'.
· . . '
:.· '·:· .



















 
.....
.C..D..
 
t:I
t
I


c:r.i
 
Art. 6	MARLIN CODE

6-400. Use performance standards by district.
The following standards of performance for any use shall apply to th_e following··districts in which they are located:

6-401. .Pietricts R-8, 400; R-4, 200 and R-2, 100.
a.	No retail or wholesale sales activity shall be  conduc­
ted;
b.	No electrical or powered devices shall be used that causes noise in excess of that of normal air conditioning units, electrical interference or radiation beyond the property lines;
c.	No Jictivity will be conducted that causes or creates abnormal noise, smoke, dust, obvious gases, odor or vibrations  beyond  the property line;
d.	No service. shall be rendered that causes abnormal commotion, generates traffic, or requires additional parking facilities beyond the minimum set forth in Section 6-1100 for Districts R-10,000 through R-2,100.
6-402. Diotrict C-0.
a.	No exchange of goods or sales shall be conducted on the property;
b.	No merchandise other than samples shall be dis­ played, and all merchandise shall be stored and displayed within a building and not visible from outside of the building.
6-403. District C-1.
a.	No wholesale sales shall be conducted;
b.	No merchandise or equipment shall be stored or displayed outside of a building;
c.	All products shall be sold and all services rendered inside a building, except that banks and savings and loan establishments may have drive-up-service;
d.	No noise, smoke, radiation, vibration or  concussion, heat or glare shall be produced  that is perceptible  outside of
1618
 

- -·.... . ·...



















'  .  .
 


.... . .
.   ...
.:. ·.:. :.....
\ - .: ..·.: .
·. .·
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	Art. 6

a building and no dust, fly ash or gas that is toxic, caustic, or obviously injurious to humans or property shall be produced.

6-404. Districts C-2 and C-3.·
a; Drive-up or drive-in service may be provided at any establishment;
b.	Any manufacturing, storage of materials for, or assembly of products as permitted above shall be entirely within a totally enclosed building;
c.	No noise, smoke,  radiation, vibration or concussion, heat or glare shall be produced that is perceptible outside of a building, and no dust, fly ash or gas that is toxic, caustic or obviously injurious to humans or property  shall  be prod uced.

6-405. District M-1.
a. All operations shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building;
b. All storage of  materials,  prod ucts or equipment  shall . be within  a fully enclosed building or in an open yard so screened that said materials, products or equipment are not visible at eye level within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line;
c. ,No use shall be permitted or so operated as to produce or emit:
1. Smoke or particulate matter of a No. 1 or darker on the Ringelmann Chart;
2.	Dust, fly ash, radiation, gases, heat, glare or other effects which are obviously injurious to humans at the property line;
3.	Vibration or concussion perceptible without instru­ ments at the property line;
4.	The noise level shall not exceed the following levels at any point along the property line:

1619
 

I
\
 
Art. 6	MARLIN CODE

Octave band
0-7p Cycles P Second . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . .55 db.
75-1,,200 C.P.S. .... . . .... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . ... .40 db.
1,2004,800 C.P.S. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .25 db.
A}?ve 4,800 C.P.S. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 db.
5.	Industrial wastes shall be of such a quantity and nature as to not overburden the  public  sewage disposal facilities or to cause odor and unsanitary effects beyond the property line.
6-406. District M-2.
a.	Vibration	or	concussion	shall	not	be . perceptible without  instruments  at the property  line;
b.	The noise level  shall not exceed  the levels given in subsection C-4 above at any point along the property line.
6-700. Special use permits.
The City Council of Marlin, Texas, after following the procedure set forth in Article 10, Procedures for Amend­ ments or Special Use Permits, and after recommendation by the City Council may authorize the issuance of Special Use Permits for the uses indicated by "S" in the Use Schedule, Section 6-300, and including the following:
1.	Amusement	parks,	commercial	baseball  or  athletic fields, race tracks, circuses, carnivals or fairgrounds;
2.	Cemeteries, mausoleums or crematories for the dispos- al of the human dead;
3.	Fraternal/civic organization club houses;
4.	Day nurseries;
5.	Drive-in theaters in Districts C-2 and M-2;
6.	Golf   driving  ranges,  commercial	or  illuminated,  m Districts C-2 and M-2;
7.	Gun clubs, skeet shoots or target ranges;
8.	Hospitals for the insane or feeble-minded or alcoholic or drug addis, or penal or correctional institutions;
1620
 

·. . . .

 





























; .
 

. . .. :..·..··.
\·. .>_:_:.-
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	Art. 6

9.	Picnic groves and fishing lakes, including minor and incidental concession facilities for patrons only;
10.	Mines or quarries, including the removing, screening,
·crushing, washing or storage of ore, sand, clay, stone, gravel or similar materials; provided, however, that no Special Use Permit shall be issued unless the location's site  plan,  and method  of  operation,  including neces· sary structures, have been submitted to and approved in writing by the City Council, after report from the Planning  Commission,  which  Permit  shall be  for  a limited period of time not to exceed five (5) years;
 
11.

•#
12.
13.

14.
. .	15.
\	16.
17.
18.
 
Nursery	sales	office,	building	or	greenhouse (wholesale or retail);
Radio, television and microwave towers;
Reservoirs, wells, towers, filter beds, or water supply plants;
Riding stables and tracks;
Sewage,  refuse,  garbage  disposal  plants  or sanitary fills;
Storage and sale of L.P. gas other than bulk plants; Swimming pools, commercial;.
Mobile home parks or trailer courts in District R·4,200 and R-2,100 only, subject to the following regulations:
(a)	Lot area per family shall be 3,500 square feet;
(b)	Space between mobile homes shall not be less than
30 feet;
(c)	Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each unit;
(d)	All	drives	and	parking	areas  shall  be  paved according to City Standards;
(e)	Private drives and streets not dedicated as public rights-of-way shall be no less than twenty  (20) feet in width;
 

1621
 
Art. 6	MARLIN CODE

(f)	Protective lighting shall be provided on the site;
(g) Playground space shall be provided, the adequacy in terms of size and location to be approved by the Planning  Commission;
(h) ·All units shall be connected to public sewer and water;
(i) Storm drainage facilities shall  be  according  to City policy and approved by the City Engineer.
19.	Junk and salvage yards in District M-2;
20.	Buildings, structures and premises for public utility services of public service corporations, which  build­ ings ..or uses the City Council, after report of the Planning  Commission,  deems  reasonably  necessary for public convenience or welfare.
Such conditions as to operation, site development, parking, signs and time limit as may be deemed necessary in order that such use will not seriously injure the appropriate use of neighboring property will conform to the general intent and purpose of this Ordinance. Such uses shall comply with the height and area regulations of the district in which they may be located, except that radio, television and microwave towers, and drive-in theater screens may exceed said height regulations.

6-801. Planned	development	district uses permitted and procedure for approval.
The City Council of the City of Marlin, Texas, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected and after recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commis­ sion, may authorize the creation of the following types of Planned Development Districts:
1.	Shopping center on tracts of three (3) or more acres;
2.	Housing development on tracts of three (3) or more acres, or a Comm unity Unit Development;
3.	Industrial  Parks or Districts  on tracts of ten (10) or more acres;
 

. . .:" · "/JI















ji
 
1622
 
APPENDIX  A-ZONING	Art. 6

4.	Medical center and/or hospital;
5.	Civic center and/or community center;
6.	.. Office center;
.7.	Recreation center;
8.	Educational complex;
9.	A combination of any of the developments listed in I to 7 above;
10.	Transition Districts as an extension of an existing district whereby the provision of off-street parking, screening walls,  open space planting  would create a
.•	protective	transition	between	a  lesser	and  a  more restrictive district.

6-802.
In establishing a Planned Development District in accordance with this section, the City Council shall require a comprehensive plan of the development. Such site plan shall be approved and filed as part of the Ordinance prior to
\	the issuance of any Building Permit in a Planned Development District. Such required plan and Ordinance shall set forth the requirements for ingress and egress to the property, public or private streets or drives with  adequate right-of-way to conform to the Thoroughfare Plan of  the City of Marlin, sidewalks, utilities, drainage, parking space, height of building, maximum lot coverage, yards and open spaces, screening walls or fences and other development and protection of the adjacent property.

6-803.
Every Planned Development District approved under the provisions of this ·Ordinance shall · be considered as an amendment to the Ordinance as applicable to the property involved. In approving the Planned Development  District, the City Council may impose conditions relative to the standard of development, and such conditions shall be complied with before a Certificate of Occupancy is issued for

1623

\
 
Art. 6	MARLIN CODE
 

. .	,
 
the use of the land or any structure which is part of the	·:;
Planned Development, and such conditions shall not be construed as conditions_ precedent to the approval of zoning amendments but shall be construed  as conditions precedent to the granting of a Certificate of Occupancy.

6-804.
All Planned Development Districts approved in accord­ ance with the provisions of this Ordinance  in  its  original form or by subsequent amendments thereto shall be referenced on the Zoning District Map, and a list of such Planned Development Districts,  together  with  the category of uses permitted therein, shall be maintained  in  the Appendix df the Ordinance.

6-805.
A public hearing may be held on any site plan required as a condition of a Planned Development District when such plan is submitted or whenever significant changes are proposed in such plan, and the public hearing shall be subject to the same procedure of notice as is specified for amending the Zoning Ordinance.

6-900. Height and area regulations.
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in the district in  which it is located,  unless it conforms with all of the minimum regulations set forth herein on the following schedule.










1624
 
'. . ......-  .
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	Art. 6
 

MINIMUM	LOT	REQUIREMENTS



RIGH. T CW WAY._.._..	,_
PltOlt!RTY	f
T----1 -IUILDI .. LIH
I l	I
I +I ---- I	-;-
·-	r
·----··
I ei I..	.


JttGHT 0, WAY
-,--- --t-;
. IJ	'\   \
 
tI --- --_-
 

\ - \
 

'°" DIM  NllOHt.  If!POLLDWING   1.-111
1-901	•·.MINIMUM	"°"T YAltD
••902.1   •·MINIMUM  ltDI  YAJtD
1-901.I a. MUUMuM	lD! YAftD .. CONCR LOT'
1-901	•·MU.IMUM ltlAtt YAltD
•-to4	e. MAXIMUM MEl8HT
1- 905	f. MINfMUM DWELLING •r ZC ·
I-IOI	t· MI NIMUM LOT .HE.A
1-107	t.. UNU UM LOT WIDTH
1-901 I MINIMUM i.OT DEPTH
•-909	J MU MUM	UILOtNI  COVlltAllE





1625
 
I	I	\	\
-1--\
.	·-·-\-l

Ill TAILH o THl'OUtH 1
1-eoa -1,Mt
 
Art. 6
 
MARLIN CODE
 

·.. ·..::- .·..-.. ·.: .·
 







CORNER	LOT
 
_J	I	HI    TAILE
 
b • o 1-toz.1 a 1-eo1.z
 
-1	-	--,----
,---- -1
..	i	I	.
I	Cl  I	I
 
I
I	f	I
I	I I
 
I " I
I	I
! i
--I--•-1.---
 


 
Cl·  lf l NI UUllJ  L07 AREA
h X I RECTANa\JLAFI LDT ll1+ h 2.X I I M!OULAll L.01'
t,i 1-x -i.2 x -11,x1-2
h1 ><1-1+,l-1
J.  MAXI MUM  BUILDI NG
    C:OV!RAOE 	 GROUND    f l.OOR +
•LOT UIA
 
f·-	1
I1------JI
 
.:i	'	I











1626
 

. . · . ·  . -
·:.. . ·... . .
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	Art.6

YARD	REQUIREMENTS	BUILDINGS	OVER
2	STORIES	DISTRICT	R - 2100


FRONT	AND	R EAi	YARDS
 


 
\
//	W//.hf \
 
SIDE
E LEVATION
 

 
FRONT YARD
 
\ REAR YARD
 





 





\

LOT	WIDTH AND  SIDE YARDS



FRONT OR REAR
ELEVATION
I	\
\
\
I	\
\
\
\
 
P.Lv
 


h
b•	2•

1627
 
\ P.L .
 	b 	
 
\
 
Art. 6	MARLIN CODE	. .   .  ·. .
·..
·.	.:


L.OTS WITH MoR E THAN I APARTMENT BUILDING I LOT - BUILDING SPACING
•.•o·	l"ftONT  TO    RONT

 
..	 
"l'.All  TO REAR
 
•tDE  TO  llDr




. HlltHT Ott  50' )fHICHEVU  IS L!8S
 

 
 
NOfl ""°
 

MOIH THAN  so•
 
H!llttT  IUT NOT  Lfll THAN	O'
IE





'"°'" TO llDf


1628
 

------..	/ .: :_ ..
.. ' :.. :.. : "
. .



 


Type Use
 

C'l1	.,.....
Cl\	0•
 

....	Cf,)
 



'""4	IN
 


c:i
 
I
0	0	0	i;i..
;
6-901	a.   MINIMUM FRONT YARDS (IN FEET)
Any Use	25	25	25	25	25	25	0	25	25	25

S..002.1	b.   MINIMUM SIDE YARDS (IN FEET)
Residential Uses	10% of lot width
Up t.o 2 st.ories	5' Minimum- 15' Maximum	*	*	•	•	•	*	See
Section
 
Residential Uses
 
1/2 height or 25' which-	6-800
 
Over 2 stories	•	ever is greater   .	*	*
><
cc	6-902.2	c.   MINIMUM SIDE YARD CORNER LOT	t
Any Use	7	7	7	25	25	25	0	25	25	25

6-903	d. MINIMUM REAR YARD (lN FEET)	0
Resfttential	15 or 1/2 height which-	See
Main Building	15	15	. ever is greater not to	Section
exceed 50'	6-800
Other  Uses	15	15	15	15	15	"'*	**	**	**	0
* This particular use not permitted in District.
,..... Nq Limitations.	Q)
 







8	g	8
 
<N
"'1'
 
C'.:J	0	Ct;)	Cl
 
·	c)	c)	0	c)	:k
 
Any Use	35	35	**	35	35	•••
 
••	....	*"'	.
 
6-904	e.  MAXlMUM BUILDING HEIGHT (IN FEET)
 
...
 
6-905	f.  MINIMUM DWELLING SIZE SQUARE FEET LIVING SPACE

Residential
2 stories	1000	900	600	•	•	•	•	"'	•	600
More than 2	"'	•	*	**	••	**	....	••	••	••
r-&	stories
Minimum dwelling sizes shall be complete exclusive of	0
breezeway , open porches, carports, garages, access	0
hallways, and accessory buildings or spaces for accessory	ti
uses.

Zone Standards
Use R-8400 R-4200 R-2100 C-0 C-1 C-2 C-3 M-1 M-2 PD
MINIMUM LOT AREA (SQUARE FEET/FAMILY)
One Family
Dwelling detached	8400	8400	8400	*	*	*	*	*	*	8400
MINIMUM LOT AREA (SQUARE FEET/FAMILY)
One Family
Dwelling attached	*	8400	8400	*	*	*	*	*	*	8400
MINIMUM LOT AREA (SQUARE FEET/FAMILY)
Two family 
 Dwelling	*	4200	4200 3500
MINIMUM LOT AREA (SQUARE FEET/FAMILY)
Multiple Family dwelling
2  stories	*	*	2100 2100
MINIMUM LOT AREA (SQUARE FEET/FAMILY)
Multiple Family dwelling
More than
2 stories	* 2100	1500	1500	1000	1000	*	*	1000	


MINIMUM LOT WIDTH (FEET)
><
70	*	*	•	"'	•	*	*	t
0
Dwelling  attached	*	35	35	*	*	•	•	•	*	•
0
Two Family
Dweiling	*	70	70	•	*	•	•	•	•	*
Multiple Family
2  stories	•	•	70	•	•	•	•	*	•	•
Multiple Family	100' (or twice the height
 
More  than	*	•
2 stories
 
whichever; greater)
 
•	•	varies
 
* This particular ue not permitted in District.	Q)
 







 
8	8
IN	...c
""2'	IN	0	...c	IN	""
 


...c
 

c-:1	0
 


6-908
 

I
C,.)

MINIMUM WT DEPTH
 
i.
;
*	*	varies
0	0

 
6-909	j.  BUILDING COVERAGE OF LOT
All Uses	35%	40%	40%	50%	50%	50%	lOOo/o'
 

50o/o	*
 

,_
0
0
ti
t;rj












. . .
.
. .	·.· ..
:.. :
-	\
 
.  ..·
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	Art. 6
 
---
 
\ · . . ·.. . .
- ··.·
 

6-910. Spacing	between	residential buildings	with more than one mail\ building per lot.
The o:Pen space between buildings shall not be less than:
1.	One-half	the   height	of	the  building	but  need	not
,exceed  50  feet  from  side of  one building  to  side of another;
2.	15· feet	from	corner	of	one  building	to  comer  of another;
3.	50 feet from front of one building to front of another;
4.	50 feet from front of one building to rear of another;
5.	50 feet from front of one building to side of another;
6.	One-half the height of the building but not less than 30 feet nor need it be more than 50 feet from rear of one building to rear of another.

6-1000. Supplementary clishict regulaO.ons.

· 6-1001. Visibility  at intersections.
On a comer lot in any district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as materi,ally to impede vision between a height of two and one-half (212/ ) feet and ten (10) feet above the center line grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by th street lines of such comer lots and a line joining  points along said street lines twenty-five (25) feet from the point of the intersection of curbs.

6-1002. Fences, walls and hedges.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Ordinance, fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard, provided that no fence, wall or hedge along the sides or front edge of any front yard shall be over two and one-half (21/2) feet in height.

1633
 
Art. 6	MARLIN CODE

6-1003. Accessory buildings.	.)
Accessory building must conform to all height area and yard requirements of the district within which they are located, except that an accessory building may be placed within ·a required rear yard but no more than seven and one-half (71/2) feet from the rear property line. No accessory building may be placed or erected within five (5) feet of any other building.

6-1004. Erection of more than one principal structure
on a lot.
In any district more than one structure housing a permitted or permissible principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other requirements of this Ordinance shall be met for each structure as provided in this Ordinance. A site plan must be submitted to the Building Inspector and approved before a building permit for the structure can be issued.

 
6-1005. Exceptions to height regulations.
The height limitations contained in the Schedule of District Regulations are exempt for spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and. not intended for human occupancy with approval after public hearing of the Planning Commission.
 

. .JI
 

6-1006. Structures to have access.
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking.

 
6-1007. Parking, storage or use of major recreational
equipment.
For	purposes	of	these	regulations,	major	recreational equipment  is defined  as including boats and boat trailers,
1634
 







")II
 

.· :. . . ..

 
























\



























\
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	Art. 6

travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles) motorized dwellings, tent trailers, and th. like, · and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment whether occupied by such equipment or not. No major recreational  equipment shall be parked or stored on any lot in a residential district except in a carport or enclosed building or behind the nearest portion of a building to a street; provided, however, that such equipment may be parked  anywhere on residen­ tial premises for not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours during loading or unloading. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for sqch use.

6-1008. Parking and storage of certain vehicles.
Automotive vehicles or trailers of · any kind or tYJ>e without current license plates shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in completely enclosed buildings.
In	any	of   the	residential	districts,   no   parking	space, . garage  or  carport  or other  vehicle  storage  space or  structure shall  be  used  for  the  storage  of  any  truck,  truck  trailer  or van,  except  panel  and pick-up  trucks  not exceeding  one and one-half (1112) ton capacity.

6-1100. Parking and loading requirements.
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered, or converted for any use permitted in the district in which it is located unless there shall be provided on the lot or tract or within 150 feet of such building  or structure vehicle spaces for the uses specified in the designated district, and no existing vehicle parking in connection with said uses at the effective date of this Ordinance may be reduced below the minimum number of spaces as hereinafter required. Uses in District C-3, Central Business District, are exempt from these require­ ments.
1635
 
Art. 6	MARLIN CODE
 

. .  .·.
.. . . . . : ...
 
Use
Shopping centers containing more than 4 separate busi- nesses as a part of Plan­ ned Development District
 
Parking requirements
5.5 spaces per 1000 square feet of gross leasable area (See definition)
 
·.· . ·...·...
 
Motels,	Hotels,	Clubs·  and	One space per sleeping room Tourist  Courts
 
Restaurants, Cafeterias
 
One space per 3 seats (Mini­ mum 5 spaces)
 

Retail,	Personal	Service	or	One	space  per	100  square
Offices		feet (Minimum 5 spaces)
Places	of) Public	Assembly	One space per 3 seats (i.e.,	Churches,	Theaters,
Meeting Rooms, Etc.)
 
Manufacturing,  Warehous­ ing and Storage

Hospitals Golf Course
 
One space per 1.5 employee or 1 space per 1000 sq. ft., whichever is greater
One space per 2 beds
30 spaces
 






\
..Ji-
 
High	School,	College,	Uni-	One  space per  teacher  sta- versity				tion	plus	1  space/2	stu­
dents
 
Jr.	High	and	Elementary School
 
One  space per  teacher  sta­ tion plus 5 spaces
 

Residence, Apartment,  Sleep-	Two  spaces  for  each  dwel-
. ing Room, Mobile Home	ling unit, sleeping room, or
other housekeeping unit
 
Gasoline Service Stations, Repair Garages, Glass Re­ placements, MUffler Shoi)s, Tire Replacement and Re­ pair
 
Minimum 6 spaces or 3 spaces per mechanic, whichever is greater
 


1636
 
APPENDIX   A-ZONING	Art. 6

Loading: The loading and unloading of any vehicle from any business or industrial use shall be conducted in such a manner as not to obstruct freedom of traffic movement on any public way, sidewalk, or alley.
6-1).01. Other parking regulations.
a.	All spaces shall be off·street.
b.	Parking for uses requiring more than 4 spaces shall be in a parking lot with ingress and egress by driveways not to exceed 35 feet in width.
c.	The parking space shall be at least 9.0 feet by 20 feet, plus the maneuvering space necessary to ulize each space.
d.	··Any lights used to illuminate parking areas shall be directed away from any adjacent residence.
e.	Parking areas and spaces shall be permanently surfaced with either asphaltic or Portland cement concrete, according to City specifications.
f. No portion of the parking area, including maneuvering space, shall extend into the public right·of·way or alley.
\
g.  Where   a  question   arises  concerning  the  minimum
off·street parking requirement for any use not specifically listed, the requirements may . be interpreted as those of a similar listed use.
6-1200. Sign regulation.
The districts in· which signs may be permitted are enumerated in Article S.308. The following regulations shall apply to the various types of signs and attention·getting devices.
6-1201. Permanent signs.
 

Type Sign
Nameplate


Institutional sign
 

Maximum  area	Zoning Districts
;4'q. ft.	Residential
No restriction	Other district
30 sq. ft.	Residential No restriction
1637
 
Spacing Stand ards
 
Art. 6	MARLIN CODE


Type Sign	Maximum area	Zoning Districts
 

.'

Spacing	                         Stand ards
 

 
Apartment	50 sq. ft.	All districts permitting Apartments
Business sign	No restriction	In districts per·
mitted
 
1/street frontage
 

 
Advertising signs or Billboards
TEMPORARY SIGNS:
 
No restriction	In districts permitted
 
Real   Estate	..
Construction
 
12 sq. ft.
60 sq. ft.
 
All districts	1/site 1/site
 
Development


6-1203.
 
900 sq. ft.	1/100 acres
 

1"o signs shall be constructed to exceed the maximum building height of the district.

6-1204.
No sign shall be located so as to interefere or cause confusion with traffic control devices.

6-1205.
No sign  in a residential district· or within 100 feet of a residential district shall be directly illuminated or of a flashing  type.

Signs may protrude into  a public right-of-way, but  no part of the sign shall extend beyond the back of the curb. Where no curbs are existing, the building inspector shall establish the curbline or limit line.


 
1638
 

../.!.Ji
 


. .··..· . ..·..
 
APPENDIX   A-ZONING	Art.7
 
<:·- -·_-.- : .	ARTICLE   7.
DEFINITIONS

7-100.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following words and terms as used herein are defined to mean the following:
Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular nU.tnber include the plural, and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "building" includes the word "structure," the word "shall" or the word "must" is mandatory; the term "used for" includes the mef!ning "designed for" or "intended for."
Accessory building or use: A subordinate building having a use customarily incident to and located on the lot occupied by the main building or a use customarily incident to the main use of the property. A building housing an accessory use is considered an integral part of the main building when
it has any part of a wall in common with the main building
!	or is under an extension of the main roof and designed as
\	an integ-ral part of the main building.
Agriculture: The planting, cultivating, harvesting and storage of grains, hay or plants commonly grown in the vicinity. The raising and feeding of livestock and poultry sha)l be considered an agricultural venture if the area in which the livestock or poultry is kept is ten (10) acres or more in area and if such raising of livestock and poultry is incidential or supplemental to the raising of crops.
Alley: A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side or properties otherwise abutting  on a street.
Alteration: Any addition, removal, extension, or change in the location of any exterior wall of a main building or accessory  building.
Apartment: A rc>om or a suite of rooms within an apartment  house  arranged,  intended  or designed  for  a place

1639
 
Art. 7	MARLIN CODE
 
...
 
. .. \
 

of residence of a single family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
Apartment house: A building arranged, intended, or designed for more than two families.
Apartment hotel: An apartment house which furnishes for the use of  its  tenants  services  ordinarily  furnished  by hotels, but the privileges of which are  not  primarily available to the public.
Basement: A story below the first story, as defined under "Story," counted as a story for height regulations if subdivided and used for dwelling purposes other than by a janitor  or w.a.tchman employed on the premises .
Block:  A  piece  or parcel  of  land  entirely surrounded  by
public highways or streets other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the Building Inspector shall determine the outline of the block.
Boarding house or lodging house: A building other than a hotel occupied as a single housekeeping  unit where lodging or	meals	are	provided	for	five	or	more	persons	for · compensation,  pursuant  to  previous  arrangements,  but  not for the public or transients.
Building: An enclosed structure anchored to permanent foundation and having exterior or party walls and a roof, designed for, the shelter of persons, animals or property. When divided by other than common or contiguous walls, each portion or section of such building shall be regarded as a separate building, except that two buildings connected by a breezeway shall be deemed as one building.
Court: An open, unoccupied space other than a yard, bounded on three or more sides by exterior walls of a building or by exterior walls of a building and lot lines on which walls are allowable.
Curb level: The mean level of the curb in front of the lot or in case of a corner lot along that abutting street where the mean curb level is the highest.

1640
 
-  .  . . .·
..._ .:...·.: :
. • .
>




































. ·,
I
)I





























, .	.·
·.   ...,/
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	Art. 7

Dwelling: A building or portion thereof designed exclu­ sively for residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family and ..multiple dwellings, boarding and lodging houses, apartment houses and apartment hotels, but not hotels, house trailers or mobile homes.
Dwelling, one-famil y: A detached building arranged, intended or designed for occupancy by one family.
Dwelling, two-famil y: A building arranged, intended or designed for occupancy by two families.
Dwelling, multiple: A building or portion thereof ar­ ranged, intended or designed for occupancy by three or more families, including apartment houses, row ·houses, tenements and·-apartment hotels.
Family: One (1) or more persons who are related by blood or marriage, living together and occupying a single housekeeping unit with  single kitchen facilities,  or a group of not more than five (5) (excluding  servants),  living together by joint agreement and occupying a single housekeeping  unit with single kitchen facilities.
\		Garage, community: A building or portion thereof other than a public, private or storage garage as defined below, providing storage for motor vehicles with facilities for washing, but no other services, such garage to be in lieu of private garages within a block or portion of block.
Garage, private:  An accessory building for storage only of motor vehicles.
Garage, public: A building or portion thereof designed or used for the storage, sale, hiring, care or repair of motor vehicles which is operated for commercial purposes.
Garage, storage: A building or portion thereof, except those defined as a private, public or community garage providing storage for more than four (4) motor vehicles with facilities for washing but no other services.
Gross leasable area: The total floor area of all buildings designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including

1641
 
Art. 7	MARLIN CODE

basement, mezzanine and upper floors,  if  any,  measured from the center line of joint :Partitions and from outside wall faces.
Height  of  buildings: The vertical  distance measured  from the highest of the following three levels:
a.	From the street curb level;
b.	From the established or mean street grade in case the curb has not been constructed;
c.	From the average finished ground level adjoining the building if it sets back from the street line to the level of the..highest point of the roof .
Height  of	yard	or  court: The  vertical  distance  from  the
lowest level of such yard or court to the highest point of any
boundary wall.
Home occupation: An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that:
a.	No person other than members  of the family residing on the premises  shall be engaged in such occupation;
b.	The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than wenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation;
c.	There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding one square foot in area, non-il­ luminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building;
d.	No home occupation shall be conducted  in any accessory building;
e.	There shall be no sales on the premises in connection with such home occupation;

1642
 

· :.·.··..·   .
 

-  . .
.-    - . .

 






































\





















\
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	Art. 7

f. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard;
g. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence or outside the dwelling  unit  if conducted  in  other  than  a  single-
.,. family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctua­ tions in line voltage off the premises.
Hotel: A building occupied or used as a temporary abiding place of individuals or groups of individuals who are lodged, with or without meals, and in which there are more than twelve (12) sleeping rooms and no provisions for· cooking in individual rooms.
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one main building or unit group of buildings and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incident thereto, including such open spaces as are required under this Ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a public street or approved place. A lot as used herein may consist of one or more platted lots or tract or tracts, as conveyed, or parts thereof.
Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. A comer lot shall be deemed to front on that street on which it has its least dimension, unless otherwise specified by the Building Inspector.
Lot interior: A lot whose .side lot lines do not abut upon any  street.

1643
 
Art. 7	MARLIN CODE

Lot, through: An interior lot having frontage on two streets.
Lots in separate ownership at the time of passage of this ordinance: A lot whose boundary lines along their entire length touched lands under other  ownership  as  shown  by plat or deed recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county on or before the date of the adoption of this Ordinance.
Lot lines: The lines bounding a lot, as defined herein.
Lot lines, front: The boundary between a lot and the street on which it fronts.
Lot lines; rear: The boundary line which is opposite and most distant from the front street line, except that in the case of uncertainty the Building Inspector shall determine the rear line.
Lot line, side: Any lot boundary line not a front or rear line thereof. A side line may be a party lot line, a line bordering on an alley or place or a side street line.
Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance from the front street line to the rear line.
Lot width: The horizontal distance between side lines measured at the front building line.
Nonconforming use, building or yard: A use, building or yard which does not, by reason of design, use or dimensions, conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. It is a legal nonconforming use if established prior to the passage of this Ordinance.
Place: An open, unoccupied space other than a street or alley permanently established or dedicated as the principal means of access to property abutting thereon.
Service f foor area: The total floor area of a building exclusive of  stairways,  rest  rooms,  storage rooms,  hallways or other areas which are not regularly used by inhabitants, visitors, employees, clients, customers, patients or patrons in their normal everyday use of the building.

1644
 
: ..:......... .
.	.
:.II





















i . .
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	Art. 7
                         Sign: Any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs or trademarks by which information is made known, such as are used  to identify  a building,  structure or object or to

designate	or	mention	an	individual,	profession,	firm,
business or commodity.	.	
Stable, private: An accessory building for the keeping of horses or ponies or cows owned by occupants of the premises and not kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
Stable, public: A stable other than a private or riding stable, as defined herein.
Stable, riding: A structure in which horses or ponies, used exclusively for pleasure riding or driving, are  housed, boarded or kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
Story: The interior space of a building whose ceiling height is not more than four (4) feet above the curb level or the established mean street grade in the case that the curb has not been constructed or the average finished ground level adjoining the building.
Street: A right-of-way which affords principal means of vehicular access to property abutting thereon.
Street line: The dividing line between the street and the abutting property.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, including but not limited to signs and excepting utility poles, fences and retaining walls.
Structural alterations: Any alteration involving a change in or addition to the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
Trailer (house) or mobile home: Any structure, including canopies and other attachments, used for living or sleeping purposes which has no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses, or skirtings and which has been or reasonably may be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place.

1645

\
 
Art. 7	MARLIN CODE	 
Trailer or mobile home park: Land used or intended to be
used, let or rented for occupancy by 25 or more house trailers or mobile homes.
Tourist court or motel: A tract or parcel of land upon which tw-o or more tourist sleeping units and the required parking areas are located.
Variance: Relief from or variation of the proviSions of these  regulations,  other than  Use Regulations,  as applied to a specific piece of property, as distinct from rezoning, as further set out hereinafter in Powers and  Duties  of  the Board  of Adjustment.
..
Yard: An open space at grade between a building and the
adjoining	lot lines unoccupied	and  unobstructed	by  any portion  of a structure from the ground upward,  except as otherwise provided. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width  of a side yard, the depth of a front yard	or  the  depth	of	a  rear  yard,  the  least  horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be
used.	Where	lots	abut	a	street	that	is	designated	a	i
thoroughf are on the Thoroughfare Plan, all yards abutting said street shall be measured from a line one-half of the proposed right-of-way width from the center line or from the lot line, whichever provides the greater setback. O:n other lots   l yards abutting a street shall be measured from a line twenty-five (25) feet from the center line or from the lot line, whichever provides the greater setback.
Yard, front: A yard across the full width of the lot from the front line of the  main  building  to  the  front  line  of the lot.
Yard, rear: A yard between the rear lot line and the rear line of the main building and the side lot lines.
Yard, side: A yard between the main building and the adjacent side line of the lot and extending entirely from the front yard to the rear yard.


1646
 


- - .
.. . . .
\,:::::_-:::- .




















/  .
i .
\ '
 
APPENDIX  A-ZONING	Art. 8

ARTICLE 8.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

8-100. Administration and enforcement.
An administrative official designated by the City Council shall administer and enforce this Ordinance. He may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the City Council may direct.
If the administrative official shall find that  any of the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the actioh necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal  additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done, or he shall take any other action authorized by this Ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.

8-101. Building permits required.
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a permit therefor issued by the administrative official. No building permit shalt be issued by the administrative official except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, unless he receives a written order from the Board of Adjustment in the form of an administrative review, special exception or variance, as provided by this Ordinance.

8-102. Application for building permit.
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans, in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any, and the location and dimensions of the proposed building  or  alteration.  The  application  shall  include  such

1647
 
Art. 8	MARLIN CODE
 
:	. . .
 

...
 

other information as lawfully inay be required by the administrative official, including existing or proposed building or alteratio11; eX:isting or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accom­ modate; ·-conditions existing on the lot, and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance.
One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the administrative official after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. The original and one copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the administrative official.

8-103.  Certificates	of	zoning	compliance	for	new, altered or nonconforming uses.
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefor by the administrative official,  stating  that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance.
No nonconforming structure or use shall be maintained, renewed, changed or extended until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the administrative official. The certificate of zoning compliance shall state specifically wherein the nonconformity differs from the provisions of this Ordinance.
No permit for erection, alteration, moving or repair of any building shall be issued until an application has been made for a certificate of zoning  compliance, and the certificate shall be issued in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance upon completion of the work.
A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued   by  the  administrative   official  for  a  period   not
1648
 
....... .. .:. ·
. .
























, •  •	l
. . . .)I>
 
· . . )'
 


.. . • .    .	.
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	Art. 8
 
\ ::.· · · :	exceeding	six	(6)	months	during	alterations	or    partial
occupancy of a building pending its completion provided that such tempor certificate may include such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public.
The administrative official shall maintain a record of all certificates of zoning compliance, and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person.
Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be a violation of this Ordinance and punishable under Section 11of this Ordinance.

8-104	Expiration of building permits. ·
•#

If the work described in any building perm.it has not begun within sixty (60) days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire; it shall be cancelled by the administrative official, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected.
If the work described in any building permit has not been substantially completed within two (2) years of the date of
\	issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be cancelled
by the administrative official, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the cancelled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained.

8-105. Construction and use to be as provided in applications, plans, permits and certificates of zoning compliance.
Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the administrative official authorize only the use, arrange­ ment and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this Ordinance and punishable as provided by Section 11hereof.
1649
'
\
 
Art. 9	MARLIN CODE

ARTICLE 9.

BOARD OF ADJUSTME NT ESTABLISHMENT  AND PROCEDURE
9-100.  ...
The Board of Adjustments (Zoning) is hereby continued in accordance with the provisions of Article lOllg, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, as revised regarding the  zoning  of cities. The word "Board," when used  in  this  Ordinance, shall be construed to mean the Board of Zoning  Adjust­ ments.
9-101.	..
The Board shall consist of five (5) taxpayers and residents of Marlin appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. The term of office of the members of the Board shall be two (2) years. The members shall elect their own chairman and secretary, who shall serve for one (1) year. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only, and members shall serve without compensation. Members may be removed for cause by the Mayor and City Council upon written charges and after public hearing. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other  times  as the Board may determine. The Board shall keep Minutes of its proceedigs nd shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. The presence of three (3) members of the Bqard shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, provided, however, that the concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be necessary to effect a ruling in favor of an appellant.

9-102. Appeals.
Appeals to the Board of Zoning Adjustments may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an office, department,

1650
 
. .. .·.·...·
• ..·   ··
























(
'
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	Art. 9

-	or  board  of the  City  of  Marlin  affected  by  any  decision  of
the Building Inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days by filing with the officer from whom the appe is taken·· and with the Board a notice of appeal in writing specifying the grounds thereof. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)  shall	accompany	such appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the _ action appealed from was taken.

9-103.
The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal. Notice of time, place and subject of such hearing shall be posted in a public place.

9-104.
The Board shall have power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Building Inspector in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance. The Board may,
\		when it shall deem the same necessary, grant  variances from the specific terms of this Ordinance which will not be contrary to the  public interest and where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship and provided that the spirit  of  this  Ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. Such variance shall not  permit  a use not permitted. by the Zoning Ordinance in such district. A variance may he granted, in such case, upon a finding by the Board that all of the following conditio1'.S have been met.
1.	That the variance requested arises from such condi­ tion which is unique to the property in question and which is not ordinarily found in the same zone or district and is not created by an action or actions of the property owner or the applicant.

1651
 
Art. 9	MARLIN CODE

2.	That the granting of the permit for the variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or residents.
3.	That 'the strict application of . the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of which variance is requested will constitute unnecessary hardship upon the property owner represented  in the application.
4.	That the variance desired will not adversely affect the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, or general welfare.
5.	That granting the variance desired will not be opposed to the general spirit and intent of the Zoning Ordinance.
In exercising the foregoing powers, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken, may attach appropriate conditions and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit.

9-105. Variances,  conditions  governing applications, procedures.
To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the tepns of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless and until:
a.	A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating:
1.	That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district.

1652
 

.·
. . .· .
.  .   . . . '
.·.





























.	. ,
 
APPENDIX  A-ZONING	Art. 9

r <··
\ ·:_·-.	:	2.	That  literal  interpretation  of  the  provisions  of  this
Ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this Ordinance.
3.	That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant.
4.	That	granting   the   variance	requested	will  not - confer on the applicant  any special privilege  that is	denied	by	this	Ordinance	to	other	lands, structures or buildings in the same district.
No  nonconforming	use  of  neighboring  lands,  struc­ tures	or	buildings	in	the	same	district	and	no
·- permitted or nonconforming use of lands structures or buildings in other districts  shall  be  considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
b.	Notice of public hearing shall be given as in Section 9-102 above;
c.	The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney;
d.	The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of Section 9-104 have been met by the applicant for a variance;
e.	The Board of Adjustments shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the . reasonable use of the land, building or structure;
f.	The Board of Adjustments  shall  further  make  a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance and will not be injurious to the neighbor­ hood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
In granting any variance the Board of Adjustments may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in confor-

1653
 
Art. 9	MARLIN CODE

mity with this Ordinance. Violation of such conditions and	    safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance · and punishable under Section 16 of this Ordinance.
Under - no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustments grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Ordinance in the district involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Ordinance in said district.

9-106. Appeals from the board of adjustments.
Any person or persons or any board, taxpayer, depart­ ment, board or bureau of the city aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustments may seek review by a court of record of such decision in the manner provided by the laws of the state.

9-107. Duties of administrative official, board of adjustments, city council and courts on matters of appeal.
It is the intent of this Ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the administrative official and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustments only on appeal from the decision of the administrative official and that recourse from the decisions of the Board of Adjustments shall be to the courts as provided by law.
It is further the intent of this Ordinance that the duties of the City Council in connection with this Ordinance shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this section and this Ordinance. Under this Ordinance the City Council  shall have only the duties of (1) considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal of this Ordinance, as provided by law, and (2) establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in Section 12 below.

1654
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	Art. 10

,.··.·::·.-	ARTICLE IO.

PROCEDURE FOR AMENDMENTS OR SPECIAL USE  PERMITS

10-100.
Applications for amendment, revision or change of the Zoning District Map may be made by any person, or his agent, who owns the land sought to be rezoned. If such application is made by the owner's agent, said agent shall enter upon the application the name and current mailing address of the owner. Such application shall be made upon forms prescribed by the Planning Commission and  duly filed with the Building Inspector.
Application for amendment, revision or change of any of the rules, regulations or provisions of the text of this Ordinance other than the Zoning District Map or applica­ tion for a Special Use Permit may be made by any interested person on forms prescribed by the Planning Commission and duly filed With the Building Inspector.

10-101.
A fee of :fifty dollars ($50.00) shall accompany each application for an amendment or Special Use Permit. Immediately upon receipt of such application, the Building Inspector shall note thereon the date of filing and make a permanent record thereof.
One application may be made for more than one amendment, revision or change per parcel by an applicant, but publication costs for more than three (3) lines of advertisement shall be charged the applicant.

10-102.
All such applications shall be set down for hearing before the Planning Commission after at least twenty (20) days following the date of the application. Notice of such hearing shall be published in one (1) issue of a newspaper of general circulation within the City, such notice to be published not
1655
 
Art.10	MARLIN CODE

more than fifteen (15) days and not less than five (5) days prior to date of said hearing before the Commission. Written notice of all public hearings on proposed changes in classification shall be sent to all owners of property or to the person rendering the property for City taxes located within two hundred (200) feet of any property affected thereby within not less than ten (10) days before any such hearing is scheduled. Any such hearing may, for good cause, at the request of the applicant or in the discretion of the Commission be continued.
Upon the final hearing of such application, the Commis­ sion shall approve or deny the same, and a report of such action; together with  a recommendation  for final  approval or denial, .shall be made by the Commission to the City Council.
Before acting upon any application for amendment or Special Use Permit, the City Council shall set a time and place for a hearing thereon, notice of which hearing shall be published at least one (1) time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing.

10-103.
Recommendations for reV1s10n or amendment of this Ordinance, including the Zoning District Map, may also be made by the Planning Commission upon its own motion for final determination by the City Council; likewise, the Commission may revise, modify or amend this Ordinance, including the Zoning District Map, upon its own motion; provided, however, that such proposed changes shall first be submitted to the Planning Commission for recommendation and report. In either case final action thereon shall be taken only upon notice and hearing, as provided herein.
In case a written protest against such revision or amendment is presented duly signed  and acknowledged  by the owners of .twenty percent (20%) or more of the land (exclusive of streets and alleys) included in such proposed change or forty percent (40%) within an area determined by

1656
 
' . ..- .
. . ·.· :

 






















·.  . ·· •.

























· '
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	Art. 11

lines drawn parallel to and two hundred (200) feet distant from the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed, such revision or amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (%) of all of the members of the Planning Commission and City Council.
If	the	Planning	Commission	recommends	against	the
enactment of any proposed amendment, it shall become effective  only  by  a  three-fourths   (3A)  vote  of  the  City
Council.

 













-_ ·. .

































\
 
10-104. Limitation on reapplication.
Upon denial of an amendment of this Ordinance or Speeial Use Permit by the City Council, reapplication of a like nature or less restricted use shall not be heard within one (1) year of the date of denial, provided that the owner may present, by letter, a request to the City Council stating how conditions have changed since the previous hearing and setting forth the merits of rehearing the application. Should the City Council concur on the justification for rehearing, it may order a hearing for amendment or Special Use Permit. The procedures set forth herein for filing an application, including the paying of the application  fee, shall be followed.

ARTICLE 11.
VIOLATION AND PENALTY

11-100.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained or ay building, structure or land is used in violation of this Ordinance, the proper local authorities of the municipality, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, mainte­ nance or use; to restrain, correct, or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building, strcuture or land or
1657
 
Art.  11	MARLIN CODE

to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. Such r·egulations shall be enforced by the Building Inspector.. or other officer authorized to issue building permits who is empowered to cause any building, structure, place or premises to  be  inspected  and examined and to order in writing the remedying of  any  condition found to exist therein or thereat  in  violation  of  any provision  of this Ordinance.

11-101.
The owner or general agent of a building or premises where a violation of any provision of said Ordinance has been committed or shall exist or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist or the owner, general agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such violation has been committed or shall exist or the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person who comffiits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($1()0.00) for each and every day that such violation continues, but if the offense be willful on conviction thereof, the punishment shall be a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each and every day that such violation shall continue or by imprisonment for ten (10) days for each and every day such violation shall continue or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
Any such person who,  having been  served with  an order to remove any such violation, shall fail to comply with said order within ten (10) days after  such  service  or  shall continue to violate any provision of the  regulations in the respect named in such order shall also be subject to a civil penalty of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).


1658
 


\ : -·_ :. -

























\
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	12-100

ARTICLE 12. SAVING CLAUSE


12-100	.· Saving clause.

All rights or remedies of the City of Marlin are expressly saved as to any and all violations of previous zoning regulations or amendments thereto of said City that have accrued at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance; and to such accrued viola­ tions, the City and the courts shall have the powers that existed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance; and that all existing violations of previous zoning regulations which would otherwise becomf:! nonconforming uses under this Ordinance shall not become legai nonconforming uses under this Ordinance, but shall be violations of this Ordinance in the same manner that they were violations of prior zoning regulations .



ARTICLE 13. INVALIDITY OF A PART


13-100.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this Ordinance.



ARTICLE 14. REPEAL


14-100.

All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with any of the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as the same are in conflict with the provisions hereof.

Supp. No. 11	1659
 

12-100	MARLIN CODE

APPENDIXES A AND B. RESERVED


APPENDIX C. MOBILE HOME PARK FACil.JTIES*

ORDINANCE NO. 89-27
An Ordinance of the City of Marlin, Texas, adopting Appendix C, Mobile Home Park Facilities, to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Marlin, Texas and repealing all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith; providing a savings clause.
Be It Ord..ained by the City Council of the City of Marlin, Texas: Section   1.
That the following Mobile Home Park Ordinance be adopted as Appendix C to the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Marlin, Texas.
PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish regulations governing the development, expansion and use of mobile home park facilities within the City of Marlin. This ordinance is (adopted] so as to insure that such facilities as will reasonably address those particular considerations presented inmobile home park  development.
I.	DEFINITIONS
(a)	All definitions contained inthis section are for use and are only applicable as used in connection with this ordinance.
(b)	Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is eight (8) or more body feet in width, and thirty-two (32) or more body feet in length, and which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities including plumbing, heating, air conditioning

 
•Editor's note-Ord. No. 89-27, §§ 1-3, adopted July 11, 1989, enacted an Appendix C to the zoning ordinance. Such appendix pertained to mobile home park facilities and is included to read as herein set out, with the exception that words appearing in brackets [ ) were added by the editor for clarity, and any obvious misspellings were corrected without comment.

Supp. No. 11	1660
 
..
. - · .  . .
·.- · _.
 


" .
\._·
\  .   .-  .- .






























i
\



























'
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	12-100

and electrical systems. For the purpose of this ordinance, "mobile home" shall be con_strued to include single section and multi­ section u.nits.
(c)	Mobile home park	means  any lot  or tract  of land upon
which fifteen (15) or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling
purposes, are located, including any buildings, structures, :fix­ tures and equipment used in connection with mobile homes, regardless of whether or not a fee is charged for such accommo­ dations.
(d)	Mobile home space means a plot of land within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation .of one (1) mobile home ·in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
(e) Recreational vehicle may be construed as including any of the following:
(1) Travel trailer means any vehicular structure built on a chassis with a body width less than eight (8) feet, and a body length less than thirty-two (32) feet. Said structure is designed to be transported, and intended for human occupancy as a dwelling for short periods of time, and containing limited or no kitchen/bathroom facilities.
(2) Pick up coach is a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis, for use as a temporary dwelling for travel,
, recreation, or vacation.
(3) Motor home is a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation, and vacation; constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
(4)  Camping trailer is a canvass, folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vaca­ tion use.
(f) Recreational vehicle space means a plot of land within a recreational vehicle park, designed for the accommodation of one
(1)	recreational vehicle in accordance with the requirements  of
this ordinance.
(g) Licensee means any person licensed to operate and main­ tain a mobile home or recreational vehicle park under the provisions of this ordinance.

Supp. No. 11	1661
 
12-100	MARLIN CODE

(h)	Natural or artificial barrier means any embankment, fence, hedge, or other feae that serves to block direct pedes­ trian access or visibility.
(i)	Perso,1) means any natural individual, firm, trust, partner­ ship, association, or corporation.
(j)	Owner is to include the person in whose name the title to the lot, block, tract, or parcel of land is shown to be.
(k)	Operator is defined to include the person in charge of operating any mobile home or recreational vehicle lease, or any
other arrangement whereby he exercises control over the prem- ises.	..
II.	ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
In accordance with the zoning ordinance of the City of Marlin, mobile home parks may be located in R-4-200 and R-2-100 only, subject to the acquisition of a special permit granted by the city council and the submission and approval of all plans.
Each mobile home park boundary, except those adjacent to a street or highway right-of-way, shall be provided with a continu­ ous natural or artificial barrier.
III.	SPECIAL  PERMIT  REQ-UIREMENT
(a)	Application for special permit. Application for the special perm.it shall be made to the city council, such application to be filed with a complete plan (in triplicate) of the mobile home or park facility in conformity with No. VII of this ordinance, Devel­ opment Plans and Specifications. Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements, and facilities constructed or to  be constructed within mobile home park shall be provided in tripli­ cate. Such application for special permit shall be subject to the review and approval procedure delineated in the zoning ordi­ nance in the City of Marlin, Texas.
(b)	Transfer of special permit. An existing special permit may be transferred from one individual or corporation to another individual or corporation without a public hearing, upon applica­ tion to the city council.
..   ,
Supp. No. 11	1662
 

 
, .  .  .  .
. ·. .
\-":.:·.	: ::
 


Iv. LICENSE
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	12-100
 
It shall be unlaWful for any person to maintain or operate a mobile home or park within the limits of the city, unless such perpn shall first obtain a license as issued by the building official of the city. Such license shall be valid for a period not to exceed one (1) year and is subject to renewal upon expiration. This license shall be in addition to the special permit set out in IIand III above.
V.	LICENSE FEES
(a)	The annual license fee for each mobile home park shall be one h))lldred dollars ($100.00).
(b)	The fee for transfer  of a license shall be fifty dollars
($50.00).
VI.	APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
(a)	Application for initial license. An application for initial development of a mobile home park shall be filed with the [and]
\.		issued by the building official of the city. The application shall be  . in writing,  signed by the applicant,  and shall include the follow­
ing:
(1)	The name and address of the applicant.
(2)	The location and legal description of the mobile home
,  park.
(3)	A complete plan of the subject park and conformity with
the requirements of VII of this ordinance.
(4)	Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements, and facilities constructed within the mobile home park.
(5)	Evidence of special permit approval, if required.
(6) Such additional information as may be requested by the building official of the city, to facilitate a determination as to compliance of the proposed park with established legal requirements.
The building official of the city shall inspect the application and the proposed plans and specifications. Inthe event that the proposed mobile home park will, when constructed or altered in
l
\
Supp. No. 11	1663
 
12-100	MARLIN CODE	 
accordance with such plans and specifications, be in compliance with all provisions of this ordinance and all other applicable ordinances and statutes, the building official of the city shall approve the application and upon completion of the park accord­ ing to the plans, shall issue the license.

Inthose instances in which a mobile home park is proposed for development which fails to reasonably satisfy particular require­ ments as herein prescribed a variance to certain of these require­ ments may be requested of the board of adjustment of the city. Those requirements for which a variance may be granted, in addition to t procedure governing the operation of the board of adjustment, are delineated in the zoning ordinance of the City of Marlin, Texas.

(b)	Application for renewal license. Upon application in writ­ ing by a licensee for renewal of a license and upon payment of the annual license fee, the building official of the city shall conduct an on-site inspection of the subject mobile home park to ascertain compliance with the requirements established in this ordinance. Subsequent to a determination of compliance, the building official of the city shall issue a certificate renewing such license for another year.

(c)	Transfer of license. Upon application in writing for a transfer of license, the provision of evidence of special permit transfer, if required, and payment of the license transfer fee, the building official shall issue a transfer of license.

(d)	Expiration date of license. All licenses issued under the terms and conditions of this ordinance shall be for one ( 1) calendar year from the issuance date.

(e)	Nonconforming mobile  home park s. Such mobile home parks lawfully in operation on the effective date of this ordinance and not in compliance with those regulations established herein may, upon application to the building official of the city of license renewal be permitted to continue that operation as a nonconform­ ing mobile home park facility. Any expansion and/or extension of

Supp. No. 11	1664
 
- -:-  -:. ..
.. ......
 

.	APPENDIX A-ZONING
 

said nonconforming mobile home park, however, is subject to and shall be in complice with the regulations established in this ordinance.

VII:-·DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS

Development plans as formulated for a proposed mobile home park are to be submitted to the building official, City of Marlin. Such development plans shall exhibit on a scale of one hundred
(100)	feet to one (1) inch (1" = 100') the following site improve­
ment data:
(a)	Name of the developer.
•#
(b)	Name of the record owner of the subject property.
(c)	Legal description of the tract to be developed.
(d)	Tract boundary lines, the precise locations and width of all existing or recorded streets, easements and other rights-of-way forming the boundary of the subject tract.
(e)	Scale, north arrow and date.
\
(f)	Final  contour  data  at  two  (2)  foot  intervals  to  show
drainage of the site or as approved by the city engineer.
(g)	Width of each private street or other roadway or right-of- way.
(h)		Source  of  water	supply  and  layout   of  water  system including locations of standard fire hydrants required in
section xrv, Fire Protection.
(i)	Method of sewage disposal and layout of sewer system.
(j)	Name of the mobile home park.
(k) Location, dimensions, and purposes of any easements.
(l)	Boundaries of each mobile home space.
(m)	Address  assignments  (numbers)  to identify  individual home spaces.
(n)	Front building setback lines on all mobile home spaces.
(o)	Location and quantity (in acres) of common recreation area.
\	Supp. No. 11	1665
 

12-100	MARLIN CODE

VIII.	MOBILE HOME PARK REGULATIONS

The regulations described herein govern the development, operation, and maintenance of those mobile home parks which exclusivelyaccommodate mobile home uses as previously defined and do not provide facilities to accommodate recreational vehi­ cles, as defined.

(a)	Mobile home park  development requirements:
(1)	The mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to insure adequate drainage and freeqpm from standing pools of water. This location must contain a minimum of three (3) acres with a minimum width of two hundred fifty (250) feet and a minimum depth of two hundred fifty (250) feet at its narrowest points.
(2)	Mobile home spaces shall be provided consisting of a minimum of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet for each space which shall be at least forty (40) feet wide and clearly defined; provided, however, that mobile home parks in existence on the effective date of this ordinance which provide mobile home spaces having a width or area less than that above prescribed may con­ tinue to operate with spaces of the existing width and area, 'but in no event shall a mobile home space be less than twenty-five (25) feet wide and have an area of less than twelve hundred fifty (1,250) square feet.
(3)	Mobile homes shall be placed on each lot so that irrespec­ tive of spatial orientation, a fifteen (15) foot separation shall be provided between mobile homes. No mobile home shall be located closer than fifteen ( 15) feet from any building right-of-way or any property line bounding the park.
(4) All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a paved driveway of not less than twenty (20) feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a private street. Paved off­ street parking facilities in the ration of two (2) spaces for each mobile home space shall be provided. Such parking facilities shall be included to satisfy the minimum mobile

Supp. No. 11	1666
 
..  . ··.. ·. ..
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	12-100
 
 




























..· .
I
\
 






(5).
 

home space area requirement and shall be considered when determining separation between mobile homes. Yard maintenance will be the responsibility of the park owner.
Walkways not less than two (2) feet wide shall be pro­ vided from the mobile home spaces to the service build­ ings and/or common recreational area. All driveways and walkways shall be constructed of asphalt, brick, or con­ crete. Internal streets shall be paved according to the following standards:
(i)	Construction of sub-grade
(a)	Preparation of sub-grade-Flexible base mate­ rial shall be composed of crusher-run broken stone and shall be constructed with a maxi­ mum of four-inch (4") lifts. The sub-grade shall be excavated and shaped [in] conformity with the typical sections shown on the details. Be­ fore base material is placed, the sub-grade shall be thoroughly wetted, bladed, and rolled until a minimum of ninety-five (95) percent of maximum density has been attained for a six­ inch (6'') depth.
(b)	First and intermediate lifts-Flexible base ma­ terial deposited upon the sub-grade shall be spread, shaped, and rolled the same day unless otherwise authorized by the city, inwhich case the city will provide directions for avoiding damage from the delay. This lift shall be wet­ ted, bladed, and rolled until a minimum of ninety-five (95) percent density has been at­ tained.
(c)	Final lift-Construction methods for the final lift shall be the same as prescribed for the first lift with the addition of the following:
(d)	Any deviation, inthe finished surface in excess of one-fourth-inch (1/4'') in cross-section or in a length of sixteen ( 16) feet measured longitudi­ nally, shall be corrected by loosening, adding, or removing material, reshaping and recompact­ ing by sprinkling and rolling.
 

 
Supp. No. 11
 
1667
 
12-100	MARLIN CODE	. . .: · · _:_,

(ii)	Hot mix asphaltic concrete pavement
.(a) Asphaltic concrete pavement shall consist of a compacted mixture material as specified and shall be constructed on a flexible base and shall be constructed in accordance with the stan­ dards set out above. The asphaltic material shall form four-and-a-half percent (41/2%) to seven percent (7%) of the mixture weight . The course shall be gravel or crushed stone, uni­ form in quality throughout, shall be free from dirt, organic, or other injurious matter occur-
..		ring either free or as coating on the aggregate. The fine aggregate shall consist of sand, stone screenings, or a combination of both. Sand shall be composed of sound, durable stone particles free from loams or other injurious foreign matter. Screenings shall be of the same or similar material as specified for coarse ag­
gregate.	\
(b)	The  asphalt  mixture, prime  coat, or tack coat	JI
shall not be placed when the air temperature is below forty-five (45) degrees Fahrenheit and is falling, but may be placed when the air tem­ perature is above forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit and is steady or rising.
(c)	The prime coat shall consist of MC-30 asphalt as specified herein, applied evenly and smoothly at the rate of 0.32 gallons per square yard at a pressure necessary for even distribution.
(d)	If the prime coat is allowed to become over-dry and dusty or traffic is allowed on the prime coat, and the new hot-mix asphalt course, in the opinion of the engineer, will not adhere to the base course, a tack coat shall be applied. The tack coat shall consist of RC-2 cut-back asphalt, as specified herein, applied evenly and smoothly at the rate of 0.10 gallons per square yard, at a pressure necessary for even distribu­ tion.

Supp. No. 11	1668
 
 
 
12-100	MARLIN CODE
 
. ·. >·: ··1·
 


less than twenty-five (25) spaces). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .... .
(2) One-way parking on one side only (acceptable only if park provides less than fifty (50) spaces). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(3)	'I\vo-way, no parking . . . . . . .
(4)	'I\vo-way, parking on one side only . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...
(5)	Two-way, parking on either side. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . .
 



15 feet



20 feet
30 feet

35 feet

40 feet
 
·. . .
 
.I,ll.
 
(6)	It sha11 be unlawful for any person operating a mobile home park, or occupying a mobile home to construct or permit to be constructed within such park, any site-built addition to a mobile home, for living purposes. Manufac­ tured components and awnings of metal suitably con­ structed, may be attached to a mobile home, provided that:
(a)	The maximum width of the addition shall not be in	)l
excess of the width of the mobile home.
(b)	The maximum length of the addition shall not be greater than fifty (50) percent of the total length of the mobile home.
(7)	One (1) accessory building for mobile home space shall be permitted for storage purposes, provided that said build­ ing is located within a rear or side yard and is not placed within two (2) feet of any mobile home space lot line. Said building shall be no larger than 10 x 12 (120 square feet), and shall be securely anchored.
(8)	The distance from any part of a mobile home to an internal road or street shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet.
(9)	Each mobile home shall be underpined.
(10)	Not less than eight (8) percent of the gross land area within the mobile home park site is to be utilized for common recreation purposes. No particular  recreation site shall be comprised of less than twenty-five hundred (2500) square feet.

Supp. No.  11	1670
 

...:  ..
\ .------ :· _-.:
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	12-100

(11)	All site-built structures located within the mobile home park  shall be constructed  and/or  placed  in compliance
:with the technical codes of the City of Marlin.
(12)	The mobile home park development plan shall comply with all applicable requirements as stated in the subdi­ vision ordinance of the City of Marlin.
(13)	Service buildings (laundry and sanitation facilities).
(a)	The provision  of common laundry facilities is not required in mobile home parks exclusively serving mobile home uses as previously defined. In the event that common laundry facilities are to be provided
 
..	within   a  mobile  home   park,  toilet   and   lavatory accommodations  are  to  be  afforded  in  accordance
with the technical codes of the City of Marlin.
(b)		Service buildings providing the aforenoted facilities shall satisfy such requirements  as include: service buildings housing sanitation and/or laundry facili­ ties  shall be  permanent  structures which  comply with all applicable laws and ordinances regulating buildings, electrical installation, plumbing, and san- · itation systems. Service buildings shall afford appro­ priate illumination, shall be well-constructed of such moisture-proof  material, to include painted wood­ work as shall permit frequent cleaning and washing, and shall be maintained at a temperature  of sixty­ eight  (68)  degrees  Fahrenheit  during  the  period October  1 through  May  1. Floors  shall  be  con­ structed  of  concrete  or  other  equally  impervious material, easily cleanable, and provided with floor drains which shall comply with the city plumbing code.
(14)	The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males  and females shall be either in separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same building, by a soundproof wall.
(15)	All service buildings and park grounds shall be main­ tained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance, as defined by appli­ cable city codes.

\	Supp. No. 11	1671
 
12-100	MARLIN CODE	·.·.·.·	::;J
(16)	Service buildings housing sanitation facilities shall be locate not closer than fifteen ( 15) feet to any permanent structure or mobile home.

IX.	COMBINED  ACCOMMODATIONS
In the event a mobile home park is proposed to provide facilities to accommodate recreational vehicles, the following regulations shall apply and must be pre-approved by the plan­ ning and zoning commission and the city council.
(a)	Those accommodations serving the recreational vehicles and mobile homes shall be physically separate and dis­ tinc( with the recreational vehicle facilities provided separate access to a public right-of-way such that recre­ ational vehicle traffic does not intrude into the residential portion of the park occupied by mobile homes.

X.	WATER SUPPLY
Mobile home parks shall provide an adequate supply of pure water to all mobile home or recreational vehicle spaces within said parks in accordance with applicable ordinances. Each indi­ vidual mobile home space shall be provided with a cold water tap not less than four (4) inches above the ground.
Initial installations, maintenance and repair of water supply mains, and all yard lines within the park shall be the responsi­ bility of the park owner and/or developer. The developer shall provide individually metered water taps at each mobile home space.
All plumbing work performed within a mobile home park shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the plumbing code of the City of Marlin, and all applicable state requirements.
XI.	SEWAGE DISPOSAL

(a)	Waste water from showers, bathtubs, flushed toilets, lava­ tories, and laundry facilities within the service and/or other buildings within the mobile home park, in addition to dump station facilities, shall be discharged into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances and codes.

Supp. No. 11	1672
 

APPENDIX A-ZONING	12-100

(b)	Each mobile home or recreational vehicle space located within . a mobile home park facility shall be provided a trapped sewer not less than four (4) inches in diameter.The trapped sewer in each mobile home or each recreational vehicle space shall dis.charge waste water into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances and codes.
XII.	ELECTRICAL, TELEPHONE, AND CABLE SERVICES
All electrical, telephone, and cable conductors installed within the mobile home park shall be placed underground. Electrical installations shall conform to the requirements of the electrical code adopted for use by the city.
XIII.	GARBAGE  RECEPTACLES
Within mobile home parks, trash dumpsters and/or receptacles shall be of a size adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Such garbage receptacles shall be located not farther than three hundred (300) feet from any mobile home space. These receptacles shall be maintained in sanitary condition at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as. frequently as may be necessary to insure that said receptacles shall not overflow. Fees for collection and disposal of garbage shall be in accordance with the applicable ordinance governing and regulating refuse services.
XIv. FIRE PROTECTION
(a)	Fire extinguishing equipment required. Each mobile home park shall be equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment ingood working order, of such type, size, and number and so located within the park as to satisfy applicable regulations as stated in the fire codes of the city. No open fires shall be permitted in any place which may endanger life or property. No open fires shall be unattended  at any time.
(b)	Fire hydrants required . Standard fire hydrants, in work­ able condition, shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of each mobile home space. All such fire hydrants shall be connected to not less than a six-inch (6") diameter water line.
(c) Individ ual mobile home space numbering system required .
Within  all mobile  home  and  recreational  vehicle  parks,  each

Supp. No. 11	1673
 

12-100	MARLIN CODE
 
..  . ·. . .. .
. ..·	.·:
 

 
mobile home space shall be assigned a unique number descrip­ tion. Such nurµbering or lettering shall be not less than three (3) inches in size and of a reflective material and shall be displayed on the mo}?jle home space in a conspicuous location, visible from the internal circulation road which abuts the front yard of the mobile home space.
(d) Park directory required . All mobile home parks, as herein defined, shall provide in a conspicuous location at each entrance to a public right-of-way a diagram displaying the location of each mobile home or recreational vehicle space within the park. The diagram of the park layout shall be enclosed in a weatherproof facility.        ·•
XV. ANIMALS AND PETS
No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat, or other animal shall permit such animal to run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of any mobile home park.
XVI.	REGISTER OF OCCUPANTS
It shall  be the duty of each licensee to maintain a register containing a record of all mobile home owners/occupants located within the mobile home park. The register shall contain the following information:
(a)	The ne and address of each mobile home occupant.
(b)	The name and address of the owner of each mobile home within the park.
(c)	The make, model, year, and license number or identifica­ tion number of each mobile home located within the park.
(d)	The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home.
The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials, and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the infor­ mation contained in the register. The register record for each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of three (3) years following the date of departure of the registrant from the park.	·



Supp. No. 11	1674
 





















. ... ...
 
.. ·.· .
.<" : :-·.·...:
 


XVII. SUPERVISION
 
APPENDIX A-ZONING	12-100
 
Th licensee, or duly authorized attendant, or caretaker shall be in charge at all times to maintain the mobile home or re.reational vehicle park, its facilities, and equipment in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with the licensee, for the violation of any provision of this ordinance to which the licensee is subject.
XVIII.	VIOLATIONS
(a)	Where the building official or his agent determines that the operation of a mobile home park violates some provision of this ordiJ;lance, or any other provision of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Marlin, a complaint may be filed in the Municipal Court for the City of Marlin, against the owner or operator of the park or both.
(b)	Where the building official or his agent determines that the operation of a mobile home park violates some provision of this ordinance,  he may  suspend the park's license to  operate until
'·	such time as the park complies with the ordinance. The license
\		may appeal this suspension to the zoning board of adjustment of the City of Marlin, as provided for in the zoning ordinance.
Operation of a park while the license is suspended shall consti­ tute a violation of this ordinance for the purposes (a) above.
XIX.	-POSTING OF LICENSE
The license certificate shall at all times be conspicuously posted in the office of or on the premises of the mobile home park.
XX.  PENALTY
Any person convicted of a violation of this ordinance shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00), nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.

Section 2.
Mobile home parks located outside the corporate city limits that will be connected to City of Marlin water and/or sewer lines shall comply with said Ordinance 89-27.

\.	Supp. No. 11	1675
 
:·.-

 
12-100	MARLIN CODE

Section 3.
All ordinances or partS· of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, repealed.
Passed on 'fhe First Reading the 13th Day of June, 1989. Passed and Approved, this the 11th Day of July, 1989.




..
 
_-·:
 




































 

Supp. No. 11	1676
 

[The next page is 1709)	· . /


 
\'; \.:.·".. . . .-

















\
 

APPENDIX B SUBDIVISION  ORDINANCE*

Ah Ordinance prescribing rules and regulations governing plats and subdivisions of land within the corporate limits of the City of Marlin, Texas, and within five miles thereof, repealing all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith and providing a severability clause.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MARLIN:
Section 1. Laying out under direction of city.
All property not subdivided into lots, blocks and streets within the city shall hereafter be laid out under the direction of  the  City  Planning  and Zoning Commission  or, in the absence of such commission, of the City Council or subject to its approval, and no other subdivision will be recognized by the city. Prior to the plat being considered by the City Planning  and Zoning  Commission, the City Planner  and . City Engineer will check the plat and make recommenda· tions on same.
Approval required. All plans, plats or replats of land laid out in building lots and the streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated for public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of the lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, and plans and descriptions of all streets, alleys, or public ways intended to be deeded  or dedicated for public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of the land fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, which is not intended to be platted into lots or other designated tracts, or any addition or plan of streets or public ways located outside the city limits within Falls County and entirely or in part within five (5) miles of the nearest point on the city limit.s shall be submitted to the City Planning
•cross  references-Building,   ch.   7;   health   and   sanitation,   ch.   15;_ housing,  ch.  16; mobile  homes,  ch.  17; pla.o.ning  and  zoning,  Ch. 20; plumbing, ch. 21; utilities, ch. 28; zoning, App. A

1709
 
§ 1	MARLIN CODE

and Zoning Commission for their consideration  with relation to the Comprehensive Plan, and their recommenda­ tion shall ten be submitted to the Governing Body for its official consideration and action, and no such plat or replat or dedication or deed of street or public way shall be filed with the- Register of Deeds as provided by law until such plat or replat or dedication or deed shall have endorsed on it the  fact  that  it  has  first  been  submitted  to  the Planning
·Commission and to the Governing Body and by said Governing Body duly approved.
It shall be unlawf ul for any owner, or agent of any owner, to lay out, subdivide or plat any land into lots, blocks and streets witpin the city which do not conform to all rules and regulations of the Planning and Zoning Commission, or to sell property therein and thereby which has not been laid off, subdivided and platted according to the following or other rules of the City Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the City Council.
 
. .·: : . .·.. ',
·. . ...-
 

Section 2. Withholding improvements until approved.
The  city hereby  defines its policy to be that the city will	)11
withhold all city improvements of whatsoever nature, including the maintenance of streets and furnishing of sewerage facilities and water service, from all additions, the platting of which has not been approved by the City Planning and Zoning Commission or, in absence of such Commi ssion, by the City Council.
No officer or employee of the city shall do, or cause to be done, any work upon any street or in any addition or subdivision of the city, unless all requirements of these or other regulations have been complied with by the owner of said  addition  or subdivision.

Section 3. Scope.
In the subdivision or resubdivision of land within the corporate limits of Marlin and within an area five (5) miles therefrom, lying in Falls County, the owner or developer shall exercise due regard to the alignment and location of

1710
 

. . . .
.-   . -. .- :
......_ .. .























\ .



























\.
 
APPENDIX  B-SUBDIVISIONS	§ 4

streets in relation to other existing or planned streets, to adequate drainage, to safe and expedient flow of traffic, and to provide for roadway surface, utilities and recreation, all in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of Marlin.

Section 4. Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:
Alley: A minor way, dedicated to public use, which is used primarily for vehicular access to the back of the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Block: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways, streets, streams, railroad rights-of-way, or parks, etc., or a combination thereof.
Cul-de-sac: A street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround.
Easement: A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation, or persons, of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes.
Improvement s: Street pavements, with curbs and side­ walks, pedestrian ways, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, permanent street monuments, trees and other apprpriate    items.
Lot: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development.
Comprehensive plan: The comprehensive plan made and. adopted by the City  Plan  Commission  indicating  the general locations recommended for the major thoroughfares, streets, parks, public buildings, zomn g districts, and other public improvements .
. etback lines or buildi.ng lines: A line on a plat generallv parallel to the street · right-of-way, indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected.

1711
 
§ 4	MARLIN CODE

 
Street: A right-of-way, dedicated to public use, or a private right-of-way serving  more  than  one  ownership, which provides principal vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent  properties.
S treet,... deadend: A  street, similar to a cul-de-sac, but providing no turnaround at its closed end.
Subdivider: A person, firm or corporation undertaking the subdividing or the resubclividing of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots or other divisions of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development, whether immediate or future, including all changes in street  or  lot lines.        ..
Subdivision: A division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two or more lots or other divisions of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development, whether immediate or future, including all changes in street or lot lines; provided, however, that divisions of land for agricultural purposes into parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or more and not involving any new street or easement of access shall not be deemed a subdivision.
Resubdiuision: The division of an existing subdivision, together with any change of lot size therein or with the relocation  of any street lines.
 

 






















·.4'
 

Section 5; Preliminary plan.
Five (5) prints of a preliminary plan of any proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the City Secretary for presentation to the Planning Commission at least five (5) days before the meeting at which approval is asked. The preliminary plan shall show or be accomplished by the following information:
a.	The proposed name of the subdivision and names of adjacent subdivisions.
b.	The names of th owner and the engineer, surveyor or landscape architect responsible for the survey and design.

1712
 


. .. .























i
I
'








\
 
APPENDIX  B-SUBDIVISIONS	§ 5

c.	The location of boundary lines and their relation to
established section lines or fractional section lines.
d.	The location and width of existing and proposed streets, roads, lots (approximate dimensions)  and alleys, building lines, easements, parks, school sites, and other features of the proposed  subdivision.  The plan shall show outline of adjacent properties for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet and how the streets, alleys, or highways in the proposed subdivi­ sion may connect with these adjacent which are of record.
e.	If there are no adjacent subdivisions, then a map on a '* smaller scale must be presented to show the nearest subdivision and how the streets, alleys or highways in the subdivision submitted may connect with those in the nearest subdivision.
f.	Survey	showing physical		features  of  the  property, including	watercourses,		ravines,	bridges,	culverts, present structures and other features of importance to lot and street layout. The appropriate acreage of the property shall be indicated. Topography of the tract · shall be shown on the preliminary plan by means of contours of two (2) foot intervals. Contours and all grades  in the  addition	must  be referred  to  a  U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, State Highway or a city
, of Marlin bench mark.
g.	Approximate gradients of streets. All grades shall be
based on city datum.
h.	Designation of the proposed uses of land within the subdivision, whether for residential, commercial, industrial or public use, such as parks, churches, etc.
1.	Centerline profiles of proposed streets may be required by the Commission.
j.	North point, scale and date.
If	the	Planning	Commission	does	not	approve	or disapprove the preliminary plan within thirty (30) days of

1713
 
§ 5	MARLIN CODE
. .
the date of the initial meeting for consideration  of the plan,	·· 4111 the plan  shall be deemed  approved  and so endorsed  by the  Chairman.
Approval of the preliminary plan does not constitute acceptance of the subdivision, but is merely an authoriza­ tion to proceed with preparation of the final plat for record. No grading of streets, or construction shall be done on the subdivision before the  final plat is approved by  the Planning Commission except by special permission of the Governing Body. Upon refusal of the Planning Commission to approve a preliminary plan, the applicant may make such changes as are required for approval and resubmit the plan or he may appeal the decision to the Governing. Body which may reverse the decision of the Planning Commission and approve said Preliminary Plan.

 
Section 6. Final plat.
After the preliminary pl an has been approved by the Planning Commission, or the Governing Body on appeal, a final plat for record shall be prepared and submitted to the Commission for approval by that body. Ten (10) prints and reproducible tracing of the plat shall be filed in the office of the Commission at least five (5) days prior to the meeting at which approval is asked. The original plat shall be to a scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch, shall be drawn in
India  ink - on  linen  or  better  at  a sheet size of 81/2" x 11",
17" x 23",	24" x 36"	or	36" x 48"	and	shall	show	or	be accompanied by the following information:
a A title including name of subdivision owner or owners and licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer responsible for the plat and the scale and location of the subdivision with reference to original land grants or surveys and the date, scale and north point.
b. The name of the subdivision and adjacent  subdivi­ sion, the names of streets (to conform wherever possible to existing street names), and the numbers of lots and blocks, in accordance with a systematic arrangement.

1714
 

.  . ,' ,
 


.-.._·..< :
 
APPENDIX  B-SUBDIVISIONS	§ 6

c.	An accurate boundary survey of the property, with bearings and distances, referenced  to official surveys or survey comers and showing (in dotted lines) the lines of immediately adjacent streets and alleys with their widths and names.
 
•..
d.	Location of lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks and other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the length and radii of all curves and with all other information necessary to duplicate the plat on the ground.
e.	The location of building set-back lines on all streets and   the   location   and   dimension .   of   utility   and
·- drainage easements and other public rights-of-way or access.
f. Certification of ownership  and  dedication  of  all streets, public highways, alleys, parks and other land intended for public use, signed and acknowledged before a Notary Public by the owner or owners and by all other parties who have lease rights, mortgage or lien   interest   in   the   property,   together   with   any
\	restrictions which apply to lots and a complete and · accurate description of the land subdivided and the streets dedicated.
g.	Certification by a registered surveyor to the effect that
, the plat represents a survey made by him and that all the necessary boundary survey monuments  are correctly shown thereon.
h.	A waiver of claim for damage occasioned by the establishment of grades or the alteration of the surface of any portion of the streets and alleys.
i. Certificate of approval to be signed by the City Planning and Zoning Commission.
All :figures and letters shown must be plain, distinct and of sufficient size to be easily read and must be of sufficient density to make a lasting and permanent record.
When more than one sheet is used, a key map showing the entire subdivision at smaller scale with block numbers and
1715
\	.
 
§ 6	MARLIN CODE

street names shall be shown on one of the sheets or on a separate sheet of the same size.
A copy o such restriction as may be filed in connection with the property shall be submitted with the final plat.

Section 7. General requirements.
S treet arrangement s: Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission, provision must be made for the extension of existing dead-end streets. Off-center street intersections  with  an  offset  of less than  one hundred  fifty
(150) feet center line to center line will not be approved except in unusual cases. Streets with reverse  curves  must have a tan.gent between curves.
Proposed streets must conform to existing topography as nearly as possible, in order that drainage problems may be reduced. Streets should, wherever possible, follow valleys so as to form a collection system for surface water. Surface drainage across residential lots or along the side or rear lot lines   shall   be   avoided   wherevei·  possible.   Where   such
drainage on residential  lots is necessary,  easements shall be	· .·61
provided and in subdivisions within the corporate limits the Planning Commission may require installation of pipe, masonry or rip-rap flumes or such other protective devices in order that adjacent or surrounding property or the welfare of the public shall not be endangered and maintenance will be kept at a minimum. Sizes of pipe and other drainage structures shall be computed with sufficient accuracy to assure their adequacy, particular attention being given to the drainage areas of surrounding land, and all drainage plans within the corporate limits shall be approved by the City Engineer before the final plat is approved.
Street design: For the purpose of facilitating the move­ ment of traffic, certain streets are designated by the Thoroughfare Plan as thoroughfares. A map showing these thoroughfares will be on file in the office of  the Planning Commission, and reference shall be made to this system of streets before any preliminary plan is approved.

1716
 
' .  .	APPENDIX  B-SUBDIVISIONS	§ 7

'<:· ··_<_ :_.- .		When a proposed subdivision abuts a major street or is bounded by a line that will in the future lie in a major street or is divided -by a major street, as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan, then the owner of that subdivision shall dedicate, without charge, any land within such subdivision tha:t is necessary to provide conformity with the Thorough­ fare Plan, such dedication to be shown on the preliminary plan and final plat.
The minimum width of a street shall be fifty (50) feet; the minimum gradient shall be four-tenths percent (0.4%) and the maximum, gradient shall be ten percent (10%).
Relation ·to adjoin ing streets and land: The system of streets designated  for the  subdivision, except in unusual cases, must connect with streets already dedicated in adjacent subdivision and where no adjacent connections are platted, must · in general be the reasonable projection of streets in nearest subdivided tracts and must be continued to the boundaries of the tract subdivided, so that other subdivisions may connect therewith.
Large allotments: In case a tract is subdivided into larger parcels  than  normal  building  lots,  such  parcels  shall  be· arranged to permit the opening of future streets and logical resubdivision.
Dead-end streets: Except in unusual cases, no dead-end streets will be approved unless such dead-end streets are provided to connect with future streets in adjacent land, but cul-de-sacs may be permitted where the form or contour of the land makes it difficult to plat with connecting streets. Such cul-de-sacs shall provide proper access to all lots and shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet in length, and a turnaround shall be provided at the closed end, with an outside street line radius of at least sixty (60) feet. Except in unusual cases, cul-de-sacs will not be permitted where the turnaround is not clearly visible from the entrance to the street.
Temporary cul-de-sacs may be required at the end  of these streets extended to the edge of the subdivision  for future connection to adjacent subdivisions.
1717
 
§ 7	MARIJN CODE
Block  lengths: In general, intersecting streets determining	  block lengths shall be provided at such intervals as to serve
cross traffic adequateiy and to meet existing or future streets. Where no existing plats control, the blocks shall not exceed 1,320 feet in length.
·-
Alley and alley wid ths: Except in unusual cases, alleys or
loading courts must be provided in business blocks. Alleys are optional in residential districts and are required only where alleys of adjoining subdivisions would be closed or shut off from access by the failure to provide alleys in the new subdivision. Alleys shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. In case of intersecting alleys, a cutoff shall be required of at least five (5) feet measured from the point of intersection of the alley lines, the resultant connecting lot line to be at least five (5) feet in length.
Lots: All rectangular lots and all other lots, so far as practicable, shall have the side lines at right angles to the street on which the lot faces, or radial to curved street lines. Lots shall be of width and area to conform to the Zoning Ordinance  of  Marlin.  Corner  lots  shall be at least fifteen
(15) feet wider than the average lot in the subdivision. The minimum  average depth of a lot shall be one hundred ten
(110) feet.
Utility easements: Where alleys are not included in the plat, easements of not less than eight (8) feet shall be provided on each side of rear lot lines and side lot lines where access to an existing or future utility is desirable or where otherwise necessary for the proper location or relocation of public utilities. If necessary for the extension of water or sewer lines or similar utilities, or for surface drainage, easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots. Easements shall connect with any established easements in adjoining property. Easements for sanitary and storm sewers, water and gas lines shall be approved by the City Engineer.
Utility and street design: All streets and utilities shall be designed and all plans prepared by an Engineer, registered in the State of Texas.

1718
 
APPENDIX  B-SUBDIVISIONS	§ 8

Building lines: Building set-back lines shall be shown on all lots intended for residential use and, in some cases may be required on ·-lots intended for business use and shall provide at least the  setback required by the Zoning Regulations.
Park s, school sites and playground s: Suitable sites for parks, ·schools, playgrounds or other public requirements shall be carefully considered and indicated on the prelimi- nary plan, so that they can be compared with the comprehensive city plan and it can be determined which of such sites, if any, should be indicated on the final plat and when and in what manner such  areas will  be  acquired  by the ,public body.	·
Sidewalk s: Where sidewalks are to be installed by the developer, they shall be located in the platted streets one (1) foot from the property line. Sidewalks shall be not less than four (4) feet wide and where located in the corporate limits shall conform to the specifications of the city of Marlin.

Section 8. Filing and inspection feeB.
\		The following schedule of fees is hereby adopted, which fees are to be paid by all persons or corporations submitting preliminary plans for approval by the Planning Commission and shall be computed to the nearest dollar:
Number of lots in subdivision

Fee
per lot
10 or less . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . $1.00 ·
11to 50	80
51_to 150	70
151to 500	60
501 or more	50
Minimum total fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00). This fee shall be paid at the time that the preliminary plan is submitted to the Planning Commission and shall apply to
1719
\
 
§ 8	MARLIN CODE

approval of the preliminary plan and final plat, provided that the final plat includes the same area to be subdivided as the preliminary plan. If the final plat is submitted in segments, then the above fee schedule shall apply to all submittals, except the first.
Inspection fees shall be paid in accordance with require­ ments of the City of Marlin. Inspections shall not be required outside the corporate limits but may be made upon request of the developer or owner.
 

. : .. .   . .
·. . .
 

 
Section 9. Survey requirements.
Concrete or approved equal monuments, 6 . inches in diameter and 24 inches long, shall be placed on all comers of subdivision boundary lines, curve points,  angle points and block corners. An iron pin or approved equal, 1A inch in diameter embedded at least 3 inches in the monument shall be put in the monument at the exact intersection point. The monuments shall be set at such an elevation that they will not be disturbed during construction, and the top  of the monument shall not be more than 12 inches below the natural ground after contemplated improvements are completed. The comers of each lot shall be located and identified by an iron pipe V2 inch or % inch in diameter, 18 inches long, driven into the ground.
 









. .AtJ
 

Section 1O. Improvements.
No building permits shall be issued for any building until the improvements listed below in Subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), and (h) of this section shall be installed or, in lieu of actual completion of such improvements, the subdivider may file with the City Council a surety bond from a bonding company authorized to do business in Texas or an equivalent cash escrow to secure to the city the actual construction of such improvements in a manner satisfactory to the Council and to  a permanent line and grade and in accordance with standard specifications of the city of Marlin or good engineering practice. If specifications are not available within a period specified by the Council (but such period shall not exceed two (2) years), such bond shall be in
1720
 


- ·  . . . •
<_· · :



























\
 
APPENDIX  B-SUBDIVISIONS	§ 10

the amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to the City Council. Whenever no lots have been sold, the subdivider may vacate the plat and bond will be returned to the subdivider.
The subdivider, after tentative approval of the final plat, may install these improvements only in a portion of such areas but improvements must be installed in any portion of the area for which final plat is approved for recording, and the owner may sell or lease lots only in the improved portion of said property, provided that water and sewerage facilities shall be designed and built to serve the entire area and so that they may be easily expanded or extended to serve the entire  area.
(a)	Curb and gutter on all streets meeting the city's specifications and set to proper line and grade with other necessary drainage and drainage structures necessary to drain properly the area.
(b)	Pavement on all streets: Refer to standard specifica· tions on file in the City Engineer's office.
(c)	Six (6) inch gravel on all alleys properly compacted to provide for all-weather traffic.
(d)	Sidewalks, four (4) feet wide, four (4) inches thick, 3000 p.s.i., concrete. The placing of sidewalks shall be required along school access streets and streets in commercial district and other locations. It shall be within the discretion of the City Planning and Zoning Commission to designate other locations where sidewalks are to be placed.
(e)	Water system with mains of sufficient size and having sufficient number of outlets to furnish adequate domestic water supply, furnish fire protection  to all lots and to meet the City of Marlin Water Plan.
(f) Sanitary sewer facilities to service the subdivision and to meet the City of Marlin Sewer Plans.
(g)	Three (3) sets of Plans and Specifications for water, sewer,  and  paving,  prepared  by  a  Registered  Civil

1721
 
§ 10	MARLIN CODE

Engineer, must be  approved  by  the  City  Engineer prior to the developer starting any construction in the subdiviion  of  this· nature.
(h)	All services for utilities shall be made available for each· lot in  such a manner as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street pavement, gutter curb and drainage structures when connections are made.
(i)	At least one (1) street sign at each street intersection.
Pavement. The subdivider may award the contract and make payments directly to the· contractor for all grading, paving, cur,b and gutter, drainage structures and sidewalks in the addition after the Plans and Specifications have been approved by the City Manager. The Engineer representing the subclivider shall prepare the Plans and Specifications for the water and sewer lines and present them to the city for approval, after which the city will advertise for bids and award the contract after the cost for said contract has been paid to the city by the subdivider.
No reimbursement shall be made by the city for the cost of other improvements.

Section 11. Inspection.

The City' Engineer shall make such inspections of drainage structures, utilities, sidewalk and pavement construction as is deemed necessary to assure compliance with the specifications of the city. Twenty-four (24) hours notice shall be given to the City Engineer regarding any requested inspection.

Section 12. As-built plans.
The Engineer representing the subdivider must present to the city reproducible complete as-built plans for all paving, drainage structures, water line and sewer facilities within thirty (30) days after completion of each contract.

1722
·.
 

...:. ·..·. ._
 
APPENDIX  B-SUBDIVISIONS	§ 16

Section 13. Additional provisions.
After a plat has been duly approved by the Planning Commission and ..the Governing Body, as required in these rules, and after said plat has been duly recorded with the Recorder of Deeds, as required by law, construction may begin on buildings within the subdivision upon issuance of building permit. No building permit shall be issued for a building within such subdivision, however, until improve­ ment districts for the construction and installation of curb and gutter, pavement, water and sewer lines have been created in the block upon which said lot fronts or until such improvements shall have been installed by the developer.
 

Section 14. Variations and exceptions.
Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict application of the requirements contained herein would result in real difficul­ ties and substantial hardships qr injustices, the City Council may   vary   or   modify   such   requirements   so   that   the
\		subdivider is allowed to develop his property in a reasonable. manner, but so at the same time the public welfare and interest of the city and surrounding area are protected and the general intent and spirit of this Ordinance is preserved.

Section 15. Severability clause.
If any provisions of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances are held invalid, the remainder of the Ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

Section 16. Approval.
These regulations shall be in full force and effect from and after their passage by the City Council, as provided by law.




 

1723
 
[The next page is l 773]

