
Mansfield, TX Code of Ordinances


CITY OF MANSFIELD, TEXAS
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2018 S-18 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance OR-2077-18, passed 1-22-18









Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CITY OFFICIALS



 




Mayor




David L. Cook








Councilmembers




Larry Broseh




Terry M. Moore




Brent Newsom




Casey Lewis




Julie Short




Michael D. Leyman








City Manager




Clayton W. Chandler








City Attorney




Allen Taylor








City Secretary




Tracy B. Norr





 



ADOPTING ORDINANCES



ORDINANCE NO.  1369



AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE RECODIFICATION OF CIVIL AND CRIMINAL ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY TO BE KNOWN AS THE CODE OF ORDINANCES, CITY OF MANSFIELD, TEXAS;
PROVIDING FOR PUBLICATION OF THIS ORDINANCE; PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES;
PROVIDING A CUMULATIVE CLAUSE; PROVIDING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; AND PROVIDING
AN EFFECTIVE DATE.



   WHEREAS, the City of Mansfield, Texas is a home rule city acting under
its charter adopted by the electorate pursuant to Article XI, Section 5 of
the Texas Constitution and Chapter 9 of the Local Government Code; and



   WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 53.001 of the Local Government Code, the
city caused the preparation of a codification of the civil and criminal
ordinances of the city, adopted on November 10, 1978; and



   WHEREAS, the city council now deems it necessary to revise that code
and recodify the ordinances of the city.



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
MANSFIELD, TEXAS, THAT:




SECTION 1.
ADOPTION OF A CITY CODE




   The recodification of the civil and criminal ordinances of the city,
designated as the Code of Ordinances, City of Mansfield, Texas ("Code")
published by the American Legal Publishing Corporation is hereby adopted. 
The Code is attached to this ordinance as Exhibit "A," and is incorporated
into this ordinance for all purposes.




SECTION 2.
PENALTIES




   (a)   Whenever in the Code an act is prohibited, or made or declared
to be unlawful, an offense, or a misdemeanor, or the doing of an act is
required, other than duties of city officers and employees, or the failure to
do an act is declared to be unlawful, and the act relates to fire safety,
zoning, and public health, or sanitation, including dumping of refuse, the
violation of the provision is punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00.



   (b)   When an act described in Subsection (a) is unrelated to fire
safety, zoning, public health or sanitation and no specific penalty is
provided, the violation of the provision is punishable by a fine not
exceeding $500.00.



   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (a) and (b), when
an act described in Subsection (a) is one for which a penalty is fixed by
state law, the penalty for the offense is the same as fixed by state law.




SECTION 3.
ORDINANCE RECORDS




   The city secretary is directed to record the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Mansfield, in the city's ordinance records in accordance with Section
53.001(b) of the Local Government Code.




SECTION 4.
PUBLICATION




   The city secretary is directed to publish this entire ordinance, not
including Exhibit "A," at least one time in the official newspaper of the
city in accordance with 3.13(c) of the Mansfield Home Rule Charter and
Section 53.002 of the Local Government Code.




SECTION 5.
CUMULATIVE CLAUSE




   This ordinance and the Code of Ordinances, City of Mansfield, Texas
shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances of the City of Mansfield
except where the provisions of this ordinance or the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Mansfield are in direct conflict with the provisions of such
ordinances, in which event the conflicting provisions of such ordinances are
hereby repealed.




SECTION 6.
SEVERABILITY CLAUSE




   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this ordinance are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree
of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not
affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and
sections of this ordinance, since the same would have been enacted by the
city council without the incorporation in this ordinance of any such
unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.




SECTION 7.
SAVINGS CLAUSE




   All rights and remedies of the City of Mansfield are expressly saved as
to any and all violations of the provisions of the Code of Ordinance of the
City of Mansfield, as amended, or any other ordinances affecting
recodification of civil and criminal ordinances which have accrued at the
time of the effective date of this ordinance; and, as to such accrued
violations and all pending litigation, both civil and criminal, whether
pending in court or not, under such ordinances, same shall not be affected by
this ordinance but may be prosecuted until final disposition by the courts.




SECTION 8.
EFFECTIVE DATE




   This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and publication as required by law, and it is so ordained.



   PASSED AND APPROVED on the first reading this 27th day of August, 2001.



   PASSED AND APPROVED on the second reading this 10th day of September,
2001.



   PASSED AND ADOPTED on the third and final reading by the City Council
of the City of Mansfield, Texas this the 24th day of September, 2001.



                                                  



   David Harry, Mayor 



ATTEST:



                                                   
           



Barbara J. Greene, Acting City Secretary



EFFECTIVE:  October 1, 2001



APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGALITY:



                                           



Allen Taylor, City Attorney



HOME RULE CHARTER OF MANSFIELD, TEXAS



RESOLUTION OF CERTIFICATION OF HOME RULE CHARTER ADOPTION



   Whereas, the citizens of the City of Mansfield are of the belief that
Municipal Government is the form of government that is closest to the people;
and



   Whereas, the Citizens of the City of Mansfield are of the belief that
Municipal Government should be a democratic government and should reflect the
highest ideals and morals of a democratic government; and



   Whereas, the Citizens of the City of Mansfield are of the belief that
Home Rule is the form of Municipal Government that is the highest expression
of a truly democratic government; and



   Whereas, the people of the sovereign State of Texas through their
Legislature have provided for the adoption of Home Rule Charter for Cities by
affirmative vote of their citizens; and



   Whereas, the citizens of the City of Mansfield, County of Tarrant,
State of Texas, on the 25th day of January, 1975, in a duly called and
conducted election did approve and adopt (by an affirmative majority vote)
the attached Home Rule Charter for the City of Mansfield, Texas; and



   Whereas, the City Council of the City of Mansfield, County of Tarrant,
State of Texas, on the 28th day of January, 1975, canvassed the returns of
said Home Rule Charter election as required by law and found that approval of
said Home Rule Charter for the City of Mansfield, Texas, passed by an
affirmative majority vote;



   Therefore, Be It Resolved that the following Home Rule Charter for the
City of Mansfield, Texas, is adopted by the citizens of the City of
Mansfield, County of Tarrant, State of Texas, as the governing document and
controlling law of the City of Mansfield, Texas; and be it further



   Resolved, that the City Secretary shall transmit an appropriate copy of
this Resolution and of said Home Rule Charter to appropriate authorities of
the State of Texas as required by law and shall maintain and preserve this
Resolution and a copy of said Home Rule Charter among the permanent records
of the City of Mansfield.



   Passed and Unanimously Adopted by the City Council, City of Mansfield
in regular meeting assembled on the 28th day of January, 1975.



   Thomas Y. Watson



   Mayor



ATTEST:



Mary Ann Johnston



City Secretary



PREAMBLE



Recognizing that effective government is a government of law rather than of
man, we the people of Mansfield, Texas invoke the guidance of God in
establishing this Charter as the basic law of our City. This Charter will
provide a home rule government which will recognize and protect individual
freedom, encourage interest and participation by the citizens, and serve in
behalf of the general welfare.



ARTICLE I.  FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES



SEC.  1.01.  INCORPORATION.



   All the inhabitants of the City of Mansfield, Tarrant County, Texas
residing within the boundaries and limits of said City as are herein
established or may hereafter be established, shall be a political subdivision
of the State of Texas, incorporated under and to be known by the name and
style of the "City of Mansfield" with such powers, rights and duties as
provided in this Home Rule Charter in accordance with the Constitution and
statutes of the State of Texas.



SEC. 1.02.  FORM OF GOVERNMENT.



   The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be of the
Council-Manager form. The Council, consisting of the Mayor and Councilmen
elected by and responsible to the people, shall appoint a City Manager, who
shall be directly responsible to the Council, for the execution of the laws
and the administration of the government of the City.



SEC. 1.03.  BOUNDARIES OF THE CITY.



   The bounds and limits of the City of Mansfield shall be the same as
have heretofore been established and as they exist on the date of acceptance
of this Charter.



SEC. 1.04  EXTENSION OF BOUNDARIES.



   The Council shall have the powers to fix the boundary limits of the
City, to provide for the extension of said boundary limits and the annexation
of additional territories lying adjacent to said City, to provide for the
disannexation of territory within said City and to provide for the exchange
of territory with other cities and towns, according to such rules as may be
provided by this Charter or any other method that may be prescribed by the
laws of the State of Texas. Such rules or methods shall not be inconsistent
with the procedural rules of the Municipal Annexation Act of the State of
Texas.



   (a)   Annexation of lands by petition:  The qualified voting
property owner or owners of any land contiguous and adjacent to the City may,
by petition in writing to the Council request the annexation of such
contiguous and adjacent land, describing it by metes and bounds. The Council
shall thereafter hear such petition and the arguments for and against the
same, and grant or refuse such petition. The council may by proper ordinance,
under such procedural rules as may be prescribed by law, receive and annex
such territory as a part of the City.



   (b)   Annexation by election: The Council shall have the power to
order an election or elections if it so desires for the purpose of annexing
territory adjacent to the City. Said election shall be in accordance with
this Charter or as prescribed by State statutes.



   (c)   Annexation of lands by ordinance:  The Council may by
ordinance annex territory adjacent to the City with or without the consent of
the inhabitants or owners thereof, subject to such procedural rules as may be
prescribed by law.



   (d)    Annexed territory to become part of the City:  Upon
completion of any one of the procedures hereinabove provided, the territory
so annexed shall become a part of the City, and said land and its residents
and future residents shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of
other citizens of the City and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances,
resolutions and regulations of the City.



SEC. 1.05.  CONTRACTION OF BOUNDARIES.



   Whenever there exists within the corporate limits of the City any
territory not deemed suitable or necessary for City purposes, which territory
adjoins the outer boundaries of the City, the Council may with or without a
petition signed by a majority of the property owners residing in said
territory, disannex such territory. Provided, however, that the right of
disannexation shall not be available to any particular annexed area which was
lawfully within the City limits of Mansfield at the time of the approval or
sale of any obligation bonds of the City if proceeds therefrom have been
expended for capital improvements to serve such particular area, unless said
property owners of said territory are willing to monetarily reimburse the
City for its percentage of the then outstanding indebtedness of the City for
bonds and warrants and a fair proportion of the then existing budget which
the assessed value of all property within said territory on the tax rolls
next preceding the presentation of such petition bears to the total of all
property on said rolls. Any disannexation will be consistent with State
Statutes governing same.



ARTICLE II.  POWER OF THE CITY



SEC. 2.01.  POWERS OF THE CITY.



   The City shall have all powers possible for a City to have under the
Constitution and laws of this State as fully and completely as though they
were specifically enumerated in this Charter.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



SEC. 2.02.  CONSTRUCTION.



   The powers of the City under this Charter shall be construed liberally
in favor of the City, and the specific mention of particular powers in the
Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power
stated in this article.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



SEC. 2.03.  INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS.



   The City may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions
and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation by
contract or otherwise, with any one or more States, and divisions or agencies
thereof, or the United States or any agency thereof.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



ARTICLE III.  THE CITY COUNCIL



SEC. 3.01.  NUMBER, SELECTION AND TERM.



   The legislative and governing body of the City shall consist of a Mayor
and six (6) Councilmembers and shall be known as the "Council of the City of
Mansfield." The Councilmembers shall be elected by place at large under the
general provisions provided by Article IV of this Charter for three (3) year
terms. The three (3) year terms shall be staggered so that two (2) and not
more than three (3) members be elected each year. The Mayor and each
Councilperson, unless sooner removed under the provisions of this Charter,
shall hold office until his successor is elected and qualified. Regular terms
of office shall commence at the beginning of the first regular meeting of the
Council following the final election as provided in Section 4.05.



(Amended: 8-11-79, 5-7-88)



SEC. 3.02.  QUALIFICATIONS.



   The Mayor and each member of the City Council shall be:



   (a)   A resident citizen of the City of Mansfield for a period of
not less than twelve (12) months immediately preceding his election of a
resident of any of the territory not formerly within the corporate limits of
the City but which is annexed under the provisions of this Charter for twelve
(12) months preceding his election;



   (b)   A qualified voter of the State of Texas;



   (c)   And shall not be indebted to the City.



If the Mayor or any Councilman fails to maintain the foregoing qualification,
shall be absent without valid excuse from three (3) consecutive regularly
scheduled meetings, or shall fail to maintain an eighty (80) percent
attendance record for each elected year without valid excuse, the Council
must declare a vacancy at its next regular meeting and shall fill the vacancy
as set forth in this Charter.



(Amended: 8-11-79)



SEC. 3.03.  COUNCIL TO BE THE JUDGE OF ELECTION QUALIFICATION.



   The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its
own members.



SEC. 3.04.  COMPENSATION.



   The Mayor and each Councilman may receive a salary set by the Council,
plus actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of his
specified official duties of the office. All expenses shall be subject to the
approval of the Council.



(Amended: 8-11-79)



SEC. 3.05.  VACANCIES.



   When a vacancy occurs in the Mayor's office or the Council, the Council
shall order a special election to be held as provided by State Law.



(Amended: 8-11-79, 5-7-88)



SEC. 3.06.  MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEM.



   (a)   Mayor:  The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council,
shall be recognized as head of the City Government for all ceremonial
purposes and by the Governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no
administrative duties.



(Amended: 8-11-79)



   (b)   Election of Mayor Pro Tem:  At its first regular meeting in
May, following the final election, the Council shall elect from among its
members, a Mayor Pro Tem who shall serve for a term of one (1) year. He shall
perform all the duties of the Mayor in the absence or disability of the Mayor.



   (c)   Emergency powers of the Mayor:  The emergency powers of the
Mayor shall be set forth by State law and local ordinances.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



SEC. 3.07.  POWER OF COUNCIL.



   All powers of the City shall be vested in the Council, except as
otherwise provided by laws or this Charter. The Council shall provide for the
exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations
imposed upon the City by law.



SEC. 3.08.  PROHIBITIONS.



   (a)   Holding other office:  Except where authorized by law, no
Mayor or Councilman shall hold any other compensated City office or
employment by the City during the term for which he was elected to the
Council, and no former Mayor or Councilman shall hold any compensated
appointive City office or employment until one (1) year after the expiration
of the term for which he was elected to the Council.



   (b)   Appointment and removals:  Neither the Council nor any of its
members shall in any way dictate the appointment or removal of any City
administrative officer or employees whom the City Manager or any of his
subordinates are empowered to appoint, unless otherwise provided in this
Charter. The Council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with
the City Manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such
officers and employees.



   (c)   Interference with administration:  Except for the purpose of
inquiries and investigations by the direction of the Council, unless provided
otherwise in this Charter, the Council or its members shall deal with City
officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of
the City Manager solely through the City Manager, and neither the Council nor
its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either
publicly or privately.



   (d)   Admission of liability:  Neither the Council nor its members
shall accept or admit liability or pay any claim for damages asserted against
the City without first obtaining a written opinion from the City Attorney
regarding the City's liability therein.



(Amended: 5-10-08)



SEC. 3.09.  MEETINGS AND PROCEDURE.



   (a)   Meetings:  Council meetings shall be held at City Hall unless
justification is announced and posted as required herein and the Council
shall meet regularly at least twice in every month at such time as the
Council may prescribe by rule. Meetings may be held on the call of the Mayor
or four (4) members and whenever practicable, upon no less than seventy-two
(72) hours notice to each member except that emergency meetings may be called
by the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem in the Mayor's absence or four (4) members
after notice has been posted two (2) hours, provided, however, that all
meetings shall be open to the public and public notice thereof given as
required by the statutes of Texas, as now or hereafter amended.



   (b)   Minutes and rules:  The Council shall determine its own rules
and order of business and shall provide for keeping minutes of its
proceedings in accordance with State law. The minutes shall be a public
record.



   (c)   Voting:  Every Councilperson and the Mayor must vote on all
issues unless there is a declared and recorded conflict of interest. The
minutes shall record those voting aye, those voting nay and those abstaining.
Five (5) members of the Council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller
number may adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance of absent
members in the manner and subject to the penalties prescribed by the rules of
the Council. In case of a 3-2 vote with five (5) people on any issue, item
would automatically be scheduled for re-consideration for the next Council
meeting. No action by the Council can be passed or failed unless four (4) of
the Council members present at the meeting vote for its passage or failure.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



SEC. 3.10.  INVESTIGATION BY COUNCIL.



   The Council shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any office,
department, agency, officer or employee of the City and to make
investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena
witnesses, administer oaths and compel the production of books, documents, or
other tangible evidence. Failure to obey such subpoena or to produce books,
documents or other tangible evidence as ordered under the provisions of this
section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine not to
exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) and/or dismissal.



SEC. 3.11.  OFFICIAL BONDS FOR CITY EMPLOYEES.



   The City Manager, City Secretary and such other city officers and
employees as the Council may require, shall, before entering upon the duties
of their offices, enter into a good and sufficient fidelity bond in the sum
to be determined by the Council payable to the City and conditioned upon a
faithful discharge of duties of such persons and upon a faithful accounting
for all monies, credits, and things of value coming into the hands of such
persons, and such bonds shall be signed as surety by some company authorized
to do business under the laws of the State of Texas, and the premium on such
bonds shall be paid by the City, and such bonds must be acceptable to the
Council.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



SEC. 3.12.  INDEPENDENT ANNUAL AUDIT.



   Not more than sixty (60) days after the end of each fiscal year, the
Council shall designate a certified public accountant who, at the end of the
next fiscal year, shall make an independent audit of accounts and other
evidences of financial transactions of the City Government and shall submit
his written report to the Council. He shall be required to make spot check
audits at his own discretion or as determined by the Council. Notice of the
annual audit and a summary shall be given by publication in some newspaper of
general circulation in the City of Mansfield. Such accountant shall have no
personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the City
Government during which time he was retained by the Council. He shall not
maintain any accounts or records of the City business, but, within
specifications approved by the Council, shall post-audit the books and
records of the City.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



SEC. 3.13.  ORDINANCES IN GENERAL.



   (a)   Action requiring an ordinance:  In addition to other acts
required by law or by specific provisions of this Charter to be done by
ordinance.



      (1)   Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted, except
as otherwise provided in Article VII;



      (2)   Levy taxes;



      (3)   Regulate the rates charged for its services by a public
utility;



      (4)   Convey, lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of
any lands of the City;



      (5)   Authorize the borrowing of money;



      (6)   Adopt, with or without amendment, ordinances proposed
under the initiative power;



      (7)   Grant, renew, extend or abolish a franchise. Acts other
than those referred to in the preceding sentence may be done either by
ordinance or by resolution; and,



      (8)   Fees and all other charges shall be passed by ordinance.



   (b)   Form:  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in
writing and in the form required for final adoption. The enacting clause of
every ordinance shall be, "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of
Mansfield..." The subject of any ordinance shall be clearly stated in its
title. Any ordinance which repeals or amends an existing ordinance shall
state sections and subsections to be amended or repealed.



   (c)   Procedure for adoption:  An ordinance may be introduced at
any regular or special meeting of the Council in accordance with rules
established by the Council. No ordinance shall be introduced for action
except as provided in Section 3.14 (Emergency Ordinances) unless such
ordinance has been posted by title on the agenda for which action is to occur
in accordance with State law. All ordinances shall be available for public
inspection and posted prior to the meeting at which time such ordinance is to
be read for the first time in accordance with State law. All ordinances shall
be read in open meeting of the Council on three (3) separate days, provided
that all readings of any ordinance may be by descriptive caption only, except
that one (1) member of the Council may require a complete reading of any
ordinance upon first reading thereof. The City Attorney shall approve all
ordinances adopted by the Council as to legality thereof or shall file with
the City Secretary written legal objections thereto. Every ordinance shall be
authenticated by the signature of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem and the City
Secretary.



   Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, the City Secretary
shall give notice of the enactment of every ordinance imposing any penalty,
fine or forfeiture for any violation of any of its provisions, and of every
other ordinance required by law or this Charter to be published by causing
the said ordinance, or its caption and penalty, to be published at least one
(1) time within ten (10) days after final passage thereof in a weekly or
daily newspaper in general circulation in the City of Mansfield. The
affidavit of such publication by the publisher of such newspaper taken before
any officer authorized to administer oaths and filed with the City Secretary
shall be conclusive proof of the legal publication and promulgation of such
ordinance in all courts. Such ordinances shall take effect ten (10) days
after the date of such publication provided that any penal ordinance shall
take effect immediately upon it's publication except as provided in Section
3.14.



   A copy of every ordinance and resolution as codified shall be
maintained and available for free reference in the office of the City
Secretary.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



SEC. 3.14.  EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.



   The Council may adopt emergency ordinances only to meet public
emergencies affecting life, health, property, or the public peace in
accordance with State law. In particular, such ordinances shall not levy
taxes, grant or renew or extend a franchise, or regulate the rate charged by
any public utility for its services. Neither shall they authorize the
borrowing of money, except as provided in Article IX. An emergency ordinance
shall be introduced in the form and manner generally prescribed for
ordinances, except that it shall be plainly designed in the title as an
emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a
declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and
specific terms. An emergency ordinance can be adopted with or without
amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. The
affirmative vote of four (4) members of the Council shall be required for
adoption. After adoption, the ordinance shall be published as required for
other adopted ordinances, but may become effective immediately upon enactment.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



ARTICLE IV.  ELECTIONS



SEC. 4.01.  NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS.



   (a)   Regular elections:  The regular City elections will be held
annually on the first Saturday in May unless specifically prescribed by State
law. The Council shall order the election and designate the place for holding
such an election.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



   (b)   Special elections:  The Council may, by ordinance or
resolution, order a special election for ordinances, bond issues, charter
amendments, filling vacancies in an existing elected office, or any other
reason the Council deems necessary. The Council will fix the place and date
for holding this type of election which may or may not be held simultaneously
with a regular election.



   (c)   Publicizing City elections:  It is the responsibility of the
Council to inform the voters as to the time, place, date, purpose and filing
period for the upcoming City election. Notice shall be given as provided by
law. The provisions for absentee balloting shall also be publicized at this
time. Sample ballots shall be posted outside the City offices and shall be
published in some newspaper of general circulation in the City of Mansfield
not less than ten (10) days prior to the election.



   (d)   Conduct and regulation of City elections:  All City elections
shall be governed by the Constitution of the State of Texas, Election Code of
the State, this Charter, and ordinances of the City, in the order named.
Municipal elections shall be conducted by the election officials appointed
and approved by the Council. Sample ballots identical to the voting format
for the specific election shall be posted in the voting place for the benefit
of the voters.



   (e)   Voter qualification:  All duly qualified electors under the
laws of the State of Texas, who are residents of the City, shall be qualified
to vote in any City election.



SEC. 4.02.  FILING FOR OFFICE.



   (a)   Eligibility to file for office:  Each candidate for an
elective position in the City shall meet the requirements set forth under
Section 3.02 of this Charter.



   (b)   Procedure for filing for office:  Any eligible person who
desires to become a candidate for election shall file an application with the
City Secretary in accordance with state law. Such an application shall
clearly designate the office and position to which the candidate seeks
election, and shall contain a sworn statement by the candidate that he is
fully qualified under the provisions of this Charter to hold the office
sought.



(Amended: 5-7-88, 5-10-08)



   (c)   General campaign regulations:  Candidates for office are
responsible for familiarizing themselves and complying with all campaign
regulations such as: Campaign Manager appointment and expenditure statements
prescribed by the Election Code.



   The City Secretary may assist candidates with their questions, but has
no legal duty to inform candidates, or has any legal authority, other than to
act as file clerk for regulatory statements. Questions should be directed to
a private attorney or the Election Division of the Secretary of State's
Office in Austin.



   Failure to comply with certain regulations can subject a candidate's
right to have his name placed on the ballot.



SEC. 4.03.  OFFICIAL BALLOTS.



   (a)   Candidates' names on ballots:  The names of all candidates
who have filed for office shall be printed on the official ballots without
party designation. The order on the ballot of the names of the candidates for
each office or position shall be determined by lot in a drawing to be held
under the supervision of the City Secretary.



   (b)   Early balloting:  Early voting shall be governed by the
Election Code of the State of Texas.



   (c)   Write-in votes:  Write in voting shall be permitted in
accordance with state law.



(Amended: 5-10-08)



SEC. 4.04.  DETERMINATION OF ELECTION RESULTS.



   (a)   Canvassing:  Canvassing shall be conducted in accordance with
state law.



   (b)   Majority rules:  The candidates for each place on the ballot
who shall have received the majority of votes cast for such place shall be
declared elected. In the event that no candidate for a designated office
receives a majority of the votes cast for that place in the regular or
special election, a runoff election shall be held between the candidates who
received the two (2) greatest number of votes for such place.
Notwithstanding, the provisions of Section 4.01(c), such a runoff election
shall be held in accordance with State law.



(Amended: 5-7-88, 5-10-08)



SEC. 4.05.  TAKING OFFICE.



   The City Secretary shall promptly notify all persons elected to office.
A candidate who is elected in a special or runoff City election shall, after
taking the oath of office, take office, and enter upon his duties as provided
in Section 3.01 or at the next Council meeting after the date of the final
election.



ARTICLE V. RECALL OF OFFICERS



SEC. 5.01.  RECALL.



   Any elected City official shall be subject to recall and removal from
office by the qualified voters of the City on grounds of incompetency,
misconduct or malfeasance in office.



SEC. 5.02.  PETITIONS FOR RECALL.



   Before the question of recall of such officer shall be submitted to the
qualified voters of the City, a petition demanding such question to be
submitted, shall first be filed with the person performing the duties of City
Secretary, which said petition shall be signed by qualified voters of the
City equal in number to at least thirty (30) percent of the number of votes
cast at the last regular municipal election of the City, but in no event less
than one hundred fifty (150) such petitioners. Each signer of such recall
petition shall personally sign his name thereto in ink or indelible pencil,
and shall write after his name his place of residence, giving name of street
and number, or place of residence, and shall also write thereon the day, the
month and year his signature was affixed.



SEC. 5.03.  FORM OF RECALL PETITION.



   The recall petition mentioned above must be addressed to the Council of
the City of Mansfield, must distinctly and specifically point out the ground
or grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and, if there
be more than one (1) ground, such as for incompetency, misconduct or
malfeasance in office, shall specifically state each ground with such
certainty as to give the office sought to be removed, notice of the matters
and things with which he is charged. The signature shall be verified by oath
in the following form:



"State of Texas               )



County of Tarrant/Johnson/Ellis         )



I,___________________ , being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I
am one of the signers of the above petition and that the statements made
therein are true and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my
presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly
swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it
purports to be.



Sworn and Subscribed to before me this _______ day of _______________, 20___,



   ____________________________________



   Notary Public in and for the State of Texas"



(Amended: 5-7-88)



SEC. 5.04.  VARIOUS PAPERS CONSTITUTING PETITION.



   The petition may consist of one (1) or more copies, or subscription
lists, circulated separately, and the signatures thereon may be upon the
paper or papers containing the form of petition or upon other papers attached
thereto. Verifications provided for in the next preceding section of this
article may be made by one (1) or more petitioners; and the several parts of
copies of the petition may be filed separately and by different persons; but
no signatures to such petition shall remain effective or be counted which
were placed thereon more than thirty (30) days prior to the filing of such
petition or petitions with the person performing the duties of City
Secretary. All papers comprising a recall petition shall be filed with the
person performing the duties of City Secretary on the same day, and the said
Secretary shall immediately notify, in writing, the officer so sought to be
removed, by mailing such notice to his Mansfield address.



SEC. 5.05.  PRESENTATION OF PETITION TO THE COUNCIL.



   Within five (5) days after the date of filing of the papers
constituting the recall petition, the person performing the duties of City
Secretary shall present such petition to the Council of the City of Mansfield
at a special meeting called for this purpose.



SEC. 5.06.  PUBLIC HEARING TO BE HELD.



   The officer whose removal is sought may, within five (5) days after
such recall petition has been presented to the Council, request that a public
hearing be held to permit him to present facts pertinent to the charges
specified in the recall petition. In this event, the Council shall order such
public hearing to be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen
(15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing.



SEC. 5.07.  ELECTION TO CALLED.



   If an officer whose removal is sought does not resign, then it shall
become the duty of the Council to order an election to be held on the first
uniform election date that permits compliance with the requirements of law.



(Amended: 5-10-08)



SEC. 5.08.  BALLOTS IN RECALL ELECTION.



   Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following
requirements:



   (a)   With respect to each person whose removal is sought the
question shall be submitted:



      "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (name of
office) by recall?"



   (b)   Immediately below each such question there shall be printed
the following words, one above the other, in the order indicated:



      "YES"



      "NO"



SEC. 5.09.  RESULT OF RECALL ELECTION.



   If the majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be "NO"
that is against the recall of the person named on the ballot, he shall
continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall
as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be "YES" that
is for the recall of the person named on the ballot, he shall, regardless of
any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office
and the vacancy be filled as vacancies in the Council are filled, as provided
in Section 3.05 of this Charter.



SEC. 5.10.  RECALL, RESTRICTION THEREON.



   No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the City
within six (6) months after his election, nor within six (6) months after an
election for such officer's recall. Nothing herein shall prevent impeachment
of an officer of the City nor removal for other causes as provided for herein.



ARTICLE VI.  ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES



SEC. 6.01.  CITY MANAGER.



   (a)   Appointment and qualification:  The Council shall appoint a
City Manager who shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of
the City and shall be responsible to the Council for the administration of
all the affairs of the City. He shall be chosen by the Council solely on the
basis of his executive and administrative training, experience, ability and
character, and need not when appointed, be a resident of the City. However,
he shall become a resident of the City within six (6) months after
appointment unless otherwise specifically excused by the Council.



   (b)   Term and salary:  The City Manager shall serve at the will
and pleasure of the Council and may be removed from office in accordance with
the following procedures:



      (1)   The Council shall adopt by affirmative vote of five (5)
members and may suspend the manager from duty for a period not to exceed
forty-five (45) days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to
the manager.



      (2)   Within five (5) days after a copy of the resolution is
delivered to the manager, he may file with the Council a written request for
a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at the Council meeting not
earlier than fifteen (15) days nor later than thirty (30) days after the
request is filed. The manager may file with the Council a written reply not
later than five (5) days before the hearing.



      (3)   The Council may adopt a final resolution of removal,
which may be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of five (5)
members at any time after five (5) days from the date when a copy of the
preliminary resolution was delivered to the manager, if he has not requested
a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if he has requested
one.



   The manager shall continue to receive his salary until the effective
date of a final resolution of removal. The action of the Council in
suspending or removing the City Manager shall be final; it being the
intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility of
such suspension or removal in the Council. In case of the absence or
disability of the City Manager, the Council may designate some qualified
person to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability.
The City Manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the
Council.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



   (c)   Powers and duties:  The powers herein conferred upon the City
Manager shall include but shall not be limited to the following:



      (1)   To appoint and remove any officer or employee of the
City except those officers and employees whose appointment or election is
otherwise provided for by law or this Charter.



      (2)   Prepare and submit the annual budget and a five (5) year
capital improvement program to the Council.



      (3)   Submit to the Council monthly a report on the finances
and administrative activities of the City and a complete report as of the end
of each fiscal year.



      (4)   Provide each Department Head with a financial report of
his department monthly.



      (5)   Attend all meetings of the Council except when excused
by Council.



      (6)   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by
this Charter or required of him by the Council, not inconsistent with
provisions of this Charter.



SEC. 6.02.  OTHER DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS.



   The Council, after obtaining the City Manager's recommendation, may
abolish or consolidate such offices and departments as it may deem to be in
the best interest of the City, and may divide the administration of any such
departments as it may deem advisable; may create new departments, and may
discontinue any offices or departments at its discretion.



   The Council shall create, establish, or appoint, as may be required by
law, circumstances, or this Charter, those boards, commission, and committees
which are deemed necessary to carry out the functions and obligations of the
City. The Council shall prescribe accountability and tenure of each board,
commission, and committee where such are not prescribed by law or this
Charter. The Council shall also prescribe the purpose, composition, function,
and duty of each board, committee, or commission where such are not
prescribed by law or this Charter.



ARTICLE VII.  LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM



SEC. 7.01.  GENERAL POWER.



   The qualified voters of the City, in addition to the method of
legislation hereinbefore provided, shall have the power of direct legislation
by initiative and referendum.



SEC. 7.02.  INITIATIVE.



   Qualified voters of the City may initiate legislation by submitting a
petition addressed to the Council which requests the submission of a proposed
ordinance or resolution to a vote of the qualified voters of the City. Said
petition must be signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at
least thirty (30) percent of the number of votes cast at the last regular
municipal election of the City, but in no event less than one hundred fifty
(150) such petitioners. Each copy of the petition shall have attached to it a
copy of the proposed legislation. The petition shall be signed in the same
manner as recall petitions are signed, as provided in Section 5.02 of this
Charter, and shall be verified by oath in the manner and form provided by
recall petitions in Section 5.03 of this Charter. The petition may consist of
one (1) or more copies as permitted for recall petitions in Section 5.04 of
this Charter. Such petition shall be filed with the person performing the
duties of City Secretary. At the next regular Council meeting after the
filing of such petition, the person performing the duties of City Secretary
shall present said petition and proposed ordinance or resolution to the
Council. Upon presentation of the petition and draft of proposed ordinance or
resolution, it shall become the duty of the Council, within ten (10) days
after the receipt thereof, to pass and adopt such ordinance or resolutions
without alteration as to meaning or effect in the opinion of the persons
filing the petition, or to call a special election, to be held on the first
uniform election date that permits compliance with the requirements of law,
at which the qualified voters of the City shall vote on the question of
adopting or rejecting the proposed legislation. However, if any other
municipal election is to he held within sixty (60) days after the filing of
the petition, the question may be voted on at such election.



(Amended: 5-10-08)



SEC. 7.03.  REFERENDUM.



   Qualified voters of the City may require that any ordinance or
resolution, with the exception of ordinances or resolutions authorizing the
issuance of either tax or revenue bonds whether original or refunding,
levying taxes, or appropriate money, passed by the Council be submitted to
the voters of the City for approval or disapproval, by submitting a petition
for this purpose within ninety (90) days after final passage of said
ordinance or resolution, or within ninety (90) days after its publication.
Said petition shall be addressed, prepared, signed and verified as required
for petitions initiating legislation as provided in Section 7.02 of this
Charter and shall be submitted to the person performing the duties of City
Secretary. Immediately upon the filing of such petition, the person
performing the duties of City Secretary shall present said petition to the
Council. Thereupon the Council shall immediately reconsider such ordinance or
resolution and, if it does not entirely repeal the same, shall submit it to
popular vote as provided in Section 7.02 of this Charter. Until such
ordinance or resolution is approved by the voters as herein provided, the
ordinance or resolution specified in the petition shall not go into effect,
or further action thereunder shall be suspended if it shall have gone into
effect.



SEC. 7.04.  VOLUNTARY SUBMISSION OF LEGISLATION BY THE COUNCIL.



   The Council, upon its own motion and by a majority vote of its members,
may submit to popular vote at any election for adoption or rejection any
proposed ordinance or resolution or measure, or may submit for repeal any
existing ordinance, resolution or measure, in the same manner and with the
same force and effect as provided in this article for submission on petition,
and may in its discretion call a special election for this purpose.



SEC. 7.05.  FORM OF BALLOTS.



   The ballots used when voting upon such proposed and referred
ordinances, resolutions, or measure, shall set forth their nature
sufficiently to identify them and shall also set forth upon separate lines
the words:



               "FOR THE ORDINANCE," and



               "AGAINST THE ORDINANCE," or



               "FOR THE RESOLUTION" and



               "AGAINST THE RESOLUTION."



SEC. 7.06.  PUBLICATION OF PROPOSED AND REFERRED ORDINANCE.



   The person performing the duties of City Secretary shall publish at
least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Mansfield
the proposed or referred ordinance or resolution within fifteen (15) days
before the date of the election, and shall give such other notices and do
such other things relative to such election as are required in general
municipal elections or by the ordinance or resolution calling said election.



SEC. 7.07.  ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES.



   If a majority of the qualified voters voting on a proposed ordinance or
resolution or measure shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon, or at
any time fixed therein, become effective as a law or as a mandatory order to
the Council.



SEC. 7.08.  INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES.



   If the provisions or two (2) or more proposed ordinances or resolutions
approved at the same election are inconsistent, the ordinance or resolution
receiving the highest number of votes "FOR" or "AGAINST" shall prevail.



SEC. 7.09.  ORDINANCES PASSED BY POPULAR VOTE, REPEAL OF AMENDMENT.



   No ordinance or resolution which may have been passed by the Council as
a result of popular vote under the provisions of this article shall be
repealed or amended except in response to a referendum vote or by submission
as provided in Section 7.03 of this Charter.



SEC. 7.10.  ORDINANCES BY THE COUNCIL (FURTHER REGULATIONS).



   The Council may pass ordinances or resolutions providing other and
further regulations for carrying out the provisions of this article not
inconsistent herewith.



SEC. 7.11.  FRANCHISE ORDINANCES.



   Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to be in conflict
with any of the provisions of Article II of this Charter, pertaining to
ordinances granting franchises when valuable rights have accrued thereunder.



ARTICLE VIII.  LEGAL AND JUDICIAL SERVICES



SEC. 8.01.  MUNICIPAL COURT.



   There shall be established and maintained a court designated as the
Municipal Court of the City of Mansfield for the trial of misdemeanor
offenses, with all such powers and duties as are now or hereafter may be
prescribed by laws of the State of Texas relative to Municipal Courts.



SEC. 8.02.  JUDGE OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT.



   The Judge of said Court shall be appointed by the Council. Said Judge
shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the Council. In case of the
disability or absence of the Judge of the Municipal Court, the Council shall
appoint a temporary Municipal Court judge, to fill the unexpired term. The
Judge of said court shall be appointed to a two (2) year term. The Judge of
the Municipal Court may be removed for cause, after a hearing, by a majority
vote of the Councilmen qualified and serving.



SEC. 8.03.  CLERK OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT.



   In accordance with state law, the City shall appoint a clerk of the
Municipal Court. The Clerk of said Court and his deputies shall have the
power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal
of said Court thereto and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and
necessary by the Clerk of Courts in issuing process of said Courts and
conducting the business thereof.



(Amended: 5-10-08)



SEC. 8.04.  ASSOCIATE JUDGES OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT.



   The Council shall be empowered to appoint Associate Judges of the
Municipal Court to serve under the direction of the Judge of the Municipal
Court. An Associate Judge shall bear all powers and duties as are now or
hereafter may be prescribed by laws of the State of Texas relative to
Municipal Courts.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



SEC. 8.05.  CITY ATTORNEY.



   The City Manager shall appoint a competent and duly qualified and
licensed attorney in the State of Texas who shall serve as the City Attorney.



   (a)   The City Attorney shall be required to:



      (1)   Serve as the legal advisor to the Council and to the
City Manager;



      (2)   Represent the City in litigation and legal proceedings;



      (3)   Review and provide opinions as requested by the Council
or by the City Manager on contracts, legal instruments, and ordinances of the
City.



   (b)   Limitation:  This Section shall not be a constraint upon the
right of the Council to retain special counsel at any time that the Council
may deem necessary and appropriate.



   (c)   Compensation:  Compensation shall be fixed by contract with
approval of Council or by appointment subject to the approval of Council.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



ARTICLE IX.  MUNICIPAL FINANCE



SEC. 9.01.  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of October and
end the last day of September. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the
budget and accounting year.



SEC. 9.02.  SUBMISSION OF BUDGET.



   The City Manager shall, not less than sixty (60) days prior to the
close of fiscal year, prepare and submit to the Council a proposed balanced
budget for the ensuing fiscal year as outlined in Section 9.03 of this
Charter. A copy shall be filed with the City Secretary for public inspection.



SEC. 9.03.  BUDGET.



   (a)   Budget message:  A budget message explaining the budget both
in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs shall be submitted with the
budget. It shall outline the proposed financial programs of the City for the
ensuing fiscal year, the capital program, the capital projects for five (5)
fiscal years succeeding the budget year. It shall describe the important
features of the budget and indicate any major changes from the current year
in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues including the reasons for
such changes. It shall also summarize the City's debt position and contain
such other materials or information as the City Manager deems desirable.



   (b)   Budget scope:  The budget shall provide a complete financial
plan of all City funds and activities and, except as required by law or this
Charter, shall be in such form as the City Manager deems desirable or the
Council may require. The budget shall be so arranged as to show comparative
figures for actual and budgeted income and expenditures for the preceding
fiscal year; budgeted and estimated income and expenditure for the current
fiscal year; and estimated income and expenditures for the next fiscal year.
The total of proposed expenditures for the budgeted year shall not exceed the
total of the established income and surplus.



   (c)   Content:  The budget shall contain in separate sections the
following:



      (1)   A clear general summary of contents;



      (2)   A consolidated statement of receipts and expenditures of
all funds, listed and itemized individually;



      (3)   An analysis and itemization of all estimated income of
the City from surplus, miscellaneous income and taxes with miscellaneous
income subclassified by sources;



      (4)   Tax rates schedule for proposed budget as well as tax
rates and collections for the preceding five (5) years;



      (5)   An itemized statement of expenditures for pending and
proposed new capital projects. Included shall be the amounts appropriated
from the budget, the amounts to be raised by issuance of bonds, and the
amount required for down payment;



      (6)   The amount required for sinking funds, for maturing
serial bonds, and for interest on the City's debts;



      (7)   The total amount of the City's outstanding debts, with a
schedule of maturity on bond issues in an attachment;



      (8)   A detailed estimate of the operating expenses of each
department, office or agency;



      (9)   Statement of estimated net surplus or deficit for the
ensuing fiscal year of each utility owned and operated by the City. A
subsidiary budget for each utility shall be included giving details of income
and expenditures;



      (10)   Such other information as is required by the Council or
deemed desirable by the City Manager;



      (11)   A contingency fund may be included not to exceed five
(5) percent of the general fund proposed expenditure; and



      (12)   Such dedicated reserves as may be required.



SEC. 9.04.  PUBLIC NOTICE AND HEARING OF BUDGET.



   The Council shall post in City office and publish in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City, the budget message of the proposed budget
with a notice stating:



   (1)   The time and places where copies of the message and proposed
budget are available for inspection by the public.



   (2)   The time and place, not less than two (2) weeks after
publication, for a public hearing of the budget.



SEC. 9.05.  COUNCIL ACTION ON BUDGET.



   (a)   The Council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as
submitted at the time and place so advertised in accordance with Section
9.04. All interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard either
for or against any item or items of the proposed budget.



   (b)   After a public hearing, the Council may increase or decrease
items of the budget, except those items in proposed expenditures fixed by
law. In no case shall the Council increase the total proposed expenditures
unless it has provided for an increase of anticipated revenue to maintain a
balanced budget.



   (c)   After a public hearing the Council may adopt the budget with
or without amendment with an affirmative vote of a majority of the entire
Council. Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriation of the amounts
specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated, and shall
constitute a levy of the Property Tax therein proposed.



SEC. 9.06.  FAILURE TO ADOPT BUDGET.



   If the Council fails to adopt the budget by the fifteenth day of
September, the amounts appropriated for operating during the current fiscal
year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month
basis, with all items in it prorated accordingly, until such time as the
Council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The levy of property tax
normally approved as part of the budget adoption will be set such that the
tax receipts for the budgeted year shall equal the tax receipts of the
current fiscal year.



SEC. 9.07.  PUBLIC RECORDS.



   Copies of the approved budget, capital improvement program, and
supporting papers shall be filed with the City Secretary and shall be public
records available to the public upon request.



SEC. 9.08.  BUDGET ESTABLISHED TAXATION.



   From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the
amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the
amount of the levy for the purposes of the City, in the corresponding tax
year; provided the levy does not exceed legal limits provided by the laws of
the State of Texas.



   A certified copy of the budget tax schedule shall be filed with the tax
office, board, or commission whose duty it shall be to levy such taxes for
the corresponding tax year.



SEC. 9.09.  AMENDMENTS AFTER ADOPTION.



   (a)   Supplemental appropriations:  If during the fiscal year the
City Manager certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in
excess of those estimated in the budget, the Council may carry the excess
into the next fiscal year or by resolution may make supplemental
appropriations to retire indebtedness or to fund emergency appropriations as
described in Section 9.09(b).



   (b)   Emergency appropriations:  To meet a public emergency
affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the Council may make
emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may require emergency notes,
which may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals
of any fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal
year in which the emergency appropriation was made.



   (c)   Reduction of appropriations:  If at any time during the
fiscal year it appears probable to the City Manager that the revenues
available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall
report to the Council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of
deficit, any remedial action taken by him and his recommendations as to any
other steps to be taken. The Council shall then take such further action that
it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit.



   (d)   Transfer of appropriations:  At any time during the fiscal
year the City Manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered
appropriation balance among programs within a department, office or agency.
The Council may require their approval of these transfers within departments
above a limit they wish to establish. Upon written request by the City
Manager, the Council only may approve transfer of part or all of any
unencumbered appropriation balance from one (1) department, office or agency
to another.



   (e)   Limitations:  No appropriation for debt service may be
reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount
required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the
unencumbered balance.



   (f)   Effective date:  The supplemental and emergency
appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this
section may be made effective immediately upon adoption or resolution by the
Council.



SEC. 9.10.  CAPITAL PROGRAM.



   The City Manager shall submit a five (5) year capital program as an
attachment to the annual budget. The program as submitted shall include:



   (a)   A clear general summary of its contents;



   (b)   A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be
undertaken during the five (5) fiscal years succeeding the budget year, with
appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements;



   (c)   Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time
schedules for each such improvement; and



   (d)   The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the
facilities to be constructed or acquired.



   The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard
to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or
acquisition.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



SEC. 9.11.  LAPSE OF APPROPRIATIONS.



   Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure,
shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not
been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall
continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been
accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be
deemed abandoned if three (3) years pass without any disbursement from or
encumbrance of the appropriation.



SEC. 9.12.  ADMINISTRATION OF BUDGET.



   (a)   Payments and obligations prohibited:  No payment shall be
made or obligation incurred against any allotment or appropriation except in
accordance with appropriations duly made and unless the City Manager or his
designee first certifies that there is a sufficient, unencumbered balance in
such allotment or appropriation that sufficient funds are or will be
available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and
payable. Any authorization of payment or incurring obligation in violation of
the provisions of this Charter shall be void and any payment so made illegal.
Such action shall be cause for removal of any officer who knowingly
authorized or made such payment or incurred such obligations, and he shall be
liable to the City for any amount so paid. However, this prohibition shall
not be construed to prevent the making or authorizing of payments or making
of contracts for capital improvements to be financed wholly or partly by the
issuance of bonds, certificates of obligations, or grants from other
governmental bodies, or to prevent the making of any contract or lease
providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year, provided that such
action is made or approved by ordinance. All disbursements above a limit set
by Council shall designate those authorized to sign the disbursements.



   (b)   Financial reports:  The City Manager shall submit to the
Council each month a report covering the financial condition of the City.



   (c)   Annual audit:  An annual audit shall be performed by a
competent certified public accounting firm as provided in Section 3.12.



SEC. 9.13.  BORROWING.



   (a)   The right to borrow:  The City shall have the right and
power, except as prohibited by law, to borrow money by whatever method it may
deem to be in the public interest and in accordance with laws of the State of
Texas.



   (b)   General obligation bonds:  The City shall have the power to
borrow money on the credit of the City and to issue general obligation bonds
for permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not
prohibited by law, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds
previously issued.



   (c)   Revenue bonds:  The City shall have the power to borrow money
for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending, or
repairing of public utilities, recreational facilities or any other
self-liquidating municipal function not prohibited by law, and to issue
revenue bonds to evidence the obligation created. Such bonds shall be a
charge upon and payable from any or all City properties or interest pledged,
or the income from the City properties, or both. The holders of the revenue
bonds shall never have the right to demand payment out of monies raised or to
be raised by taxation.



   (d)   Borrowing in anticipation of property tax:  In any budget
year, the Council may, by resolution, authorize the borrowing of money in
anticipation of the collection of the property tax for the same year whether
levied or to be levied. Notes may be issued for periods not exceeding one (1)
year and must be retired by the end of the budget year in which issued.



SEC. 9.14.  PURCHASING.



   The Council may confer upon the City Manager general authority to
contract for expenditures without further approval of the Council for all
budgeted items not exceeding limits set by Council or State law. All
contracts for expenditures involving more than the set limits must be
approved by the Council. All contracts or purchases involving more than the
limits set, shall be let as provided by law or ordinance; provided that the
Council, or City Manager in such cases as he is authorized to contract for
the City, shall have the right to reject any and all bids.



   Emergency contracts as authorized by law may be negotiated by the
Council, or City Manager if given authority by the Council, without
competitive bidding. Such emergency shall be declared by the City Manager and
approved by Council or may be declared by Council.



(Amended: 5-10-08)



SEC. 9.15.  DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION.



   There shall be established a Department of Taxation to assess and
collect taxes, the head of which shall be the City Tax Assessor-Collector who
shall be appointed and may be removed by the City Manager.



   The City Tax Assessor-Collector shall give a surety bond for faithful
performance of his duties, including compliance with all controlling
provisions of the State law bearing upon functions of his office, in a sum
which shall be fixed by the Council at not less than fifty-thousand dollars
($50,000.00). The Council may in the interest of economy and efficiency,
contract with the school district or other political subdivision to handle
the assessments and/or collection of taxes.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



SEC. 9.16.  POWER TO TAX.



   The Council shall have the power to levy, assess and collect an annual
tax upon real and personal property within the City to the maximum provided
by the Constitution and general laws of the State of Texas. The Council shall
also have the power to levy such additional taxes as now or hereafter may be
authorized by the State of Texas.



SEC. 9.17.  PROPERTY SUBJECT TO TAX, METHOD OF ASSESSMENT.



   All real and personal property within the City of Mansfield, not
expressly exempted by law, shall be subject to annual taxation as provided
herein except as may be required by State law.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



SEC. 9.18.  TAXES - WHEN DUE AND PAYABLE.



   All taxes due the City of Mansfield shall be payable at the office of
the City Tax Assessor-Collector and may be paid at any time after the tax
rolls for the year have been completed and approved, which shall be not later
than October 1st. Taxes shall be paid on or before January 31st and all such
taxes not paid on or prior to such date shall be deemed delinquent and shall
be subject to such penalty and interest as prescribed by State statute. The
Council may provide further by ordinance that all taxes, either current or
delinquent, due the City of Mansfield, may be paid by installments. Failure
to levy and assess taxes through omission in preparation of the approve tax
roll shall not relieve the person, firm or corporation so omitted from
obligation to pay such current or past due taxes as shown to be payable by
recheck of the rolls and receipt for the years in question.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



SEC. 9.19.  TAX LIENS.



   The tax levied by the City is hereby declared to be a lien, charge, or
encumbrance upon the property as of January 1st of each year, upon which the
tax is due, which lien, charge or encumbrance the City is entitled to enforce
and foreclose in any court having jurisdiction over the same, and the lien,
charge or encumbrance on the property is such as to give the State Courts
jurisdiction to enforce and foreclose said lien on the property on which the
tax is due, not only as against any resident of this State or person whose
residence is unknown, but as against nonresidents. All taxes upon real estate
shall especially be a lien and a charge upon the property upon which the
taxes are due, and such lien may be foreclosed in any court having
jurisdiction. Such lien shall be, prior to all other claims, and no gift,
sale, assignment or transfer of any kind, or judicial writ of any kind, can
ever defeat such lien.



   In addition to the liens herein provided, on the first day of January
of any year the owner of real and personal property subject to taxation by
the City shall be personally liable for the taxes due thereon for such year.
The City shall have the power to sue for and recover personal judgment for
taxes without foreclosure, or to foreclose its lien or liens, or to recover
both personal judgment and foreclosure. In any such suit where it appears
that the description of any property in the City assessment rolls is
insufficient to identify such property, the City shall have the right to
plead a good description of the property intended to be assessed, to prove
the same, and to have its judgment foreclosing the tax lien and/or personal
judgment against the owner for such taxes.



ARTICLE X.  PLANNING AND ZONING



SEC. 10.01.  THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   There shall be established a Planning and Zoning Commission, which
shall consist of seven (7) citizens from the City of Mansfield who own real
property within said City. The members of said Commission shall be appointed
by the Council for a term of two (2) years. Three (3) members of the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall be so appointed each odd-numbered year and for
(4) members shall be appointed each even-numbered year. The Commission shall
elect a chairman from among its membership and shall meet not less than once
each month. Vacancies and unexpired terms shall be filled by the Council for
the remainder of the term. A majority of the members shall constitute a
quorum. Members of the Commission may be removed with the consent of a
majority of the Council and for cause set forth in writing. A member may
request a public hearing within five (5) days of notice of removal by the
Council, said hearing to be scheduled not less than ten (10) nor more than
thirty (30) days after said notice.



   A requirement for a Planning and Zoning member who runs for City
Council shall be that he resign his position on the Planning and Zoning
Commission before filing for office.



   The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings which shall be of
public record. The Commission shall serve without compensation.



(Amended: 5-7-88, 5-10-08)



SEC. 10.02.  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall:



   (a)   Recommend a City Plan for the physical development of the City,



   (b)   Recommend to the Council approval or disapproval of proposed
changes in the zoning plan, and



   (c)   Exercise control over platting or sub-dividing land within the
corporate limits of the City and outside said corporate limits to the extent
authorized by law.



   The Commission shall be responsible to and act as an advisory body to
the Council and shall have and perform such additional duties as may be
prescribed by ordinance.



SEC. 10.03.  THE MASTER PLAN.



   The master plan for the physical development of the City of Mansfield
shall contain the Commission's recommendations for growth, development and
beautification of the City. A copy of the master plan, or any part thereof,
shall be forwarded to the Council, which may adopt this plan in whole or in
parts, and may adopt any amendments thereto after at least, one (1) public
hearing on the proposed action. The Council shall act on such plan, or part
thereof, within sixty (60) days following its submission. If such plan, or
part thereof, shall be rejected by the Council, the Commission may modify
such plan, or part thereof, and again forward it to the Council for
consideration.



   All amendments to the master plan recommended by the Commission shall
be submitted in the same manner as outlined above to the Council for approval
and all recommendations affecting the master plan shall be accompanied by a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission.



SEC. 10.04.  LEGAL EFFECT OF THE MASTER PLAN.



   Upon the adoption of a master plan by the Council, no subdivision,
street, park or any public way, ground or space, public building or
structure, or public utility whether publicly or privately owned, which is in
conflict with the master plan shall be constructed or authorized by the City
until and unless the location and extent thereof shall have been submitted to
and approved by the Commission. In case of disapproval, the Commission shall
communicate its reasons to the Council, which shall have the power to
over-rule such disapproval, and upon such over-ruling, the Council shall have
power to proceed. The widening, narrowing, re-locating, vacating or change in
the use of any street, alley or public way, or ground or the sale of any
public building, or real property, shall be subject to similar submission and
approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and failure to approve may be
similarly overruled by the Council.



ARTICLE XI.  FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES



SEC. 11.01.  POWERS OF THE CITY.



   In addition to the City's power granted elsewhere in this Charter, the
City shall have the power to buy, own, sell, construct, lease, maintain, and
operate public service within or without the City limits and to manufacture,
distribute and sell the output of such service operation within or without
the City limits. The City shall have such regulatory and other power as may
now or hereafter be granted under the Constitution and Laws of the State of
Texas. Public service shall include utilities or service to the public of
every character.



SEC. 11.02.  POWER TO GRANT FRANCHISE.



   The Council shall have power by ordinance to grant, amend, renew and
extend, all franchises of all public utilities of every character operating
within the City of Mansfield. All ordinances granting, amending, renewing, or
extending franchises for public utilities shall be read at two (2) separate
regular meeting of the Council, and shall not be finally passed until
twenty-eight (28) days after the first reading, and no such ordinance shall
take effect until thirty (30) days after its final passage; and pending such
time, the full text of such ordinance shall be published once each week for
three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
of Mansfield; and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the
proponent of the franchise. No franchise shall be for an indeterminate period
nor be transferable except with the approval of the Council expressed by
ordinance.



SEC. 11.03.  FRANCHISE VALUE NOT TO BE ALLOWED.



   No value shall be assigned to any franchise granted by the City of
Mansfield under this Charter in fixing reasonable rates and charges for
utility service within the City and in determining the just compensation to
be paid by the City for public utility property which the City may acquire by
condemnation or otherwise.



SEC. 11.04.  RIGHT OF REGULATION.



   All grants, renewals, extensions, or amendments of public utility
franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be
subject to the right of the City:



   (a)   To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for failure to
begin construction or operation within the time prescribed or for failure
otherwise to comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be
exercised only after due notice and hearing.



   (b)   To require an adequate and reasonable extension of plant and
service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the standard
necessary to render the highest reasonable quality of utility service to the
public.



   (c)   To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of
products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates.



   (d)   (1)   To prescribe the form of accounts kept by each such
utility; provided, that if the utility shall keep its accounts in accordance
with the uniform systems of accounts for said utility prescribed by the
National Association of Railroad and Public Utility Commissioners, the
Federal Power Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, the Railroad
Commission of Texas, or their successors, or other State or federal utility
regulating agencies, this shall be deemed sufficient compliance with this
paragraph.



      (2)   At any time to examine and audit the accounts and other
records of any such utility and to require annual and other reports,
including reports on local operations by each such public utility.



   (e)   To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may
be deemed desirable or conducive to safety, welfare, and accommodation of the
public.



   (f)   To require the franchise to restore at the franchisee's
expense, all public or private property to a condition equally as good as or
better than before disturbed by construction, repair or removal.



   (g)   To require every franchisee to furnish within a reasonable
time to the City, without cost to the City, a general map, with updates
outlining the location, character, size length, and terminals of all
facilities of such franchisee in, over, and under ground of property in the
City and to provide detailed information on request.



SEC. 11.05.  GRANT NOT TO BE EXCLUSIVE.



   No grant or franchise to construct, maintain or operate a public
utility and/or renewal or extension of such grant shall be exclusive.



SEC. 11.06.  CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNERS.



   The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be
required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any
public utility; but nothing in this Charter or in any franchise granted
thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owner of any
right of action for damage or injury to his property as now or hereafter
provided by law.



SEC. 11.07.  EXTENSIONS.



   All extensions of public utilities within the City limits shall become
a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as
such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights
contained in this Charter and in any original grant thereafter made. The
right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original
grant and shall be terminable as provided in Section 11.04 of this Charter.
In case of an extension of a public utility operated under a franchise
hereafter granted, such right shall be terminated at the same time and under
the same conditions as the original grant.



SEC. 11.08.  TEMPORARY PERMITS.



   Permits unconditionally revocable at the will of the Council for minor
or temporary privileges in the streets, public ways and public places of the
City may be granted and revoked by resolution from time to time, and such
permits shall not be deemed franchises as the term is used in this Charter.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



SEC. 11.09.  OTHER CONDITIONS.



   All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between
the City and the grantee, and the contractual rights as contained in any such
franchises shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except
that the power of the City to exercise the right of eminent domain in the
acquisition of any utility property is in all things reserved, and except the
general power of the city heretofore existing and herein provided for to
regulate the rates and services of a utility, which shall include the right
to require adequate and reasonable extension of plant and service and the
maintenance of the plant fixtures at the standard necessary to render the
highest reasonable quality of utility service to the public. Every public
utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms
and conditions contained in the various sections of this article whether or
not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchises. Nothing in this
Charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the
discretion of the Council or the electors of the City in imposing terms and
conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant
including the right to require such compensation or rental as may be
permitted by the laws of the State of Texas.



SEC. 11.10.  FRANCHISE RECORDS.



   Within six (6) months after this Charter takes effect, every public
utility and every owner of public utility franchise shall file with the City,
as may be prescribed by ordinance, certified copies of all franchises owned
or claimed, or under which utility is operated in the City. The City shall
compile and maintain a public record of public utility franchises.



SEC. 11.11.  ACCOUNTS OF MUNICIPALLY OWNED UTILITIES.



   Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the
City, in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of
such City ownership and operation, including all assets, appropriately
subdivided into different classes, all liability subdivided by classes,
depreciation reserve, other reserves, and surplus; also revenues; operating
expenses including depreciation interest payments, rental, and other
disposition of annual income. The accounts shall show the actual capital cost
to the City of each public utility owned, also the cost of all extensions,
additions, and improvements and the source of the funds expended for such
capital purposes. They shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any
service furnished to or rendered by any such utility to any other City or
governmental department. The Council shall annually cause to be made by a
certified public accountant, and shall publish a report showing the financial
condition of said public utility and the financial results of such City
ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section and
such additional data as the Council shall seem expedient.



SEC. 11.12  SALE OF PUBLIC SERVICES.



   (a)   The Council shall have the power and authority to sell and
distribute any public service to any person, firm or corporation outside the
limits of the City and to permit them to connect with said system under
contract with the City under such terms and conditions as may appear to be
for the best interests of the City.



   (b)   The Council shall have the power and authority to prescribe
the kind of materials used within or beyond the limits of the City where it
furnishes the service, and to inspect the same and require them to be kept in
good order and condition at all times and to make such rules and regulations,
as shall be necessary and proper, and prescribe penalties for noncompliance
with same.



SEC. 11.13.  REGULATION OF RATES.



   The Council shall have full power after notice and hearing to regulate
by ordinance the rates, charges and fares of every public utility franchise
holder operating in the City, provided that no such ordinance shall be passed
as an emergency measure.



   (a)   The Council, upon receiving a request from a public service
desiring a change in rates, charges or fares, shall call a meeting for
consideration of such change.



   (b)   The public service shall show the necessity for such change by
establishing by clear, competent and convincing evidence:



      (1)   Cost of its investment property allocable to service in
the City;



      (2)   Amount and character of its expenses and revenues
connected with the rendering of such service; and



      (3)   Any additional evidence required by Council.



   (c)   The Council may, if not satisfied with the sufficiency of the
legal evidence furnished by the public service, select and employ rate
consultants and auditors to investigate any requests or changes in rates,
charges or fares. The public service shall reimburse the City for fifty (50)
percent of its reasonable and necessary expenses incurred.



   (d)   The public service may, if not satisfied with the rate, charge
or fare ordered by Council, make a motion for rehearing within twenty (20)
days of the entry of such order. Such motion will be deemed overruled if not
acted upon by the Council within thirty (30) days, provided that the Council
may by resolution extend such time for action on the motion to a maximum of
sixty (60) days.



   (e)   No public service may institute legal action contesting such
rate, charge or fare fixed by the Council until such public service has
exhausted remedies provided herein.



ARTICLE XII.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 12.01.  PUBLICITY OF RECORDS.



   All records and accounts of every office, department, or agency of the
City shall be open to inspection by any citizen or by any representative of
the press at all reasonable times and under such reasonable regulations as
may be established by the Council, provided that police records and vital
statistic records, and any other records closed to the public by law, shall
not be considered records for the purpose of this section.



SEC. 12.02.  PERSONAL FINANCIAL INTERESTS.



   (a)   Any City officer, appointee, or employee who has a substantial
financial interest, direct or indirect, or by reason of ownership of stock in
any corporation, in any contract with the City or in the sale of any land,
material, supplies, or services to the City or to a contractor supplying the
City shall make known that interest to the Council and refrain from voting
upon or otherwise participating in his capacity as a City officer, appointee,
or employee in the making of such sale or in the making or performance of
such contract. Any City officer, appointee, or employee who conceals such a
substantial financial interest or violates the requirements of this section
shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit his
office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge express or
implied of the person or corporation contracting with or making sale to the
City shall render the contract or sale voidable by the City Manager or the
Council.



   (b)   When ownership of stock in a corporation is involved, such
stock ownership in an amount in excess of one (1) percent of the stock of
such corporation shall constitute substantial interest.



SEC. 12.03.  PROHIBITIONS.



   (a)   Activities prohibited:



      (1)   In appointments to and removal from any City office or
employment, persons shall not be favored or discriminated against because of
race, sex, religion, age, national origin or handicap.



(Amended: 5-7-88)



      (2)   No person who seeks appointment or promotion with
respect to any City position or appointive City administrative office shall
directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or other
valuable thing to any person for or in connection with his test, appointment,
proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion,



      (3)   No City official or employee, elected or appointed,
shall orally, by letter, or otherwise solicit or assist in soliciting any
assessment, subscription or contribution for any political party or political
purpose whatever from any subordinate City official or employee holding any
compensated City position.



      (4)   No person who holds any compensated City position shall
solicit or receive any contribution to the campaign funds of any candidate
for municipal office or take part in the management, affairs, or political
campaign of any municipal candidate, unless specifically permitted by state
law.



      (5)   A person who holds any compensated City position shall
not engage in political activity relating to a campaign for an elective
office while in uniform or on active duty.



      (6)   For purposes of this section, a person engages in
political activity if the person:



         1.   Makes a public political speech supporting or
opposing a candidate;



         2.   Distributes a card or other political literature
relating to the campaign of a candidate;



         3.   Wears a campaign button;



         4.   Circulates or signs a petition for a candidate;



         5.   Solicits votes for a candidate; or



         6.   Solicits campaign contributions for a candidate.



      (7)   While out of uniform and not on duty a person who holds
any compensated City position may engage in political activity, including
each activity listed in Section 12.03(5).



   (b)   Penalties:  Any person who by himself or with others violates
any of the provisions or  paragraphs (1) through (3) of the preceding
subsection (a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Any person who by himself or with others violates any of the provisions of
paragraph (4) of the preceding subsection (a) shall be guilty of an offense
and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any person convicted under this section shall
be ineligible for a period of five (5) years thereafter to hold any City
office or position and, if an officer or employee of the City, shall
immediately forfeit his office or position.



(Amended: 5-10-08)



SEC. 12.04.  NEPOTISM.



   No person related within the second degree by affinity, or within the
third degree by consanguinity to any elected officer of the City, or to the
City Manager, shall be appointed to any office, position or clerkship or
other service of the City. This prohibition shall not apply, however, to any
person who shall have been continuously employed by the City for a period of
two (2) years prior to the election of the Councilman or appointment of the
City Manager so related to him.



SEC. 12.05.  ASSIGNMENT, EXECUTION AND GARNISHMENT.



   The property, real and personal belonging to the City shall not be
liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill.
The funds belonging to the City, in the hands of any person, firm or
corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or
sequestration; nor shall the City be liable to garnishment on account of any
debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any
person. Neither the City nor any of its officers or agents shall be required
to answer any such writ of garnishment or any account whatever. The City
shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its
employees, agents, or contractors.



SEC. 12.06.  SECURITY AND BONDS.



   It shall not be necessary in any bond, undertaking, or security to be
demanded or executed by or on behalf of said City in any of the State Courts,
but in all such actions, suits, appeals, or proceedings, same shall be
conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had
been given as required by law.



SEC. 12.07.  DAMAGE SUITS.



   Before the City shall be liable to damage claim or suit for personal
injury, or damage to property, the person who is injured or whose property is
damaged or someone in his behalf shall give the City Manager or the person
performing the duties of City Secretary, notice in writing duly verified
within thirty (30) days after the occurrence of the alleged injury, or
damage, stating specifically in such notice when, where and how the injury or
damage was sustained, and setting forth the extent of the injury or damage as
accurately as possible. No action at law for damages shall be brought against
the City for personal injury or damage to property prior to the expiration of
thirty (30) days after notice herein-before described has been filed with the
City Manager or the person performing the duties of City Secretary and not
later than two (2) years after the occurrence of the injury or damage to
property. In case of injuries resulting in death, before the City shall be
liable in damages therefor the person or persons claiming such damages shall
after the death of the injured person give notice as above required in case
of personal injury, provided however, that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to mean that the City waives any rights, privileges, defense or
immunities in tort actions which are provided under the common law, the
Constitution and General Laws of the State of Texas. The notice herein
required shall be waived only by appropriate resolution of the Council.



SEC. 12.08.  WELFARE AND/OR PENSION PLAN FOR CITY EMPLOYEES.



   The council shall have the power exercisable in its discretion, and
subject to such limitations and regulations as it shall deem proper to
create, operate, amend, and contract for a welfare and/or pension plan for
any or all City employees.



SEC. 12.09.  SEPARABILITY CLAUSE.



   If any section or part of section of this Charter shall be held invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the
remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of
section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire
section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect
with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly
apply.



SEC. 12.10.  EFFECT OF CHARTER ON EXISTING LAW.



   All ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and contracts now in
force under the City government of Mansfield and not in conflict with the
provisions of this Charter shall remain in force under this Charter until
altered, amended, or repealed by the City Council after this Charter takes
effect. All rights of the City under existing franchises and contracts and
all existing authority for the issuance of bonds, not in conflict with the
provisions of any amendment of this Charter, shall be preserved in full force
and effect.



SEC. 12.11.  APPLICABILITY OF GENERAL LAWS.



   The Constitution of the State of Texas, the statutes of said State
applicable to home ruled municipal corporations, as now or hereafter enacted,
this Charter and ordinances enacted pursuant hereto shall, in the order
mentioned, be applicable to the City of Mansfield. The City shall also have
the power to exercise any and all powers conferred by the laws of the State
of Texas upon any other kind of city, town, or village, not contrary to the
provisions of any such powers by the City of Mansfield shall be optional with
it, and it shall not be required to conform to the law governing any other
city, town, or villages unless and until by ordinance it adopts same.



SEC. 12.12.  AMENDING THE CHARTER.



   Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of
the City in the manner provided by Chapter 13 of Title 28 of the Revised
Statutes of Texas, 1925, as now or hereafter amended.



SEC. 12.13.  CHARTER CONSTRUCTION.



   All powers granted heretofore to cities are hereby preserved. In case
of any irreconcilable conflict between the provisions of this Charter and any
superior law, the powers of the City and its officers shall be defined in
such superior laws. In case of any insufficiency or omission that may be
supplied by reference to the general laws, such provisions of the general
laws are hereby adopted, and the city shall have and exercise all of the
powers that it could have acquired by expressly adopting and incorporating
into this Charter all of the provisions of State and general laws, it being
the intent of this Charter that no lawful power of the City shall fall
because of any omission, insufficiency or invalidity of any portion or
portions of this Charter. The insufficiency or invalidity of any portion or
portions of this Charter shall not in any way affect the remainder of the
Charter, but the same shall be construed as if adopted with such portion
and/or portions so found invalid or impotent.



SEC. 12.14.  JUDICIAL NOTICE.



   This Charter shall be deemed a public act, may be read in evidence
without pleading or proof, and judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all
courts and places.



SEC. 12.15.  GENDER OF WORDING.



   The masculine gender of the wording used throughout this Charter shall
always be interpreted to mean either sex.



   We the undersigned members of the Charter Commission, duly elected as
such Charter Commission in accordance with Articles 1165 and 1166 of the
Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas, on the fourteenth day of
September, 1974, have, in accordance with law, framed the Charter for the
City of Mansfield, State of Texas, and herewith respectfully submit the same
to the Honorable City Council of the City of Mansfield on the fourteenth day
of December, 1975.



   It is respectfully requested that the Honorable City Council of the
City of Mansfield submit the proposed Charter as framed by the Charter
Commission to the qualified voters of the City of Mansfield, at an election
to be held on the twenty-fifth day of January, 1975, said election to be
called in accordance with the election laws of the State of Texas, and that
such other action be taken by the Honorable City Council as required by law
in the submission of said Charter.



Respectfully submitted:



/s/   _______________________            /s/   ______________
_____________



   W. M. Brittain, Chairman               Al Stubenrauch,
Vice-Chairman



/s/   _______________________            /s/   ______________
_____________



   Barbara Cook, Secretary               Steve Baker



/s/   _______________________            /s/   ______________
_____________



   H. E. Baxter, Jr.                  Mack Cain



/s/   _______________________            /s/   ______________
_____________



   Dwain Cannon                  Virginia Carew



/s/   _______________________            /s/   ______________
_____________



   Ira Gibson                     Alice Henry



/s/   _______________________            /s/   ______________
_____________



   Joe Humphries                  James R. Icenhower



/s/   _______________________            /s/   ______________
_____________



   S. K. Pressley                     Joe T. Spry, Sr.



/s/   _______________________



   Don E. Williams



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS




CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the municipality of
Mansfield, Texas shall be designated as the Code of Mansfield, Texas and may
be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Mansfield,
Texas.



   CITY SECRETARY, CHIEF OF POLICE, OR OTHER CITY OFFICERS OR
DEPARTMENTS.  The words "City Secretary," "Chief of Police," or words
designating any other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean
the City Secretary, Chief of Police or such other municipal officers or
departments, respectively, of the City of Mansfield, Texas. 



('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))



   CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This  municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Mansfield, Texas.



   COUNTY.  Tarrant County, Texas.



   HIGHWAY.  Any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or
square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the
city, dedicated or devoted to public use.



('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN
shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. 



('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))



   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT.  An officer,
office, employee, commission or department of this municipality unless the
context clearly requires otherwise. 



   OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant
by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land, except as
otherwise defined in this code.



('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))



   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, company, firm, organization,
government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership, association and any other group or combination of
individuals or business entity or legal entity.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Every species of property, except real property,
as defined in this section.



('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))



   PROPERTY.  Real and personal property, and "mixed" if the sense used
so indicates.



('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes land, tenements, and hereditaments.



('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))



   ROADWAY. That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular traffic and that portion of a street used for drainage.



('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIDEWALK.  Any portion of the street between the curb or the lateral
line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, all or a part of which is
intended for the use of pedestrians.



('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))



   SIDEWALK AREA.  The space between the lateral line of the roadway and
the boundary separating the public right-of-way and the adjacent private
property, or adjacent public property not constituting an area usable as a
sidewalk. 



('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when a person cannot
write. 



('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))



   STATE.  The State of Texas.



   STREET.  Any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square,
bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel, causeway, or other public way
in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.



('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   WRITTEN or IN WRITING.  Any representation, other than oral, of words,
letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 



('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))



   YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the
words YEAR OF OUR LORD.



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written "and/or," if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy may do as the principal,
such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an
authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   The phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this code
are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of
this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree
of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not
affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and
sections of this code, since the same would have been enacted by the City
Council without the incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional
phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and
such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of
all municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the City Council requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.  Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect
from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in anyway be affected, released or discharged, but may be
prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued
in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this code,
which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code, may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion
therein.  When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or division
or any portion thereof, those repealed portions may be excluded from the code
by omission from reprinted pages.  The subsequent ordinances as numbered and
printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of
those subsequent ordinances until such time that this code and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the City
Council.



   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made
by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of
this code in the following language:  "That section     of the Code of
Ordinances, City of Mansfield, Texas is hereby amended to read as follows: .
. ."  The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.



   (C)   In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code
is to be added, the following language shall be used:  "That the Code of
Ordinances, City of Mansfield, Texas is hereby amended by adding a section,
to be numbered     , which said section reads as follows: . . ."  The new
section shall then be set out in full as desired.



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. 
Example:  ('78 Code, § 1-2) (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed
1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute.  Example:  (Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, § 54.001) ('78 Code, § 1-2)
(Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85).



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory
reference" following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information.



Example:



   § 31.10  ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS.



      This city has the authority to impose penalties for ordinance
violations.



   ('69 Code, § 1-5) (Ord. 10, passed 1-1-80)



   Statutory reference:



      General municipality penalty, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, § 54.001



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act
is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by:



      (1)   A fine not to exceed $2,000 in all cases arising under
municipal ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning and public health and
sanitation other than vegetation and litter violations;



      (2)   A fine not to exceed $2,000, if a motor vehicle is used
in illegal dumping or an offense under the law or city ordinance violated by
the illegal dumping;



      (3)   A fine not to exceed $500 in all other cases, provided,
however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided
for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state.



   (B)   Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.  In the event that any such
violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this Code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the City Administrator or the Chief of
Police or their assigns.



Statutory reference:



   Municipal penalties, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, § 54.001



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   PERSONNEL





         31.   RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM





         32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS





         33.   FIRE DEPARTMENT





         34.   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS





         35.   CODE ENFORCEMENT





         36.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT





         37.   MUNICIPAL COURT





         38.   TAXATION AND FINANCE




CHAPTER 30: PERSONNEL



Section




General Provisions




   30.01   Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS) - election to
participate; adoption by reference




Officer and Employee Liability Plan




   30.15   Definitions



   30.16   Plan established



   30.17   Coverage



   30.18   Defense



   30.19   Limits of coverage; expenses



   30.20   Exclusions



   30.21   Notice of occurrence, claim or suit; cooperation



   30.22   Plan period



   30.23   Subrogation



   30.24   Legal presentation



   30.25   Determination of coverage



   30.26   No creation of cause of action



   30.27   Administration



   30.28   Payments subject to appropriation



   30.29   No right to fund



   30.30   Amendment, repeal and termination




Code of Ethics and Conduct for City Elected Officials and Board and Committee
Members




   30.40   Statement of purpose



   30.41   Definitions



   30.42   Affected parties



   30.43   Standards of conduct



   30.44   Prohibited conduct



   30.45   Disclosure of interest



   30.46   Voting for appointments to City Boards, Commissions and
Committees and applicant responsibility to report campaign contributions



   30.47   Enforcement



   30.48   Advisory opinions



   30.49   Penalties; forfeited position; exemptions; injunctions



   30.50   Distribution of Code of Ethics and conduct



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.01  TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM (TMRS) - ELECTION TO
PARTICIPATE; ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   Election to participate in the TMRS.  On behalf of the city,
the City Council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and
all of the employees of all departments participate in the Texas Municipal
Retirement System (hereafter "TMRS") as provided in Tex. Gov't Code §§
851.001 et seq., as amended; and all of the benefits and obligations of such
system are hereby accepted.



   (B)   Election to participate in the TMRS Supplemental Benefits
Fund.  The City Council elects to have the employees of all participating
departments of the city participate in and be covered by the Supplemental
Benefits Fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by Tex.
Gov't Code §§ 851.001 et seq.; and all the benefits and obligations of
participation in said fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such
employees.



   (C)   Adoption by reference.  Ordinances effecting the plan for
participation in the TMRS, employee contributions, updated service credits,
increases in benefits and retirement annuities and any other applicable
legislation of the city and state are adopted by reference into this code of
ordinances as if fully set forth herein and shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 317, passed 10-25-76; Ord. 318, passed 10-25-76; Ord. 343, passed
1-10-78; Ord. 398, passed 10-22-79; Ord. 433, passed 12-23-80; Ord. 434,
passed 12-23-80; Ord. 656, passed 12-9-85; Ord. 715, passed 12-8-86; Ord.
760, passed 12-14-87; Ord. 761, passed 12-14-87; Ord. 800, passed 10-24-88;
Ord. 815, passed 12-12-88; Ord. 854, passed 11-13-89; Ord. 882, passed
11-26-90; Ord. 909, passed 11-12-91; Ord. 925, passed 2-24-92; Ord. 1280,
passed 9-27-99; Ord. OR-1821-11, passed 11-28-11)



OFFICER AND EMPLOYEE LIABILITY PLAN



§ 30.15 DEFINITIONS. 



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY VEHICLE.  A vehicle or mobile equipment either leased or owned by
the city.



   COVERAGE.  The extent to which the city will defend and indemnify a
plan member under the plan.



   LOSS.  An amount which a plan member is legally obligated to pay
resulting from an act or omission which has coverage under the plan.



   PLAN.  The officer and employee liability plan as established in this
subchapter.



   PLAN MEMBER.  A person who is as follows.



      (1)   An employee of the city.



      (2)   A member of the City Council.



      (3)   A member of a city board, commission or committee
created by Charter, ordinance or resolution of the city.



      (4)   A member of the Board of Directors of a nonprofit
corporation created under the authority of the City Council as an
instrumentality of the city.



      (5)   A volunteer who is as follows.



         (a)   A member of the city's Volunteer Police Reserve.



         (b)   A member of the city's Volunteer Fire Department.



         (c)   Assisting the city pursuant to an official policy
adopted or approved by the City Council.



   PROGRAM ORDINANCE.  Ordinance 799, as amended, establishing the city's
self-insurance and risk management program.



('78 Code, § 13-50) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)



§ 30.16  PLAN ESTABLISHED.



   The City Council hereby establishes the city's Officer and Employee
Liability Plan, which consists of the terms and conditions described in this
subchapter.



('78 Code, § 13-51) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)



§ 30.17  COVERAGE.



   (A)   The plan provides coverage in accordance with this section.



   (B)   To the extent coverage is not excluded under §§ 30.20 or
30.22, the city shall indemnify and defend a plan member in accordance with
terms of the plan, against a loss arising out of a claim, suit or judgment
resulting from an act or omission of the plan member occurring during the
discharge of the plan member's duties, and which is within the scope of the
plan member's office, employment or assigned volunteer work with the city.



   (C)   A person whose position with the city terminates, has coverage
in accordance with division (A) of this section for any event that occurred
while the person was a plan member.



('78 Code, § 13-52) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)



§ 30.18  DEFENSE.



   (A)   The city will defend a suit against a plan member who has
coverage under this plan even if the suit is groundless or fraudulent.



   (B)   The city may investigate, negotiate and settle any claim or
suit as it determines necessary.



('78 Code, § 13-53) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)



§ 30.19  LIMITS OF COVERAGE; EXPENSES.



   (A)   The city will pay each loss; except, that in cases arising
from incidents or occurrences for which the city's liability would exist by
virtue of the Texas Tort Claims Act (Texas Civil Practices and Remedies Code,
Chapter 101), whether or not a claim is made against the city or the city is
a defendant in the suit, the city will pay the loss only up to an amount not
exceeding the limits of liability provided by the Texas Tort Claims Act, as
amended, for a municipality.



   (B)   In addition to the coverage provided in division (A) of this
section, the city will pay the following.



      (1)   The city's expenses in investigating and defending the
claim or lawsuit.



      (2)   Costs taxed against a plan member in a suit defended
under this plan and interest that accrues after entry of judgment before the
city has deposited payment with the court on that part of the judgment which
does not exceed the limits of coverage established in division (A).



      (3)   Reasonable expenses of the plan member incurred at the
city's request.



      (4)   Attorney's fees ordered by the court to be paid by the
plan member.



('78 Code, § 13-54) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)



§ 30.20  EXCLUSIONS.



   Coverage under this plan does not apply to a claim or lawsuit that is
brought against a plan member as follows.



   (A)   By the city.



   (B)   Arising out of the intentional, knowing or criminally
negligent violation of a penal statute or ordinance, committed by or with the
knowledge or consent of the plan member or any claim arising out of acts of
fraud committed by or at the direction of the plan member with intent to
deceive or defraud.



   (C)   Arising out of the gross negligence of the plan member;
except, the city will defend the plan member when gross negligence is alleged
in a claim or lawsuit.



   (D)   Arising while the plan member is operating a city vehicle with
no authority to operate the vehicle.



   (E)   For liability assumed by the plan member under a contract,
unless the contract is entered into at the request of the city.



   (F)   If the plan member joins or attempts to join with the suit
against the plan member a claim against the city for benefits under this plan.



   (G)   If the plan member fails to comply with §§ 30.21 or 30.23 of
this subchapter.



('78 Code, § 13-55) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)



§ 30.21  NOTICE OF OCCURRENCE, CLAIM OR SUIT; COOPERATION.



   To be entitled to coverage under the plan a plan member must do the
following.



   (A)   Notify the Claims Board, in writing, as soon as practicable
upon receipt of written notice of a claim or lawsuit, but no later than three
working days after receipt and deliver to the Claims Board, promptly upon
receipt, any demand, summons, notice or other process received by the plan
member in connection with a claim or suit.



   (B)   Cooperate with the Claims Board and City Attorney and upon the
Claims Board's request, assist in making settlements, in the conduct of suits
and in enforcing any right of contribution or indemnity against a person or
organization who may be liable to the city because of payment by the city of
a loss under the plan.



   (C)   Attend hearings and trials and assist in securing and giving
evidence and obtaining the attendance of witnesses.



   (D)   Comply with Claims Board administrative procedures.



   (E)   Perform the duties and comply with the requirements imposed on
the plan member by this subchapter or the program ordinance.



   (F)   Not, except upon advice of the City Attorney or when
questioned by a police officer at the scene of an accident, give any oral or
written statement or enter into any stipulation or agreement concerning a
claim or lawsuit.



   (G)   Not, except at the plan member's own expense, voluntarily make
any payment, assume any obligation or incur any expense with respect to a
claim or lawsuit without consent of the city.



('78 Code, § 13-56) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)



§ 30.22  PLAN PERIOD.



   Coverage under the plan is only for acts or omissions occurring or
alleged to have occurred as follows.



   (A)   While the plan is in effect.



   (B)   Before the plan was in effect and which are not barred by any
statute of limitations.



   (C)   If the plan is canceled, while the plan was in effect and
which are not barred by any statute of limitations.



('78 Code, § 13-57) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)



§ 30.23  SUBROGATION.



   If payment or legal representation is provided under the plan, the city
is subrogated to the plan member's rights of recovery against any person or
organization to the extent of the city's payment or liability for payment. A
plan member must execute and deliver to the Claims Board whatever documents
are necessary in the opinion of the City Attorney to secure this right of
subrogation. The plan member must not do anything after a loss to prejudice
those rights.



('78 Code, § 13-58) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)



§ 30.24  LEGAL PRESENTATION.



   (A)   The city will provide legal representation for a plan member
in a claim or suit in which the plan member has coverage under the plan.



   (B)   If the City Attorney determines that there is a conflict of
interest for the City Attorney in representing a plan member, and the plan
member is otherwise entitled to coverage under the plan, the city will pay
the reasonable fee of a private attorney to represent the plan member. The
private attorney will be selected by the Claims Board.



('78 Code, § 13-59) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)



§ 30.25  DETERMINATION OF COVERAGE.



   If the city denies coverage to a plan member, the plan member may seek
a determination of coverage by a court of proper jurisdiction in Tarrant,
Johnson or Ellis County, Texas. If the court rules in favor of the plan
member, the city shall provide the plan member all benefits under the plan
and shall reimburse the plan member for the reasonable attorney fees,
expenses and costs incurred in obtaining the determination of coverage.



('78 Code, § 13-60)



§ 30.26  NO CREATION OF CAUSE OF ACTION.



   Nothing contained in this plan shall be construed as creating a right
or cause of action against a plan member nor as giving a right to a third
party to institute or maintain a suit which would not otherwise exist under
law as a legal claim against a plan member.



('78 Code, § 13-61) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)



§ 30.27  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Claims Board is responsible for the administration of the plan in
accordance with its terms, subject to the authority of the City Council. In
the course of carrying out this responsibility, the Claims Board shall
interpret and apply the provisions of this subchapter.



('78 Code, § 13-62)



§ 30.28  PAYMENTS SUBJECT TO APPROPRIATION.



   All amounts payable under this subchapter are subject to available and
appropriated funding; except, that appropriation shall not be required to the
extent funding is available under the program ordinance.



('78 Code, § 13-64) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)



§ 30.29  NO RIGHT TO FUND.



   This subchapter does not grant any right to any plan member in or to
the Risk Management Fund created by the program ordinance.



('78 Code, § 13-65) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)



§ 30.30  AMENDMENT, REPEAL AND TERMINATION.



   This subchapter may be repealed or amended at any time, subject to
existing rights of plan members under §§ 30.17 and 30.22 of this
subchapter, and the city may modify or terminate the plan at any time.



('78 Code, § 13-63) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)



CODE OF ETHICS AND CONDUCT FOR CITY ELECTED OFFICIALS AND BOARD AND COMMITTEE
MEMBERS



§ 30.40  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the
proper operation of democratic government requires that city elected
officials and members of boards and committees be independent, impartial and
responsible only to the people of the city, that governmental decisions and
policy should be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure;
that no city elected official or member of any board, commission or committee
should have any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or
engage in any business, transaction or professional activity or incur any
obligation of any nature which is in conflict with the proper discharge of
his or her duties in the public interest; that public offices are positions
of public trust imposing the duty of a fiduciary upon all office holders, who
are not to use their public position for personal gain, and that the public
should have confidence in the integrity of its government.  To implement
such a policy, the City Council deems it advisable to enact the Code of
Ethics and Conduct for all elected city officers and board and committee
members, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, to serve not only as a
guide for official conduct of the city's public servants, but also as a basis
for discipline for those who refuse to abide by its terms. The Code of Ethics
and Conduct is cumulative of other ordinances, city charter provisions and
state statutes defining and prohibiting conflict of interest.



   (B)   The Code of Ethics and Conduct is not intended to be nor shall
it be used as a political weapon to intimidate or embarrass persons affected.



(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03)



§ 30.41  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADVISORY BOARD.  A board, commission or committee of the city that
functions only in an advisory or study capacity.



   BENEFIT.  Anything reasonably regarded as pecuniary gain or pecuniary
advantage, including benefit to any other person in whose welfare the
beneficiary has a direct and substantial interest.  A pecuniary gain or
advantage shall not include insignificant amounts or items of de minimis
value.  This policy does not establish dollar limits.  "Insignificant" and
"de minimis" shall have their usual meanings and be subject to interpretation
on a case by case basis.



   BUSINESS ENTITY.  A sole proprietorship, partnership, firm,
corporation, holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust, or
any other entity recognized in law.



   CANDIDATE.  Every person who declares for or files for any office of
the City of Mansfield to be filled by election.



   CODE.  The Code of Ethics and Conduct.



   COMPENSATION.  Any economic benefit received in return for labor,
services, property, or investment.



   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.  Information to which the following apply:



      (1)   At the time of the use or disclosure of the information,
the information is not a public record subject to public disclosure under the
Texas Public Information Act; and



      (2)   The use or disclosure of the information will have, or
could reasonably be expected to have, a material financial effect on any
investment or interest in real property that a city officer, board or
committee member, or any person to whom the city officer, board or committee
member provides the information, has at the time of the use or disclosure of
the information or acquires after the use or disclosure of the information.



   CONFLICT OF INTEREST.  Action upon any matter which would constitute a
violation of this code of ethics, Texas Penal Code or Tex. Loc. Gov't Code,
Ch. 171.



   DECISION.  Any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal
action or other matter voted on by the City Council or other city board or
commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board
or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body.



   ECONOMIC BENEFIT.  Any money, real or personal property, purchase,
sale, lease, contract, option, credit, loan discount, service, or other
tangible or intangible thing of value, whether similar or dissimilar to those
enumerated.



   ENTITY.  A sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability
partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company,
joint stock company, joint venture, receivership, trust or any other entity
recognized by law through which business may be conducted.



   FALSE.  A knowing or willful misrepresentation or concealment of any
item required to be disclosed by this chapter.



   FAMILY MEMBER.  A person related in the first or second degree of
consanguinity to any person subject hereto.



   GIFT.  A favor, hospitality, or economic benefit, other than
compensation, but does not include campaign contributions reported as
required by state law.



   INTENTIONALLY.   A person acts intentionally, or with intent, with
respect to the nature of his or her conduct or to a result of his or her
conduct when it is his or her conscious objective or desire to engage in the
conduct or cause the result.



   KNOWINGLY.  A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect
to the nature of his or her conduct or to circumstances surrounding his or
her conduct when he or she is aware of the nature of his or her conduct or
that the circumstances exist.  A person acts KNOWINGLY, or with knowledge,
with respect to a result of his or her conduct when he or she is aware that
his conduct is reasonably certain to cause the result.



   MINISTERIAL ACT.  An act performed in a prescribed manner and not
requiring the exercise of any judgment or discretion.



   OFFICER.  Any member of the City Council and any member of a board,
commission or committee established by ordinance, charter or state law;
provided no member of an advisory board or committee shall be deemed an
officer of the city.



   PERSON.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.



   SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST.



      (1)   A person has a substantial interest in a business entity
if:



         (a)   The interest is ownership of 10% or more of the
voting stock or shares of the business entity or ownership of $2,500 or more
of the fair market value of the business entity;



         (b)   Funds received by the person from the business
entity exceed 10% of the person's gross income for the previous year;



         (c)   A person has a substantial interest in real
property if the interest is an equitable or legal ownership with a fair
market value of $2,500 or more;



         (d)   An interest of a person related in the first or
second degree by either affinity or consanguinity to the local public
official is a "substantial interest";



         (e)   The person holds a position of member of the board
of directors or other governing body of the business entity;



         (f)   The person serves as an elected officer of the
business entity;



         (g)   The person is an employee of the business entity;



         (h)   The person is a creditor, debtor or guarantor of
any person, group or business entity in the amount of $5,000 or more; or



         (i)   Property of the person has been pledged to a
person, group or business entity or is subject to a lien in favor of the
person, group or business entity in the amount of $5,000 or more.



      (2)   A person does not have a substantial interest in a
business entity if:



         (a)   The person holds a position as a member of the
board of directors or other governing board of a business entity;



         (b)   The person has been designated by the City Council
to serve on such board;



         (c)   The person receives no remuneration, either
directly or indirectly, for his service on such board; and



         (d)   The primary nature of the business entity is
either charitable, nonprofit or governmental.



      (3)   A person has a substantial interest in real property if
the interest is an equitable or legal interest with a fair market value of
$2,500 or more (see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, § 171.002).



      (4)   A person has a substantial interest under this
subchapter if the person's spouse or a person related to the person in the
first degree by consanguinity or affinity has a substantial interest under
the Code of Ethics and Conduct (see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, § 171.002).  A
person is related in the first degree by consanguinity to his or her father,
mother, brother, sister, son or daughter.  A person is related in the first
degree by affinity to his or her father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother's
spouse, sister's spouse, step-son, step-daughter, son-in-law or
daughter-in-law.



(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03)



§ 30.42  AFFECTED PARTIES.



   The persons subject to the provisions hereof shall be:



   (A)   The members of the City Council, including the mayor; and



   (B)   The members of any board, commission or committee established
pursuant to the charter or the ordinances of this city, or the laws of this
state, including, but not limited to:



      Mansfield Housing Finance Corporation



      Mansfield Library Board



      Keep Mansfield Beautiful Commission



      Mansfield Industrial Development Commission



      Historic Landmark Commission



      Economic Development Board



      Mansfield Park Facilities Development Corporation



      Capital Improvement Advisory Board



      Board of Adjustments



      City Council



      Construction Codes Board of Adjustments and Appeals



      Senior Citizens' Advisory Board



      Planning and Zoning Commission



      Animal Shelter Advisory Committee



   (C)   Candidates for any city elected office; and



   (D)   Any person listed within "affected parties" shall include all
relevant information concerning the spouse of said person.



(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03)



§ 30.43  STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.



   (A)   City officers and advisory board members shall not use their
position to secure special privileges and shall avoid situations that could
cause any person to believe that they may have brought bias or partiality to
a question before the Council, any board, or decision maker.  When an item
to be considered by the Council or any board presents a conflict of interest
to a city officer or advisory board member, it will be the responsibility of
the city official to make such conflict known to the City Attorney and to
remove himself/herself from discussion and voting on the matter.  Members of
the Council will not condone, overlook or forgive any unethical or illegal
activity. All members of the Council agree to uphold the intent of this
policy and to govern their actions accordingly.



   (B)   City officers and advisory board members shall strive to
recognize their responsibility to future generations by addressing the
interrelationship of the social, cultural, and physical characteristics of
the community when making policies.



   (C)   City officers and advisory board members shall make a
commitment to improve the quality of life for the individual and the
community, and be dedicated to the faithful stewardship of the public trust.



   (D)   City officers and advisory board members shall continue to be
dedicated to friendly and courteous relationships with staff, other city
officials and the public, and shall seek to improve the quality and image of
public service.



(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03)



§ 30.44  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   (A)   No city officer or advisory board member, or their spouses
shall knowingly:



      (1)   Accept or solicit any gift, favor, service or thing of
value from any person, group or business entity that might reasonably tend to
influence him or herein the discharge of his or her official duties.  This
prohibition shall not apply to:



         (a)   An occasional non-pecuniary gift, insignificant in
value;



         (b)   An award publicly presented in recognition of
public service; or



         (c)   Any gift which would have been offered or given to
him or her if he or she were not a city officer or advisory board member, or
their spouses.



      (2)   Grant in the discharge of his or her official duties any
improper favor, service or thing of value to any person, group or business
entity.



      (3)   Solicit or accept, from any source, any compensation,
gift, favor, service, economic benefit, or thing of value, including a
promise of future employment, that might reasonably tend to influence him or
her, in the discharge of his or her official duties, in consideration of any
person subject hereto of exercising or having exercised any official power or
performing or having performed any official duty on behalf of the city, from
any person group or business entity:



         (a)   Who is licensed or has a substantial interest in
any business entity that is licensed by any city department, agency,
commission or board on which the city officer or advisory board member
serves; or



         (b)   Who has a financial interest in any proposed
ordinance or decision upon which the city officer or advisory board member
may or must act or make a recommendation; provided, however, that any city
office or advisory board member and their spouses, may accept travel and
related expenses to attend ceremonial functions, provided that such
acceptance and attendance have been approved by the city council prior to the
occurrence of the ceremonial function.



      (4)   Disclose any confidential information gained by reason
of the position of the officer, advisory board member or spouse concerning
the property, operations, policies or affairs of the city, or use such
confidential information to advance any personal interest, financial or
otherwise, of such officer or advisory board member, spouse or others.  This
subsection shall not preclude disclosure of such confidential information in
connection with any investigation or proceeding regarding whether there has
been a violation of the standards of conduct set forth in this subchapter.



      (5)   Use one's position or office to secure special
privileges or exemption for himself or herself or another or for the private
gain of the city officer, advisory board member or his or her spouse.



      (6)   Hold himself or herself out as representing the city in
any capacity other than that for which he was appointed, or elected.



      (7)   Engage in or accept private employment or render a
service when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper
discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair his or her
independent judgment in the performance of his or her official duties.



      (8)   Make unauthorized use, or permit unauthorized use, of
city owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property.



      (9)   Grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage
to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen.



      (10)   After termination of service with the city, appear
before any board or commission of the city in relation to any case,
proceeding or application in which he or she personally participated or which
was under his or her active consideration during the period of his or her
service.



      (11)   Transact any business in his or her official capacity
with the city with a business entity in which he or she has a substantial
interest.



      (12)    Engage in any dishonest or criminal act or any other
conduct prejudicial to the government of the city or that reflects discredit
upon the government of the city.



      (13)   Perform or refuse to perform any act in order to
deliberately thwart the execution of city ordinances, rules or regulations or
the achievement of official city programs.



      (14)   Be an interested party to any exchange, purchase, or
sale of property, goods, or services with the city, or enter into any
contract with the city, except in full and impartial compliance with
statutes, City Charter, ordinances and regulations applicable thereto and
subject to any restrictions of the Charter of the city; provided further,
that such persons shall receive no favor or special concession or inducement
not customarily available and granted by the city in such a transaction; and
provided further, that any discretion by officers of the city, in connection
with any such transaction shall be exercised impartially and upon the same
standards applied to all Mansfield citizens.



   (B)   No member of the City Council or city officer shall knowingly
represent, directly or indirectly, any person, group or business entity:



      (1)   Before the City Council or any department, agency, board
or commission of the city;



      (2)   In any action or proceeding against the interests of the
city or in any litigation in which the city or any department, agency, board
or commission is a party; or



      (3)   In any action or proceeding in the municipal court(s) of
the city which was instituted by a city officer or employee in the course of
his or her official duties, or a criminal proceeding in which any city
officer or employee is a material witness for the prosecution.



   (C)   No member of a city board or commission shall knowingly
represent, directly or indirectly, any person, group or business entity:



      (1)   Before the City Council or the board or commission of
which he or she is a member;



      (2)   Before a board or commission which has appellate
jurisdiction over the board or commission of which he or she is a member;



      (3)   In any action or proceeding against the interests of the
city or in any litigation in which the city or any department, agency, board
or commission thereof is a party; or



      (4)   In any action or proceeding in the municipal court(s) of
the city which was instituted by a city officer or employee in the course of
his or her official duties, or a criminal proceeding in which any city
officer or employee is a material witness for the prosecution.



   (D)   The restrictions contained in divisions (B) and (C) do not
prohibit the following:



      (1)   A member of a city board or commission (other than City
Council), or his or her spouse, appearing before the City Council or a city
department, agency, board or commission to represent himself or herself in a
matter affecting his or her property; provided, however, that no such person,
or his or her spouse, shall appear before the board or commission of which he
or she is a member;



      (2)   An officer of an employee organization appearing before
the City Council or a city department, agency, board or commission to address
employment matters.



   (E)   The City Council shall not approve or award any bid or
contract for the city's purchase of goods or services from any person, group,
or entity which at any time-prior to such award or approval, has hired a
person who, at any time within such six-month period, was either a member of
the Mansfield City Council or the chief or assistant administrator of any
city department or agency that had direct, or indirect, review or
consideration, or recommending or approval authority for the project or
decision which is the subject of the award of such bid or contract.



   (F)   A person subject hereto who serves as a corporate officer or
member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity may not participate in
a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the city for the entity,
if said official receives any fee, compensation or other monetary payment
from the entity, unless the City Council appointed such city official to the
board of directors or such corporate office.



   (G)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the City Council
from participating in a vote or decision relating to salaries or travel
budgets of City Council members.



   (H)   No person subject hereto shall use his official position to
secure confidential information for any purpose other than official
responsibilities.



   (I)   No person subject hereto shall use city facilities, personnel,
equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are
customary, incidental or lawfully available to the public.



   (J)   No member of the City Council shall interfere with the City
Manager's administrative duties of appointment to and removal of persons from
employment with the city.  Except for the purpose of inquiry, the City
Council and its members shall deal with the city departments and city
employees for which the City Manager is responsible solely through the City
Manager, and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to
any of the subordinates of the City Manager, either publicly or privately.



   (K)   The restrictions in § 30.44 do not prohibit the following:



      (1)   Rendering service to the city as an officer, employee or
advisory board member;



      (2)   The paying of taxes, fines, utility service or filing
fees;



      (3)   Subject to restrictions contained in the charter of the
city, executing and performing any community facilities contract or plat in
compliance with laws and regulations applicable to any person; provided,
however, that if any city ordinance, rule or regulation allows any discretion
by the appropriate officers of the city in the interpretation or enforcement
of such ordinance, rule or regulation, such officers shall exercise such
discretion in favor of the city in connection with any such community
facilities contract or plat;



      (4)   Purchasing goods or services from the city in full
compliance with all applicable state and local laws; or



      (5)   Members and spouses of members of the advisory boards
set up by ordinance, charter or state law who are not otherwise officers of
the city, may engage in any exchange, purchase or sale of property, goods or
services with the city, or enter into a contract with the city, provided,
however, that the board of which they are a member has no advisory function
or cognizance, direct or indirect, present or prospective, with respect to
the transaction in which such advisory board member engages or proposes to
engage; or



      (6)   A city contract for the purchase of services or personal
property with a business entity in which a member of the governing body has a
substantial interest if the business entity is the only business entity that
provides the needed service or product within the jurisdiction of the city
and is the only business entity that bids on the contract.



(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03)



§ 30.45  DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST.



   (A)   The City Council hereby directs all members of the City
Council, or members of appointed Boards and Commissions to present a
statement annually to the City Secretary by October 15 of each fiscal year in
a form as set forth in Exhibit "A" attached to Ordinance 1466, passed 12-8-03
which is incorporated herein for all purposes; such statement providing a
complete disclosure of business and professional relationships with entities
that do business with the city or plan to do business with the city in the
future.  Any individual required to complete this statement has a duty to
amend the statement if a change in its disclosures should occur during each
fiscal year.  Amendments must occur within 30 days of the individual
acquiring knowledge of the business relationship. Any individual who fails to
file a required disclosure pursuant to this section within 60 days of its due
date may be removed from office by majority vote of the Council for failure
to conform to the requirements of the ethics chapter.



   (B)   If any officer or advisory board member has a substantial
interest in any person, group or business entity, or real property involved
in any decision pending before such officer or advisory board member, or the
body of which he or she is a member, such officer or advisory board member
shall disclose such interest as provided in division (D) below and shall not,
except as provided in division (D) below, discuss the substance of the matter
at any time with any other member of the board of which he or she is a member
or any other body which will vote on the matter or otherwise participate in
the consideration of the matter.



   (C)   If any of the following interests are involved in any decision
pending before any city or advisory board member, or the body of which he is
a member, such officer or advisory board member must disclose such interest
as provided in division (D) below, but he shall be permitted to vote on and
participate in the consideration of such matter:



      (1)   A decision concerning a bank or other financial
institution from which the officer or advisory board member has a home
mortgage, automobile loan, or other installment loan, if the loan is not
currently in default, was originally for a term of more than two years and
cannot be accelerated except for failure to make payments according to the
terms thereof;



      (2)   A decision concerning a bank or other financial
institution in which the officer or advisory board member holds a savings
account, checking account or certificate of deposit and which is fully
insured by the U.S. government or an agency thereof;



      (3)   A decision concerning a business entity with which the
officer or advisory board member has a retail or credit card account;



      (4)   A decision concerning the approval of substitution of
collateral by a city depository bank;



      (5)   A decision concerning real property in which the
officer-or advisory board member has a substantial interest if it is not
reasonably foreseeable that such decision would have a special economic
effect on the value of the property, distinguishable from the effect on the
public (See Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, § 171.004).



   (D)   A city officer or advisory board member shall disclose the
existence of any substantial interest in any person, business entity or real
property involved in any decision pending before such officer or advisory
board member, or the body of which he is a member.  To comply with this
section, a city officer or advisory board member shall, prior to any
discussion or determination of the matter, either file an affidavit of
disclosure as required by Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 171.004 or, if not so
required, shall publicly disclose in the official records of the city to the
city secretary the nature of the interest.  In disclosing a substantial
interest in a business entity, a city officer or advisory board member shall
not be required to disclose the dollar amount of any income that he or she
receives from the business entity.



   (E)   Where the interest of a city officer or advisory board member
in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city
officer or advisory board member may participate in the vote or decision and
need not disclose the interest.



      (1)   "Remote interest" means an interest of a person or
entity, including a city officer or advisory board member, who would be
affected in the same way as the general public.  The interest of a council
member in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a
comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar decisions is incidental to the
extent that the council member would be affected in common with the general
public.



      (2)   "Incidental interest" means an interest in a person,
entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has
insignificant value, or which would be affected only in a de minimis fashion
by a decision.  This section does not establish dollar limits on the terms
"insignificant value" and "de minimis" which shall have their usual meanings
and be subject to interpretation on a case by case basis.



(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03)



§ 30.46  VOTING FOR APPOINTMENTS TO CITY BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
AND APPLICANT RESPONSIBILITY TO REPORT CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS.



   Any person being considered, or with an application pending, for
appointment to any city board, commission, or committee established pursuant
to the charter or ordinances of the city, or the laws of the State of Texas,
if that person has made a financial contribution of $250 or more to the
election campaign of a member of the City Council during the two years
preceding the date of the proposed appointment, the council member or members
who received such contribution(s) must abstain from voting on such
appointment.  All persons shall enter upon the Application for City Boards,
Commissions, information regarding any financial contribution as noted above,
or if an application is on file for an appointment, shall notify the City
Secretary of such contributions for notation on the application within 30
days of the passage of this subchapter.  The City Secretary shall send a
copy of this section to all persons who have an application on file
requesting appointment.  The provisions of this section shall apply only to
contributions made on or after January 1, 2004.



(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03)



§ 30.47  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The City Council shall have the primary responsibility for the
enforcement of the code.



   (B)   In matters where it is alleged that a city officer or board
member, other than a member of the City Council, violated the code, the City
Council may direct the City Attorney to investigate or prosecute any apparent
violation of the code by one or more such persons.  At the direction of the
City Council, the City Attorney shall have the power to investigate any such
complaint, to initiate any suit, to file any complaint in municipal court,
and to prosecute any such complaint or action on behalf of the city where
such complaint or action is appropriate against a city officer or board
member, other than a member of the City Council.



   (C)   In matters where it is alleged that a member of the City
Council violated the code, the City Council may direct the City Attorney to
investigate as in division (B) above, or if the Council feels the alleged
conduct is an extreme violation of the code, the Council may select an
outside, independent attorney to investigate or prosecute any apparent
violation of this subchapter by a member of the City Council.  The City
Council shall select such attorney from a list of five experienced, qualified
attorneys to be nominated by the City Attorney.  At the direction of the
City Council, such independent attorney shall have the power to investigate
any such complaint, to initiate any suit, to file any complaint in municipal
court, and to prosecute any such complaint or action on behalf of the city
where such complaint or action is appropriate against a member of the City
Council.



   (D)   Any person who believes that a violation of any portion of the
code has occurred may file a complaint with the City Council which may then
proceed as provided in divisions (B) or (C) above.  However, nothing in the
code shall be construed to prevent complainants from instituting direct legal
action through the appropriate judicial authority.



(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03)



§ 30.48  ADVISORY OPINIONS.



   (A)   Where any officer or advisory board member has a doubt as to
the applicability of any provision of the code to a particular situation, or
as to the definition of terms used herein, he may apply to the City Attorney
for an advisory opinion.  The officer or advisory board member shall have
the opportunity to present his or her interpretation of the facts at issue
and of the applicability of provisions of the code before such advisory
opinion is made.



   (B)   The City Attorney shall only issue advisory opinions
concerning how the code applies prospectively to a particular situation, or
how the definition of terms used herein applies prospectively to such a
situation.  The City Attorney shall not issue advisory opinions to city
officer or advisory board members in matters when a complaint is already
pending with the City Council or the situation in question has already
occurred.  These matters shall be handled as provided in § 34.46 hereof.



   (C)   Until amended or revoked, any advisory opinion shall be
binding on the city, the City Council, and the City Attorney in any
subsequent actions concerning the public officer or advisory board member who
sought the opinion and acted on it in good faith, unless material facts were
omitted or misstated in the request for the advisory opinion.  Such opinion
shall not be binding in any judicial proceedings initiated by any private
citizen.



(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03)



§ 30.49  PENALTIES; FORFEITED POSITION; EXEMPTIONS; INJUNCTIONS.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of the code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not
more than $500 for each violation.  Each day that a violation continues or
is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Whenever the City Council has determined that any officer or
advisory board member has violated any provision of the code, such officer or
advisory board member shall be subject to discipline, including forfeiture of
his or her office or position.  Any removal of an official from elected
office shall be done in accordance with applicable state laws.  The code
shall be construed to prohibit any such officer or advisory board member from
being re-elected, or reappointed to any position with the city for a period
of three years from the date of termination.



   (C)   The City Council may exempt from the provisions of the code
any conduct found to constitute a violation by an officer or advisory board
member if it finds that the enforcement of the code with respect to such
conduct is not in the public interest.



   (D)   Any contract or transaction which was the subject of an
official act or action of the city in which there is an interest prohibited
by the code, or which involved the violation of a provision of the code,
shall be voidable at the option of the City Council.



   (E)   At the discretion of the City Council, the City Attorney or
the city's outside independent attorney shall have the power, where a
violation of the provisions of the code threatened or has occurred, to bring
a civil action or proceeding, at law or in equity, for a judgment enjoining
any violation of the provisions of the code or requiring the relinquishment
of any prohibited interest or the voiding of any such contract or
transaction, taking into account the interests of the city and any third
persons who may be injured thereby.  Where the City Council determines that
the public interest may best be served by not voiding a contract or
transaction entered into in violation of the code, such contract or
transaction may be enforced and an action or proceeding may be brought
against any officer or advisory board member found in violation of provisions
of the code for damages, not to exceed twice the damages suffered by the city
or twice the profit or gain realized by the officer or advisory board member,
whichever is greater.



(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03)



§ 30.50  DISTRIBUTION OF CODE OF ETHICS AND CONDUCT.



   The City Secretary shall cause a copy of the code in booklet form to be
distributed to and signed for by every officer and advisory board member of
the city within 30 days after enactment of the code.  Each officer and
advisory board member thereafter elected or appointed shall be furnished and
sign for a copy before entering upon the duties of his or her office.



(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03)



CHAPTER 31: RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM



Section



   31.01   Definitions



   31.02   City records declared public property



   31.03   Policy



   31.04   Designation of Records Management Officer; duties



   31.05   Establishment of Records Management Committee; duties



   31.06   Development of Records Management Plan



   31.07   Duties and responsibilities of department heads



   31.08   Designation of records liaison officer; duties



   31.09   Development of records control schedules



   31.10   Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of
records under schedule



   31.11   Destruction of unscheduled records



   31.12   Records center



   31.13   Micrographics



§ 31.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEPARTMENT HEAD.  The officer who by ordinance, order or
administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or
receives records.



   ESSENTIAL RECORD.  Any record of the city necessary to the resumption
or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the
re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city or to the
protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.



   LOCAL GOVERNMENT RECORDS.  All documents, papers, letters, books,
maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape or
other information recording media, regardless of physical form or
characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or
restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or
any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of
public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall
be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner.



   PERMANENT RECORD.  Any record of the city for which the retention
period on a records control schedule is given as permanent.



   RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE.  A document prepared by or under the
authority of the Records Management Officer listing the records maintained by
the city, their retention periods and other records disposition information
that the Records Management Program may require.



   RECORDS MANAGEMENT.  The application of management techniques to the
creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records
for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency or
record-keeping. The term includes the development of records control
schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the
protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and
space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and
distribution of forms, reports and correspondence and the management of
micrographics and other records storage systems.



   RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS.  The persons designated under § 31.08(A) of
this chapter.



   RECORDS MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE.  The Committee established in § 31.05
of this chapter.



   RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.  The person designated in § 31.04(A) of
this chapter.



   RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN.  The plan developed under § 31.06 of this
chapter.



   RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULE.  A listing issued by the State Library
that specifies the time period each record obtained by the city should be
retained.



   RETENTION PERIOD.  The minimum time that must pass after the creation,
recording or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions
associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.



('78 Code, §§ 2-10, 2-11) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90; Am. Ord. 1251, passed
3-22-99)



§ 31.02  CITY RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   All city records as defined in § 31.01 of this chapter are hereby
declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by
virtue of his/her position, any personal or property right to such records
even though he/she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized
destruction, removal from files or use of such records is prohibited.



('78 Code, § 2-12) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)



§ 31.03  POLICY.



   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for
efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution,
organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records
from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the
requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act, Tex. Local Gov't
Code, §§ 201.001 et seq., and accepted records management practice.



('78 Code, § 2-13) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)



§ 31.04  DESIGNATION OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER; DUTIES.



   (A)   The City Secretary, and the successive holders of the office,
shall serve as Records Management Officer for the city. As provided by state
law, each successive holder of the office shall file his/her name with the
Director and Librarian of the State Library within 30 days of the initial
designation or of taking up the office, as applicable.



('78 Code, § 2-14)



   (B)   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, the
Records Management Officer shall do the following.



      (1)   Administer the Records Management Program and provide
assistance to department heads in its implementation.



      (2)   Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition
policies, systems, standards and procedures.



      (3)   In cooperation with department heads identify essential
records and establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to
ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations
quickly and with minimum disruption and expense.



      (4)   Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation
of the historically valuable records of the city.



      (5)   Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and
for record-keeping supplies.



      (6)   Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish
a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city.



      (7)   Provide records management advice and assistance to all
city departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and
policy and by on-site consultation.



      (8)   Monitor records retention schedules and administrative
rules issued by the State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the
Records Management Program and the city's records control schedules are in
compliance with state regulations.



      (9)   Disseminate to the City Council and department heads
information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local
government records.



      (10)   Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel
in policies and procedures of the Records Management Plan and their duties in
the Records Management Program.



      (11)   Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in
the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of
records control schedules as required by state law and this chapter.



      (12)   Ensure that the maintenance, preservation,
microfilming, destruction or other disposition of the city is carried out in
accordance with the policies and procedures of the Records Management Program
and the requirements of state law.



      (13)   Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed
under approved records control schedules or the volume of records
microfilmed, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such
disposal or disposition.



      (14)   Bring to the attention of the City Manager
noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with the policies
and procedures of the Records Management Program or the Local Government
Records Act,  Tex. Local Gov't Code, §§ 201.001 et seq.



('78 Code, § 2-17)



(Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)



Statutory reference:



   Duties of Records Management Officer, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code §
203.023



§ 31.05  ESTABLISHMENT OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE; DUTIES.



   A Records Management Committee consisting of the City Attorney, City
Manager, Finance Director and Risk Manager is hereby established. The
Committee shall do the following.



   (A)   Assist the Records Management Officer in the development of
policies and procedures governing the Records Management Program.



   (B)   Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and
propose changes and improvements if needed.



   (C)   Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the
Records Management Officer.



   (D)   Give final approval to the destruction of records in
accordance with approved records control schedules.



   (E)   Actively support and promote the Records Management Program
throughout the city.



('78 Code, § 2-15) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)



§ 31.06  DEVELOPMENT OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   (A)   The Records Management Officer and the Records Management
Committee shall develop a Records Management Plan for the city for submission
to the City Council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed
to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of record-keeping, to
adequately protect the essential records of the city and to properly preserve
those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be
designed to enable the Records Management Officer to carry out his/her duties
prescribed by state law and this chapter effectively.



   (B)   Once approved by the City Council, the Records Management Plan
shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs,
commissions, bureaus, boards, committees or similar entities of the city and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed or disposed of in
accordance with the Plan.



   (C)   State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities or
record-keeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department
head or the records in the department head's care from the application of
this chapter and the Records Management Plan adopted under it and may not be
used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the
Records Management Program of the city.



('78 Code, § 2-16) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)



§ 31.07  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS.



   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, department heads
shall do the following.



   (A)   Cooperate with the Records Management Officer in carrying out
the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and
economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   Adequately document the transaction of government business and
the services, programs and duties for which the department head and his/her
staff are responsible.



   (C)   Maintain the records in his/her care and carry out their
preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition only in
accordance with the policies and procedures of the Records Management Program
of the city and the requirements of this chapter.



('78 Code, § 2-18) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)



§ 31.08  DESIGNATION OF RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS; DUTIES.



   (A)   Each department head shall designate a member of his/her staff
to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the Records
Management Program in the department. If the Records Management Officer
determines that in the best interests of the Records Management Program more
than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the
department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers
specified by the Records Management Officer. Persons designated as records
liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created
and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of
the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation,
retirement, dismissal or removal by action of the department head of a person
designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly
designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as
records liaison officer for his/her department.



('78 Code, § 2-19)



   (B)   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, records
liaison officers shall do the following.



      (1)   Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the
records of the department in preparation for the development of records
control schedules.



      (2)   In cooperation with the Records Management Officer
coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the Records
Management Program in their departments.



      (3)   Disseminate information to department staff concerning
the Records Management Program.



('78 Code, § 2-20)



(Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)



§ 31.09  DEVELOPMENT OF RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES.



   (A)   The city adopts records retention schedules that comply with
the minimum requirements of records retention schedules issued by the Texas
State Library and Archives Commission.



   (B)   The Records Management Officer shall complete a declaration of
compliance with the records scheduling requirements of the Local Government
Records Act and file it with the state.



('78 Code, § 2-21) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90; Am. Ord. 1251, passed 3-22-99)



§ 31.10  IMPLEMENTATION OF RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES; DESTRUCTION OF
RECORDS UNDER SCHEDULE.



   (A)   A records control schedule for a department that has been
approved and adopted shall be implemented by department heads and records
liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the Records
Management Plan.



   (B)   A record whose retention period has expired on a records
control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending
on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law
suit or the department head requests in writing to the Record Management
Committee that the record be retained for an additional period.



   (C)   Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records
control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the
Records Management Officer from the Records Management Committee.



('78 Code, § 2-23) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)



§ 31.11  DESTRUCTION OF UNSCHEDULED RECORDS.



   A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control
schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same
manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the Records
Management Officer has submitted to and received back from the Director and
Librarian an approved destruction authorization request.



('78 Code, § 2-23) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)



§ 31.12  RECORDS CENTER.



   A records center, developed pursuant to the Plan required by § 31.06,
shall be under the direct control and supervision of the Records Management
Officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the
records center shall be contained in the Records Management Plan developed
under § 31.06.



('78 Code, § 2-24) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)



§ 31.13  MICROGRAPHICS.



   Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted
by order of the City Council, all microfilming of records will be centralized
and under the direct supervision of the Records Management Officer. The
Records Management Plan will establish policies and procedures for the
microfilming of city records, including policies to ensure that all
microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the
filming of local government records established in rules of the Texas State
Library and Archives Commission. The plan will also establish criteria for
determining the eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for
ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized
operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the Records
Management Officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency and
compliance with Commission rules.



('78 Code, § 2-25) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)



CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



Senior Citizen Board



   32.01   Creation; membership



   32.02   Appointments; terms



   32.03   Organization



   32.04   Rules; meetings



   32.05   Function



Mansfield Hospital Authority



   32.15   Establishment



   32.16   Organization



Cross references:



   Fire Department, see Ch. 33



   Library Board, see §§ 95.01 et seq.



   Parks and Recreation Board, see § 96.37



SENIOR CITIZEN BOARD



§ 32.01  CREATION; MEMBERSHIP.



   There is created and established for the city a Senior Citizen Board
which shall be composed of seven members. All seven members shall be
residents of the city and qualified voters of the city and shall be appointed
by the City Council.



(Ord. 1132, passed 10-28-96)



§ 32.02  APPOINTMENTS; TERMS.



   (A)   The members of the Senior Citizen Board shall be appointed by
the City Council for two-year terms. All vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term in the same manner as provided for the original appointments.
Members of the Board may be removed by the governing body for cause. The
members of the Board shall serve without compensation.



   (B)   The City Council desires to create a membership structure in
which the entire membership of the Board does not change at one time.
Continuity on the Board is to be maintained by ensuring that some members'
terms overlap those of other members. To implement this structure, four
members of the initial Board shall be appointed for a one-year term while the
remaining three members shall be appointed for a two-year term. The
staggering of the appointments of the initial Board is intended only to
ensure that when subsequent two-year appointments are made, the membership of
the Board will continuously operate on overlapping terms.



(Ord. 1132, passed 10-28-96)



§ 32.03  ORGANIZATION.



   The Senior Citizen Board shall annually select its own Chairman. The
Board shall also select a Vice-Chairman and Secretary from its members.



(Ord. 1132, passed 10-28-96)



§ 32.04  RULES; MEETINGS.



   The Senior Citizen Board shall promulgate its own rules consistent with
the ordinances of the city and laws of the state. The Board shall hold at
least one meeting each calendar quarter and such special meetings as it deems
necessary.



(Ord. 1132, passed 10-28-96)



§ 32.05  FUNCTION.



   The Senior Citizen Board shall act as an advisory body to the City
Council in the procurement, development, supervision and administration of
the Mansfield Senior Citizen Center and its activities, as related to the
senior citizens of the city.



(Ord. 1132, passed 10-28-96)



MANSFIELD HOSPITAL AUTHORITY



§ 32.15  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   It is hereby officially found and determined that it is to the
best interest of the city and its inhabitants to create a hospital authority.



   (B)   By virtue of the power conferred upon the city by the Hospital
Authority Act, being Tex. Health & Safety Code §§ 262.001, a hospital
authority comprising the territory included within the boundaries of the city
is hereby created as a body politic and corporate, and Mansfield Hospital
Authority is designated as the name by which the authority shall be known.



('78 Code, § 9-5(a) and (b)) (Ord. 352, passed 4-4-78)



§ 32.16  ORGANIZATION.



   Mansfield Hospital Authority shall be governed by a Board of Directors
consisting of seven members. The first Directors for the authority shall be
those named in ordinance 352, dated April 4, 1978, and each of the Directors
shall, unless other provision is made in the bond resolution or trust
indenture in connection with the issuance of bonds as provided in the
Hospital Authority Act, being Tex. Health & Safety Code §§ 262.001, serve
for a term of two years from the date hereof and until their successors have
been appointed by the governing body of the city and have duly qualified.



('78 Code, § 9-5(c)) (Ord. 352, passed 4-4-78)



CHAPTER 33: FIRE DEPARTMENT



Section



General Provisions



   33.01   Arson reward



   33.02   Firefighter's Relief and Retirement Fund law



Fire Marshal



   33.15   Office created; compensation



   33.16   Investigation and record of fires



   33.17   Right of entry



   33.18   Taking testimony; prosecution of criminal suspects



   33.19   Gathering evidence



   33.20   Recalcitrant witness



   33.21   Privacy of investigation; separation of witnesses



Ambulance



   33.35   Ambulance service established



   33.36   Schedule of charges



   33.37   Service boundaries



   33.38   Service area defined



Cross reference:



   Departments, Boards and Commissions, see Ch. 32



   Fire Protection and Prevention, see Ch. 91



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 33.01  ARSON REWARD.



   The city hereby offers a reward of $250 for the arrest and conviction
of any person or persons found guilty of committing the crime of arson within
the corporate limits of the city. This reward is a standing offer and shall
be paid out of the General Fund of the city.



('78 Code, § 8-1) (Ord. 148, passed 11-13-62)



Statutory reference:



   Crime of arson, see Tex. Penal Code, § 28.02



§ 33.02  FIREFIGHTER'S RELIEF AND RETIREMENT FUND LAW.



   (A)   Adoption.



      (1)   There is hereby adopted the Firefighter's Relief and
Retirement Fund law, S.B. No. 411, 65th Legislature, a copy of which is filed
and available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk.



      (2)   There is further adopted the ten-year "buy back" and
"accrued time" plan as specified in the law.



('78 Code, § 8-2)



   (B)   City's contribution; Volunteer Fire Department membership. 
There shall be a maximum of 35 firefighters as members of the City Volunteer
Fire Department. The city shall contribute $12 per man per month towards the
Firefighter's Relief and Retirement Fund, S.B. No. 411. This is in addition
to the annual sum paid toward the "buy-back" and "accrued time" plan as
described in division (A) of this section.



('78 Code, § 8-3)



(Ord. 6-15, passed 6-24-85)



FIRE MARSHAL



§ 33.15  OFFICE CREATED; COMPENSATION.



   The office of Fire Marshal is hereby created. The office shall be
filled by appointment as provided in the Charter.



('78 Code, § 8-20) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71)



§ 33.16  INVESTIGATION AND RECORD OF FIRES.



   The Fire Marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances
of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed
or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire
was the result of carelessness or design. The investigation shall be begun
within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The
Fire Marshal shall keep in his/her office a record of all fires, together
with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the
fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the
investigation required by this subchapter.



('78 Code, § 8-21) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71)



§ 33.17  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Fire Marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night,
when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him/her by the
provisions of this subchapter, to enter upon and examine any building or
premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises
adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with
reason and good discretion.



('78 Code, § 8-22) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71)



§ 33.18  TAKING TESTIMONY; PROSECUTION OF CRIMINAL SUSPECTS.



   The Fire Marshal, when in his/her opinion further investigation is
necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all
persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge
in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be
reduced to writing; and if he/she shall be of the opinion that there is
evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the
attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or
criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he/she shall cause the person
to be lawfully arrested and charged with the offense, or either of them, and
shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together
with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him/her,
including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case.



('78 Code, § 8-23) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71)



§ 33.19  GATHERING EVIDENCE.



   The Fire Marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before
him/her to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of
this subchapter a subject of inquiry and investigation and may require the
production of any books, papers or documents deemed pertinent thereto. The
Fire Marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and
affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him/her.



('78 Code, § 8-24) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71)



§ 33.20  RECALCITRANT WITNESS.



   Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or
testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the Fire Marshal, or who fails
or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the
proceedings of the Fire Marshal in the matter of the investigation or inquiry
after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under
investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it
shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal to cause all such offenders to be
prosecuted. Any person being convicted of such misdemeanor shall be fined as
provided in § 10.99.



('78 Code, § 8-25) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71)



§ 33.21  PRIVACY OF INVESTIGATION; SEPARATION OF WITNESSES.



   All investigations held by or under the direction of the Fire Marshal
may, in his/her discretion, be private, and persons other than those required
to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is
held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not
allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined.



('78 Code, § 8-26) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71)



AMBULANCE



§ 33.35  AMBULANCE SERVICE ESTABLISHED.



   There is established an emergency ambulance service in the city under
the supervision of the City Manager who shall have the authority to
promulgate and publish necessary rules and regulations governing the
establishment of funding, operations and management of the necessary
emergency ambulance services.



('78 Code, § 17-7) (Ord. 373, passed 12-11-78; Ord. 703, passed 11-10-86)



§ 33.36  SCHEDULE OF CHARGES.



   The following rate schedule shall be in full force and in effect and
shall constitute charges, which shall be made for the rendition of the
respective enumerated services by the City Fire Department.



   (A)   The ambulance charge for Basic Life Support transportation of
each person shall be $715. If, however, an ambulance transports more than one
person of the same family, involved in the same accident, then the charge
will be $715 for the first person and $150 per person thereafter.



   (B)   The ambulance charge for Advanced Life Support transportation
of each person shall be $753.



   (C)   The ambulance charge for Advanced Life Support II
transportation of each person shall be $783.



   (D)   The ambulance charge for transporting each non-resident of the
city shall be an additional $80.



   (E)   The ambulance charge for mileage for each person shall be $12
per transported mile. Mileage responding to an incident shall not be used in
calculating this fee.



   (F)   The disposable supply charge for basic life support shall be
$75.



   (G)   The disposable supply charge for advanced life support shall
be $125.



   (H)   The Oxygen Fee supply charge shall be $63.



(‘78 Code, § 17-8) (Ord. 373, passed 12-11-78; Ord. 396, passed 10-8-79;
Ord. 703, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. 1236, passed 11-9-98; Am. Ord. 1358,
passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 1667, passed 1-28-08; Am. Ord. OR-1844-12, passed
9-24-12)



§ 33.37  SERVICE BOUNDARIES.



   Boundaries for ambulance service will include the territory covered by
the existing city limits or where written agreement has been established to
supply ambulance services.



('78 Code, § 17-9) (Ord. 703, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. 1236, passed 11-9-98)



§ 33.38  SERVICE AREA DEFINED.



   Service area, as used in this section, will refer to the area from
which the ambulance will transport patients from the scene of the accident or
injury to area hospitals. This will be defined as to include all hospitals
within Tarrant County. Most ambulance transports will require transport to
the closest appropriate facility per Mansfield EMS protocols. Transport to
other facilities may occur due to a hospital's ability to handle a specific
situation, such as medical trauma, pediatric cases or diversion.



('78 Code, § 17-10) (Ord. 703, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. 1236, passed
11-9-98; Am. Ord. 1667, passed 1-28-08)



CHAPTER 34: LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS



Section



City Marshal



   34.01   Office created



   34.02   Duties



   34.03   Qualifications



   34.04   Survivor's assistance benefits



Law Enforcement Assistance During Civil Emergencies



   34.15   Mutual law enforcement assistance authorized



   34.16   Status of officers from another governmental unit



   34.17   Rights while serving outside this city



   34.18   Reimbursement of other governmental units



Police Reserve Force



   34.30   Establishment



   34.31   Appointment; term of members



   34.32   Police Chief in control of Force



   34.33   Training of applicants



   34.34   Size, composition and organization of Force; compensation of
members



   34.35   Carrying of weapons



   34.36   Reserve Force to act in supplementary capacity to regular
Police Force



Disposal of Abandoned Property



   34.50   Definition



   34.51   Removal



   34.52   Record



   34.53   Notice to owner



   34.54   Disposition of unclaimed property



   34.55   Exceptions



CITY MARSHAL



§ 34.01  OFFICE CREATED.



   The office of City Marshal for the jail division of the law enforcement
center of the city is hereby created. The City Marshal and his/her deputies
shall be appointed by the City Manager. Their compensation shall be
established by ordinance.



('78 Code, § 13.5-36) (Ord. 867, passed 6-12-90)



§ 34.02  DUTIES.



   The City Marshal and his/her deputies, acting under the direction of
the Jail Administrator, shall perform the following duties.



   (A)   The City Marshal's office shall transport persons already in
custody to and from the Mansfield Law Enforcement Center.



   (B)   The City Marshal's office shall transport persons already in
custody from a point of origin to a point of destination for other recognized
law enforcement or detention agencies as provided for per agreement between
the city and any such other agency.



   (C)   The City Marshal's office shall transport and remain with
persons requiring hospital treatment who have been officially entered into
the jail book of the Mansfield Law Enforcement Center.



   (D)   In the event of a natural disaster, personnel of the City
Marshal's office may be incorporated into the emergency services of the city.



   (E)   The City Marshal's office is authorized to provide City
Marshal personnel to work as Bailiff and/or Warrant Officers for the
Mansfield Municipal Court and perform any law enforcement duties as 
authorized by law, and as directed by the City Marshal, including the
authority to arrest, detain or issue summons or citations.



(’78 Code, § 13.5-37) (Ord. 867, passed 6-12-90; Ord. OR-1831-12, passed
2-27-12)



§ 34.03  QUALIFICATIONS.



   The City Marshal and his/her deputies shall meet all qualifications
necessary to be certified as peace officers by the Texas Commission on Law
Enforcement Standards and Education.



('78 Code, § 13.5-38) (Ord. 867, passed 6-12-90)



§ 34.04  SURVIVOR'S ASSISTANCE BENEFITS.



   The City Marshal and his/her deputies are not members of the Police
Department of the city; however, they are paid law enforcement officers for
the purpose of qualifying for survivor's assistance benefits under the
provisions of Tex. Gov't Code §§ 615.071 et seq., as amended.



('78 code, § 13.5-39) (Ord. 867, passed 6-12-90)



LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSISTANCE DURING CIVIL EMERGENCIES



§ 34.15  MUTUAL LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSISTANCE AUTHORIZED.



   The City Council does hereby appoint the City Manager, at his/her
discretion, to send the regularly employed law enforcement officers to assist
any other county or municipality when the Mayor or other officer authorized
to declare a state of civil emergency requests this assistance, and there
exists in such other county or municipality, its inhabitants and the visitors
thereto, by reason of riot, unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
force and violence, or threat thereof by three o r more persons acting
together or without lawful authority, or during time of natural disaster or
man-made calamity.



('78 Code, § 2-1)



Cross reference:



   Emergency powers of Mayor, see Charter, § 3.06(c)



Statutory reference:



   Authority for mutual assistance, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 362.002



   Emergency powers of Mayor, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 22.042



§ 34.16  STATUS OF OFFICERS FROM ANOTHER GOVERNMENTAL UNIT.



   Whenever any law enforcement officer of any other county or
municipality is assigned to this city, under authority of an order adopted by
the governing body of such other county or municipality, to assist under
circumstances as described above which may exist in this city, that such
officer shall be a peace officer of this city and shall be under the command
of the Chief of Police of this city while so assigned. He/she shall have all
the powers of a regular law enforcement officer of this city as fully as
though he/she were within the county or municipality where regularly
employed, and his/her qualifications, respectively, for office where
regularly employed shall constitute his/her qualification for office in this
city, and no other oath, bond or compensation shall be made.



('78 Code, § 2-2)



§ 34.17  RIGHTS WHILE SERVING OUTSIDE THIS CITY.



   When any law enforcement officer of this city is ordered by proper
authority to perform peace officer duties outside the territorial limits of
this city, he/she shall be entitled to the same wage, salary, pension and all
other compensation and all other rights for such service, including injury or
death benefits, the same as though the service had been rendered within the
limits of this city; and he/she shall also be paid for any reasonable
expenses of travel, food or lodging, as well as for damage to equipment and
clothing, and medical expenses which he/she may incur while on duty outside
such limits, or while traveling to or from such assignment.



('78 Code, § 2-3)



§ 34.18  REIMBURSEMENT OF OTHER GOVERNMENTAL UNITS.



   When any law enforcement officer is assigned to this city from another
city under the circumstances described in this subchapter, and upon request
of the proper authority of this city, this city will, upon proper request,
reimburse the county or city furnishing the services of such law enforcement
officer for his/her actual expenses of travel, food, lodging and for such
cost or damage to equipment and clothing resulting from the services of such
law enforcement officer in this city and for which the county or city where
he/she is regularly employed has paid.



('78 Code, § 2-4)



POLICE RESERVE FORCE



§ 34.30  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby established a Police Reserve Force of the Police
Department of the city, which shall be a voluntary force of reserve peace
officers hereafter referred to as the "Police Reserve Force."



('78 Code, § 13.5-11) (Ord. 420, passed 7-28-80)



§ 34.31  APPOINTMENT; TERM OF MEMBERS.



   Members of the Police Reserve Force shall be appointed at the
discretion of the Chief of Police, shall serve at the discretion of the Chief
of Police and may be called into active service at any time the Chief of
Police considers it necessary to have additional peace officers to preserve
the peace and enforce the law.



('78 Code, § 13.5-12) (Ord. 420, passed 7-28-80)



§ 34.32  POLICE CHIEF IN CONTROL OF FORCE.



   The Police Reserve Force shall function under the general direction and
control of the Chief of Police and shall be subject to such rules,
regulations and orders as may be promulgated from time to time by the Chief
of Police in accordance with the authority vested in the Chief of Police by
the City Charter or the ordinances of the city.



('78 Code, § 13.5-13) (Ord. 420, passed 7-28-80)



§ 34.33  TRAINING OF APPLICANTS.



   Prior to performing any duties as a reserve police officer, each police
reserve applicant shall receive training from the City Police Department in
accordance with the requirements of the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement
Officer Standards and Education and shall apply for certification by the
Commission as a reserve police officer.



('78 Code, § 13.5-14) (Ord. 420, passed 7-28-80; Ord. 462, passed 4-26-82)



§ 34.34  SIZE, COMPOSITION AND ORGANIZATION OF FORCE; COMPENSATION OF
MEMBERS.



   The Police Reserve Force shall be an auxiliary police force composed of
volunteers who shall serve without pay or other compensation. The City
Council shall establish the size of the Police Reserve Force by appropriate
resolution from time to time. The Chief of Police shall establish the
composition and organization of the Police Reserve Force.



('78 Code, § 13.5-15) (Ord. 420, passed 7-28-80; Ord. 900, passed 8-12-91)



§ 34.35  CARRYING OF WEAPONS.



   No person appointed to the Police Reserve Force may carry a weapon or
otherwise act as a peace officer without the prior approval of the City
Council. After such approval, the police reserve officer may carry a weapon
only when authorized to do so by the Chief of Police and only when
discharging official duties in accordance with the rules, regulations and
orders promulgated by the Chief of Police.



('78 Code, § 13.5-16) (Ord. 420, passed 7-28-80; Ord. 462, passed 4-26-82;
Ord. 900, passed 8-12-91)



§ 34.36  RESERVE FORCE TO ACT IN SUPPLEMENTARY CAPACITY TO REGULAR POLICE
FORCE.



   Reserve police officers of the Police Reserve Force shall act only in a
supplementary capacity to the regular Police Force of the city and shall not
assume the full-time duties of regular police officers without first
complying with all requirements for such regular police officers.



('78 Code, § 13.5-17) (Ord. 420, passed 7-28-80)



DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED PROPERTY



§ 34.50 DEFINITION.



   ABANDONED PROPERTY. For the purpose of this subchapter, this term shall
mean any personal property that is left unattended on public property within
the city for more than 48 hours or any personal property that has remained on
private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the
property for more than 48 hours.



('78 Code, § 13.5-26) (Ord. 402, passed 1-28-80)



§ 34.51  REMOVAL.



   All abandoned, stolen or recovered property may be summarily removed by
or at the direction of the Chief of Police.



('78 Code, § 13.5-27) (Ord. 402, passed 1-28-80)



§ 34.52  RECORD.



   The Chief of Police shall maintain a list of all property seized or
stored pursuant to this subchapter.



('78 Code, § 13.5-28) (Ord. 402, passed 1-28-80)



§ 34.53  NOTICE TO OWNER.



   If the identity of the owner of the property can be ascertained, the
Chief of Police shall send a notice by mail to the owner's last known address
requesting that the owner claim the property. If a claim is made for property
which is being held for evidence purposes, the claimant shall leave his/her
name and current mailing address and shall claim such property after notice
of its availability.



('78 Code, § 13.5-29) (Ord. 402, passed 1-28-80)



§ 34.54  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.



   (A)   All abandoned, stolen or recovered property which remains in
the possession of the Chief of Police for a period of 60 days without being
claimed by its owner may be sold or disposed of as provided in this
subchapter.



   (B)   If the unclaimed property is determined to have no value, it
may be destroyed.



   (C)   If the unclaimed property is determined to have value, notice
of the time and place of the sale of the property shall be posted in a
prominent place at the City Hall and shall be published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation on a date more than 30 days prior to such
sale.



   (D)   The public auction provided for in the preceding paragraph
shall be conducted at the place and time designated in the notice. The City
Manager shall conduct such public auction and shall keep an accurate
statement of each article sold and the price bid and paid therefor. All sales
shall be for cash. All funds received shall be paid to the city.



   (E)   Prior to the public auction, the head of any department of the
city may request, in writing, that any items offered or to be offered for
sale be assigned to his/her department. On the date designated for the public
auction, the City Manager may, in his/her discretion, assign such item or
items to such department or sell such item or items at public auction.



   (F)   No employee or officer of the city shall, either directly or
indirectly, submit a bid or purchase any property sold pursuant to this
subchapter.



('78 Code, § 13.5-30) (Ord. 402, passed 1-28-80)



§ 34.55  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the following.



   (A)   Motor vehicles.



   (B)   Prohibited weapons, as that term is defined in the Texas Penal
Code.



   (C)   Gambling equipment, criminal instruments or weapons whose
disposition is governed by Chapter 18 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.



   (D)   Personal property subject to escheat under Tex. Prop. Code
§§ 71.001 et seq.



   (E)   Property subject to forfeiture under the Texas Controlled
Substances Act.



('78 Code, § 13.5-31) (Ord. 402, passed 1-28-80)



CHAPTER 35: CODE ENFORCEMENT



Section



Issuance of Search Warrants and Enforcement Orders



   35.01   Definitions



   35.02   Conflicts



   35.03   Search warrants authorized



   35.04   Authorized searches without a warrant



   35.05   Probable cause for search warrant



   35.06   Content of search warrant



   35.07   Execution of search warrant



   35.08   Time allowed for execution of search warrant



   35.09   Power of Inspector executing search warrant



   35.10   Enforcement orders authorized



   35.11   Authorized entry without enforcement order



   35.12   Content of enforcement order



   35.13   Execution of enforcement order



   35.14   Power of Inspector executing enforcement order



 



   35.99   Penalty



ISSUANCE OF SEARCH WARRANTS AND ENFORCEMENT ORDERS



§ 35.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ENFORCEMENT ORDER.  A written order by a Magistrate authorizing entry
by the city onto specified premises for the purpose of abating a nuisance or
other condition which is in violation of city ordinance or state statute.



   INSPECTOR.  Any official Inspector for any department of the city who
is charged with the enforcement of city ordinances, including but not limited
to Inspectors for the departments of zoning, environmental control, housing,
building inspection, fire inspection and health inspection.



   MAGISTRATE.  The Judge of the Municipal Court of the city, or any
other person or position designated as a Magistrate by state law.



   SEARCH WARRANT.  A written order issued by a Magistrate and directed
to any Inspector or peach officer commanding him/her to a specified premises
to determine the presence of a violation of any ordinance of the city.



(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)



§ 35.02  CONFLICTS.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to conflict with
any state or federal law and shall be in addition to any rights granted
thereby. The city or any Inspector or peace officer may seek other available
enforcement remedies, both civil and criminal, in addition to those allowed
by this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the
city or any Inspector from performing inspections or abatement work without
the necessity of a warrant or order where authorized by law.



(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)



§ 35.03  SEARCH WARRANTS AUTHORIZED.



   Except as provided in § 35.04, Inspectors are hereby authorized to
seek and obtain search warrants from Magistrates as provided in this chapter
before making an inspection incidental to the enforcement of any provision of
the Zoning Ordinance, Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code,
Electrical Code, Fire Code or any ordinances related to the use or condition
of property or a nuisance on the property.



(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)



§ 35.04  AUTHORIZED SEARCHES WITHOUT A WARRANT.



   Search warrants shall not be required under the following circumstances.



   (A)   When permission to inspect the premises has been granted by
someone with apparent charge or control of those premises. For the purpose of
this paragraph, permission to inspect may be granted either verbally, in
writing or by some other action indicating consent.



   (B)   When there exists an imminent danger or peril to human life,
limb or property and any delays resulting from the application for a search
warrant would materially increase the likelihood of loss from such danger or
peril.



   (C)   When the inspection can be executed by a person who is an
invitee on premises held open to the general public. For the purposes of this
division (C), a person ceases to be an invitee when he/she has been
instructed to leave the premises or otherwise terminate his/her inspection by
someone having charge or control of those premises.



   (D)   When the inspection can be executed from public property or
adjacent private property with the permission of someone with apparent charge
or control of such adjacent private property.



   (E)   When the inspection is an open fields inspection of or from an
unoccupied or undeveloped area.



(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)



§ 35.05  PROBABLE CAUSE FOR SEARCH WARRANT.



   No search warrant shall be issued pursuant to this chapter except on
the presentation of evidence of probable cause to believe that a violation is
present or that reasonable administrative standards for conducting an
inspection are satisfied with respect to the premises sought to be inspected.
A sworn affidavit setting forth substantial facts toward establishing
probable cause or reasonable administrative standards shall be filed in every
instance in which a search warrant is requested. In determining probable
cause, the Magistrate shall consider the totality of the circumstances behind
the issuance of the search warrant and may consider and weigh evidence of
specific knowledge or any other evidence that a substantial basis exists that
a search warrant would uncover evidence of a violation. In determining
whether reasonable administrative standards are satisfied for the issuance of
a warrant, the Magistrate may consider and weigh the following.



   (A)   The age and general condition of the premises.



   (B)   Previous violations or hazards found present on the premises
and the scope and objects of the search.



   (C)   The type of premises.



   (D)   The purposes for which the premises are used.



   (E)   The presence of hazards or violations and the general
condition of premises near the premises sought to be inspected.



   (F)   The passage of time since a previous inspection.



(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)



§ 35.06  CONTENT OF SEARCH WARRANT.



   A search warrant issued pursuant to this chapter shall be sufficient if
it contains the following requisites.



   (A)   That it run in the name of the "State of Texas."



   (B)   That it identify as near as may be the premises to be
inspected and the scope and objects of the search.



   (C)   That it command an Inspector or peace officer to inspect
forthwith the premises described.



   (D)   That it be dated and signed by the Magistrate.



(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)



§ 35.07  EXECUTION OF SEARCH WARRANT.



   The Inspector shall, upon going to the premises ordered to be
inspected, give notice of his/her purpose to the person who has charge or
control of the premises described in the warrant. If the person cannot be
found, a search may be conducted in accordance with the search warrant
provided that a copy of the warrant shall be affixed to the front door of the
building or gate of the premises inspected. In every instance, entry shall be
effected using the minimum force necessary according to the circumstances.



(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)



§ 35.08  TIME ALLOWED FOR EXECUTION OF SEARCH WARRANT.



   An Inspector to whom a search warrant is delivered shall execute it
without delay and forthwith return it to the proper Magistrate. The time
allowed for the execution of a search warrant shall be three whole days
exclusive of the day of its issuance and of the day of its execution, or such
shorter period as may be ordered by the Magistrate. The Magistrate issuing a
search warrant under the provisions of this section shall endorse on the
search warrant the date and hour of the issuance of the same. Upon returning
the search warrant, the Inspector shall state on the back of same or on some
paper attached to it, the manner in which it has been executed and shall
likewise deliver to the Magistrate a copy of the report resulting from that
inspection. The Magistrate shall keep a record of all proceedings had before
him/her in the cases of search warrants as part of the official records of
his/her court.



(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)



§ 35.09  POWER OF INSPECTOR EXECUTING SEARCH WARRANT.



   In the execution of a search warrant, the Inspector may call to his/her
aid any number of citizens in the city who shall be bound to aid in the
execution of same. Any person interfering with the execution of a lawful
search warrant issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. The execution of a search warrant issued pursuant to this
chapter shall not include any authority to seize tangible goods or any
authority to make arrests without the assistance of a peace officer.



(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98) Penalty, see § 35.99



§ 35.10  ENFORCEMENT ORDERS AUTHORIZED.



   Where civil enforcement by the city is authorized by ordinance or
statute, Inspectors are hereby authorized to seek and obtain an
administrative enforcement order from the Magistrate authorizing entry upon
private property for the purpose of abating any public nuisance or other
violation of an ordinance or statute which adversely affects the public
health, safety or welfare. The Inspector shall present to the Magistrate a
sworn affidavit setting forth substantial facts establishing that a violation
of the city ordinance or state statute exists and that requisite notice has
been given under the ordinance or statute. The Magistrate shall issue an
enforcement order if he/she determines the following.



   (A)   That facts exist to show that a violation of a statute or
ordinance has occurred.



   (B)   That the abatement of the nuisance or violation is in the best
interest of the public health, safety or welfare.



   (C)   That the proposed abatement action is reasonable under the
circumstances.



(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)



§ 35.11  AUTHORIZED ENTRY WITHOUT ENFORCEMENT ORDER.



   An administrative enforcement order shall not be required under the
following circumstances.



   (A)   When permission to perform the abatement work or improvements
has been granted by someone with apparent charge or control of the premises.
For purposes of this division (A), permission may be granted either verbally,
in writing or by some other action indicating consent.



   (B)   Where there exists an imminent danger or peril to human life,
limb or property and any delays resulting from the application for an
enforcement order would materially increase the likelihood of loss from such
danger or peril.



   (C)   When the abatement work or improvements are on open fields or
unoccupied or undeveloped  areas.



(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)



§ 35.12  CONTENT OF ENFORCEMENT ORDER.



   An enforcement order issued by a Magistrate pursuant to this chapter
shall contain the following requisites.



   (A)   That it identify as near as may be the premises which are in
violation of ordinance or statute.



   (B)   That it reasonably specify the scope of the work or
improvements to be performed by the city in abating the violation.



   (C)   That it set forth such other requirements or conditions as the
Magistrate deems necessary to assure that the premises will be adequately
protected and that the work or improvements are no greater than is reasonably
necessary to abate all conditions which adversely affect the public health,
safety or welfare.



   (D)   That it specify a reasonable amount of time in which to carry
out such enforcement order.



(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)



§ 35.13  EXECUTION OF ENFORCEMENT ORDER.



   The Inspector shall, upon entering the premises for the purpose of
abatement, give notice of his/her purpose to the person who has charge or
control of the premises. If the person cannot be found, the work may be
performed in accordance with the enforcement order provided that a copy of
the order shall be affixed to the front door of the building or gate of the
premises. In every instance, entry shall be effected using the minimum force
necessary according to the circumstances.



(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)



§ 35.14  POWER OF INSPECTOR EXECUTING ENFORCEMENT ORDER.



   In the execution of an enforcement order, the Inspector may call to
his/her aid any number of citizens in the city who shall be bound to aid in
the execution of same. Any person interfering with the execution of a lawful
enforcement order issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98) Penalty, see § 35.99



§ 35.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $2,000 for all
violations involving fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation,
including dumping of refuse and shall be fined $500 for all other violations
of this chapter. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)



CHAPTER 36: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   36.01   Emergency Management Director, Coordinator, organization



   36.02   Powers and duties of Director



   36.03   Emergency Management Plan



   36.04   Interjurisdictional program



   36.05   Override



   36.06   Liability



   36.07   Commitment of funds



   36.08   Offenses



 



   36.99   Penalty



Cross reference:



   Law enforcement assistance during civil emergencies, see §§ 34.15 et
seq.



Statutory reference:



   Emergency powers of Mayor, see Charter, § 3.06(c)



§ 36.01  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR, COORDINATOR, ORGANIZATION.



   There exists the office of Emergency Management Director of the city
which shall be held by the Mayor in accordance with state law.



   (A)   An Emergency Management Coordinator may be appointed and serve
at the pleasure of the Director.



   (B)   The Director shall be responsible for a program of
comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the
duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He/she may delegate
authority for execution of these duties to the Coordinator, but ultimate
responsibility for the execution shall remain with the Director.



   (C)   The operational emergency management organization of the city
shall consist of the officers and employees for the city so designated by the
Director in the Emergency Management Plan, as well as organized volunteer
groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed
among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the
Emergency Management Plan.



('78 Code, § 7-1) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)



§ 36.02  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.



   The duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management Director
shall include the following.



   (A)   Conduct an on-going survey of actual or potential hazards
which threaten life and property within the city and an on-going program of
identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures
which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such
hazards if a disaster did occur.



   (B)   Supervision of the development and approval of an Emergency
Management Plan for the city and recommendation for adoption by the City
Council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation
of the Plan.



   (C)   Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The
declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven
days except by or with the declaring, continuing or terminating a local state
of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed
promptly with the City Secretary.



   (D)   Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives
which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter; such
proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by
means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public
and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede,
promptly filed with the City Secretary.



   (E)   Direction of the operations of the city emergency management
organization.



   (F)   Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility
that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city,
relative to an actual disaster.



   (G)   Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district,
state, regional or federal emergency management organizations.



   (H)   Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies
from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions
of the Emergency Management Plan.



   (I)   Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid
agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state, and the
drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county
and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide
coordination of emergency management efforts.



   (J)   Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of
all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private
contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency
management within the city.



   (K)   Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the City
Attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes.



   (L)   Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment,
supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for
herein.



   (M)   Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act 1975
(Tex. Gov't. Code, §§ 418.001 et seq.).



('78 Code, § 7-2) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)



§ 36.03  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   (A)   A comprehensive Emergency Management Plan shall be developed
and maintained in a current state. The Plan shall set forth the form of the
organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers and designate officers and
employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   As provided by state law, the Plan shall follow the standards
and criteria established by the State Division of Emergency Management of the
State of Texas. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and
terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the State Division of
Emergency Management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments
and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the Plan and to maintain
their portion of the Plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The
Emergency Management Plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter
and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster.



('78 Code, § 7-3) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)



§ 36.04  INTERJURISDICTIONAL PROGRAM.



   The Mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judge and the
Mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of an Emergency
Management Council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate
in the preparation of a Joint Emergency Management Plan and in the
appointment of a Joint Emergency Management Coordinator, as well as all
powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency
management insofar as the program may affect the city.



('78 Code, § 7-4) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)



§ 36.05  OVERRIDE.



   During an active or eminent emergency, when the orders, rules and
regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect,
they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and
regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith; provided
that nothing stated herein shall override any provision of the City Charter.



('78 Code, § 7-5) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)



§ 36.06  LIABILITY.



   This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions
for the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and neither the
city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual,
receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of
the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting
to comply with, any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to
persons as the result of the activity. Any person owning or controlling real
estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect,
designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or
premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or
practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with
his/her successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death
of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under
such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the
property of such person.



('78 Code, § 7-6) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)



§ 36.07  COMMITMENT OF FUNDS.



   No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city
in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter
without prior approval by the City Council, nor shall any person have any
right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and
specific approval of the City Council unless during a declared disaster.
During a declared disaster, the Mayor may expend and/or commit public funds
of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health,
life or property.



('78 Code, § 7-7) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)



§ 36.08  OFFENSES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct,
hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the
enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or to
do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the
authority contained in this chapter.



   (B)   It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or
display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification of the
city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper
officials.



   (C)   Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other
device as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning,
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to
the penalties imposed in § 36.99.



('78 Code, § 7-8(a)-(c)) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)



§ 36.99  PENALTY.



   Conviction for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by fine not to exceed $1,000.



('78 Code, § 7-8(d)) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)



CHAPTER 37: MUNICIPAL COURT



Section



General Provisions



   37.01   Establishment



   37.02   Terms of Government Code adopted



   37.03   Judge



   37.04   Magistrates



   37.05   Municipal Court Clerk



   37.06   Court Reporter



Technology Fund



   37.15   Establishment of Municipal Court Technology Fund



   37.16   Amount of fee, assessment, collection



   37.17   Designated use of Fund; administration



Municipal Court Building Security Fund



   37.30   Creation of Fund



   37.31   Security fee assessed



   37.32   Fund purposes



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 37.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The City Council hereby establishes the City Municipal Court as a
Municipal Court of Record in order to provide a more efficient disposition of
cases arising in the city, and in order to more effectively enforce the
ordinances of the city. The Municipal Court shall become a Court of Record
from and after the first day of October, 1995, and shall be designated the
City Municipal Court of Record No. 1.



('78 Code, § 9.9-1) (Ord. 1086, passed 7-24-95)



§ 37.02  TERMS OF GOVERNMENT CODE ADOPTED.



   The Municipal Court of Record is established pursuant to the authority
granted in the Tex. Gov't. Code, Ch. 30, subchapter CC, and the terms set
forth therein are hereby adopted governing the operation of the Court.



('78 Code, § 9.9-2) (Ord. 1086, passed 7-24-95)



§ 37.03  JUDGE.



   The Municipal Court of Record shall be presided over by a Municipal
Judge appointed by the City Council who shall serve for a two-year term. The
initial term shall be from the effective date of Ordinance 1086 through April
1997. The Municipal Judge must be a licensed attorney in good standing in the
state and must have two or more years of experience in the practice of law in
Texas. The Judge must be a citizen of the United States and of the State of
Texas. The City Council may appoint one or more similarly qualified persons
to serve as alternate or associate Municipal Judge when the Municipal Judge
is temporarily absent for any reason, or to serve under the direction of the
Municipal Court Judge.



('78 Code, § 9.9-3) (Ord. 1086, passed 7-24-95)



§ 37.04  MAGISTRATES.



   The City Council may appoint one or more Magistrates who need not
possess all the qualifications necessary to be a Municipal Court Judge of the
Court of Record. The Magistrate may conduct an arraignment, hold an indigency
hearing, accept a plea, sign a judgment, set the amount of bond and perform
other functions under the Code of Criminal Procedure, Art. 15.17. A
Magistrate may not preside over the Court or hear contested cases.



('78 Code, § 9.9-4) (Ord. 1086, passed 7-24-95)



§ 37.05  MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK. 



   The City Manager shall appoint a Clerk of the Municipal Court of Record
who shall perform duties in accordance with statutes, the City Charter and
city ordinances.



('78 Code, § 9.9-5) (Ord. 1086, passed 7-24-95)



§ 37.06  COURT REPORTER.



   The Municipal Court Clerk shall appoint a Court Reporter who must meet
the qualifications provided by law for official Court Reporters. The Court
Reporter may use written notes, transcribing equipment, video or audio
equipment, or a combination of those methods to record the proceedings of the
Court. The Court Reporter is not required to record testimony in any case
unless the Judge or one of the parties requests a record in writing, and
files the request with the Court before trial. If a record is made, it shall
be kept for the 20-day period beginning the day after the last day of the
Court proceeding, trial or denial of motion for new trial, whichever occurs
last. The Court Reporter is not required to be present during proceedings of
the Municipal Court of Record, provided that proceedings that are required to
be recorded are recorded by a good quality electronic recording device.



('78 Code, § 9.9-6) (Ord. 1086, passed 7-24-95)



TECHNOLOGY FUND



§ 37.15  ESTABLISHMENT OF MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court
Technology Fund, here-in-now known as the Fund, pursuant to the Code of
Criminal Procedure, Art. 102.0172.



   (B)   The Fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and
may be maintained in the general revenue account.



(Ord. 1282, passed 10-11-99; Ord. OR-1814-11, passed 8-22-11)



§ 37.16  AMOUNT OF FEE, ASSESSMENT, COLLECTION.



   (A)   The fee shall be in the amount of $4 or the maximum allowed by
statute.



   (B)   The fee shall be assessed and collected from a defendant, as
allowed by statute, or when convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the
Municipal Court as a cost of court. A person is considered convicted if:



      (1)   A sentence is imposed on the person;



      (2)   The person is placed on community supervision, including
deferred adjudication community supervision; or



      (3)   The Court defers final disposition of the person's case.



   (C)   The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense
committed on or after September 1, 1999 (or for convictions on offenses
committed on or after the adoption of Ordinance OR-1814-11).



   (D)   The Clerk of the Court shall collect the fee and pay the fee
to the Municipal Treasurer of the city, who shall deposit the fee into the
Municipal Court Technology Fund.



(Ord. 1282, passed 10-11-99; Ord. OR-1814-11, passed 8-22-11)



§ 37.17  DESIGNATED USE OF FUND; ADMINISTRATION.



   The Fund shall be used only for purposes authorized by law, to finance
the purchase of technological enhancements for the Municipal Court of the
City of Mansfield, Texas, including:



   (A)   Computer systems;



   (B)   Computer networks;



   (C)   Computer hardware;



   (D)   Computer software;



   (E)   Imaging systems;



   (F)   Electronic kiosks;



   (G)   Electronic ticket writers; or



   (H)   Docket management systems.



(Ord. 1282, passed 10-11-99; Ord. OR-1814-11, passed 8-22-11)



MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND



§ 37.30  CREATION OF FUND.



   There is hereby created a Municipal Court Building Security Fund. 
This Fund shall be administered under the direction of the governing body of
the city.



(Ord. 1099, passed 10-23-95)



§ 37.31  SECURITY FEE ASSESSED.



   All defendants convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor offense in
Municipal Court shall be required to pay a $3 security fee as a cost of
court.  A person is considered convicted for purposes of this section if a
sentence is imposed on the person, the person receives community supervision,
including deferred adjudication, or the court defers final disposition of the
person's case.  The security fee shall be collected by the Municipal Court
Clerk and paid to the official who discharges the duties of Municipal
Treasurer for deposit in the Municipal Court Building Security Fund.



(Ord. 1099, passed 10-23-95)



§ 37.32  FUND PURPOSES.



   The Municipal Court Building Security Fund may be used only to finance
the following items when used for the purpose of providing security services
for any buildings housing the City Municipal Court:



   (A)   The purchase or repair of x-ray machines and conveying systems;



   (B)   Hand-held metal detectors;



   (C)   Walk-through metal detectors;



   (D)   Identification cards and systems;



   (E)   Electronic locking and surveillance equipment;



   (F)   Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract
security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security
services;



   (G)   Signage;



   (H)   Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems;



   (I)   Locks, chains or other security hardware; and



   (J)   Any other item or service permitted by law.



(Ord. 1099, passed 10-23-95)



CHAPTER 38: TAXATION AND FINANCE



Section



General Provisions



   38.01   Sales and use tax



   38.015   Taxation of tangible personal property in transit



   38.02   Delinquency penalties and interest



   38.03   Penalty schedule; interest rate



   38.04   Payment of delinquency tax



   38.05   Collection by Tax Attorney



Hotel Occupancy Tax



   38.15   Levied



   38.16   Definitions



   38.17   Duty to collect



   38.18   Quarterly tax payments



   38.19   Tax Assessor/Collector to have access to books and records



 



   38.99   Penalty



Cross reference:



   Department of taxation, see Charter, § 9.15



   Taxation procedure, see Charter, §§ 9.16 et seq.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to levy, assess and collect taxes, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat.,
Arts. 1028, 1029, 1041, 1175(7)-(9)



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 38.01  SALES AND USE TAX.



   (A)   All action concerning the submission of the proposition to the
voters of the city having been taken and the tax authorized by Section 4A of
the Act having been approved by the voters of the city, the City Council does
hereby authorize the levy of a sales and use tax (the "Tax") within the city
for the benefit of a corporation established under Section 4A of the Act at a
rate of one-half of one percent on the sale of items at retail and an excise
tax at the same rate on the use, storage or other consumption within the city
of tangible personal property purchased, leased or rented from a retailer
during such time as the tax is effective within the city.



   (B)   The tax shall be administered, collected and remitted in
accordance with the Act and, to the extent not inconsistent with the Act, in
accordance with the Tex. Tax Code, Ch. 321, as amended.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-10-97)



§ 38.015  TAXATION OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY IN TRANSIT.



   Goods in transit as defined by § 11.253 of the Tex. Tax Code which are
not exempt from taxation under other law shall be subject to ad valorem
taxation for tax year 2012 and for every year thereafter, and shall not be
exempt from taxation as provided by, and in accordance with § 11.253 of the
Tex. Tax Code.



(Ord. 1657, passed 12-10-07; Ord. OR-1820-11, passed 11-28-11)



§ 38.02  DELINQUENCY PENALTIES AND INTEREST.



   (A)   For the maintenance, management and expenses of the city and
for the general improvement of the city and its property and in the interest
of the citizens of the city, there is hereby ordered to be charged the
hereinafter specified penalty and interest against all delinquent taxes
collected.



   (B)   Such penalty and interest as herein provided shall be charged
and shall accrue until the unpaid and delinquent taxes, together with such
accrued penalty and interest have been paid and satisfied.



('78 Code, § 14-1) (Ord. 209, passed 2-11-69)



§ 38.03  PENALTY SCHEDULE; INTEREST RATE.



   (A)   From and after February first next following the date any duly
levied or assessed tax shall have been due and payable to the city, the
following penalty and interest shall be assessed until the unpaid taxes,
penalty and interest have been paid and satisfied.



      (1)   During the month of February, 1%.



      (2)   During the month of March, 2%.



      (3)   During the month of April, 3%.



      (4)   During the month of May, 4%.



      (5)   During the month of June, 5%.



      (6)   On and after July 1, 8%.



   (B)   Additionally, all delinquent taxes shall bear interest at the
rate of 6% per annum from the date of their delinquency.



('78 Code, § 14-2) (Ord. 209, passed 2-11-69)



§ 38.04  PAYMENT OF DELINQUENCY TAX.



   At the time of the payment of any delinquent tax due the city, the City
Assessor-Collector or other officer charged with the duty of collecting same,
shall carefully figure and compute the amount of the delinquency and interest
due on the date of such payment and collect same, together with such
delinquent taxes, for and on behalf of the city.



('78 Code, § 14-3) (Ord. 209, passed 2-11-69)



§ 38.05  COLLECTION BY TAX ATTORNEY.



   (A)   Whenever any accounts for delinquent property taxes owed to
the city are given to its Tax Attorney for collection, on or after July 1 of
the year they become delinquent, the city shall be entitled to, and shall
collect, an additional penalty of 15% of the delinquent taxes and penalty
(including any interest owed) due on each delinquent property at the time of
collection, either before or after suit and or foreclosure sale, as provided
by the Texas Property Tax Code, § 33.07.



   (B)   In addition to the collection expenses provided for in
division (A) above, whenever a delinquent tax suit is filed, the city shall
be entitled to recover reasonable expenses, subject to the approval of the
Court, that are incurred by the city in determining the name, identity and
location of necessary parties and in procuring necessary legal descriptions
of the property on which a delinquent tax is due, as provided by the Texas
Property Tax Code, § 33.48(a)(3).



('78 Code, § 14-4) (Ord. 537, passed 5-31-84)



HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX



§ 38.15  LEVIED.



   Under the provisions of Tex. Tax. Code §§ 351.002 and 352.003, there
is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any sleeping room
furnished by any hotel, where the cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2 or
more per day, such tax to be equal to 7% of the consideration paid by the
occupant for such room to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes
imposed by other governmental agencies.



('78 Code, § 10-60) (Ord. 634, passed 9-23-85)



§ 38.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSIDERATION.  The cost of the room in such hotel only if the room is
one ordinarily used for sleeping, and shall not include the cost of any food
served or personal services rendered to the occupant of the room not related
to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy.



   HOTEL.  Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels,
motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses
or other buildings where rooms are furnished for consideration; but HOTEL
shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes.



   OCCUPANCY.  The use or possession, or the right to use or possession,
of any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if
the occupant's use, possession or right to use or possession extends for a
period of less than 30 days.



   OCCUPANT.  Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the
right to use or possess any room in a hotel, if the room is one ordinarily
used for sleeping.



('78 Code, § 10-61) (Ord. 634, passed 9-23-85)



§ 38.17  DUTY TO COLLECT.



   Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall
collect the tax imposed by this subchapter for the city.



('78 Code, § 10-61) (Ord. 634, passed 9-23-85)



§ 38.18  QUARTERLY TAX PAYMENTS.



   (A)   The taxes provided for herein shall be paid on a quarterly
basis as follows.



      (1)   The regular calendar quarters of the year, the first
quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March.



      (2)   The second quarter being the months of April, May and
June.



      (3)   The third quarter being the months of July, August and
September.



      (4)   The fourth quarter being the months of October, November
and December.



   (B)   On the last day of the month following each quarterly period,
every person required by this subchapter to collect the taxes imposed herein
shall file a report with the Tax Assessor and Collector of the city showing
the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, and
the amount of taxes collected on such occupancies, and such other information
as the Assessor and Collector of taxes may reasonably require. Such persons
shall pay the taxes due on such occupancies at the time of filing the report.



('78 Code, § 10-63) (Ord. 634, passed 9-23-85)



§ 38.19  TAX ASSESSOR/COLLECTOR TO HAVE ACCESS TO BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   The Assessor and Collector of taxes of the city shall have the power to
make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the
tax levied herein, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to the books
and records necessary to enable the Tax Assessor and Collector to determine
the correctness of any report filed as required by this subchapter, and the
amount of taxes due under the provisions of this subchapter.



('78 Code, § 10-64) (Ord. 634, passed 9-23-85)



§ 38.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed in §§
38.15 et seq., or fail to file a report as required in §§ 38.15 et seq., or
shall fail to pay to the Assessor and Collector of taxes the tax imposed 
when the report for payment is due, or shall file a false report, then such
person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.



   (B)   The City Attorney or other attorney acting for the city may
bring suit against a person who is required to collect the tax imposed in
§§ 38.15 et seq. and pay the collections over to the city and who has
failed to file a tax report or pay the tax when due to enjoin the person from
operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report filed, as
applicable, as provided by the Court's order.



   (C)   If any person fails to report when required to pay the tax
when due, any person shall pay a penalty of 5% of the amount of the tax due
pursuant to §§ 38.15 et seq. If any person fails to file the report or pay
the tax before the thirty-first day after the date that the report or tax
payment was due, he/she shall pay an additional penalty of 5% of the amount
of the tax due.



   (D)   Any person who is required to pay the taxes imposed in §§
38.15 et seq. shall report and send the taxes collected herein to the city as
provided.



   (E)   Delinquent taxes and accrued penalties draw interest at the
rate of 10% a year beginning 60 days after the date of which the tax was due.



('78 Code, § 10-65) (Ord. 634, passed 9-23-85; Ord. 773, passed 4-11-88)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT





         51.   SEWER AND WATER SERVICE





         52.   STORMWATER QUALITY PROTECTION





         53.   DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM





         54.   WATER DEMAND MANAGEMENT AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY
PLAN




CHAPTER 50:  SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT



Section



General Provisions



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Unauthorized disposal



   50.03   Collection required; authority to collect



   50.04   Pickup schedule



   50.05   Charges for collection



   50.06   Tampering with containers



   50.07   Prevention of scattering



   50.08   Theft of service



   50.09   Customer to provide garbage containers



   50.10   Other disposal prohibited



Residential Garbage and Recycling Collection



   50.25   Pickup schedule



   50.26   Specifications for garbage containers; number



   50.27   Placing of garbage containers for collection



   50.28   Placement of recycling containers



   50.29   Return of recycling containers



   50.30   Recycling containers assigned to property



   50.31   Recycling container replacement



   50.32   Mobile home park collection



Commercial Garbage and Recycling Collection



   50.45   Commercial collection; minimum collection standards



   50.46   Enclosures required



   50.47   Proof of service



   50.48   Small commercial garbage service



   50.49   Small commercial recycling



License to Regulate Recyclables



   50.60   License for commercial recyclable collection required



   50.61   Application



   50.62   Term



   50.63   License and application fees



   50.64   License agreement



   50.65   Requirement to furnish information



   50.66   Marking of vehicles and containers



   50.67   Comingled recyclable products



   50.68   Issuance or denial of license



   50.69   Revocation, denial or suspension of license



   50.70   Appeal



Enforcement



   50.85   Abatement of nuisance



 



   50.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BRUSH.  Parts or all of trees and shrubs.



   BULKY WASTE.  Bundled brush, stacked brush, fencing, appliances and
other waste materials with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for
permanent containers, but specifically excluding unacceptable waste.



   BUNDLED BRUSH.  Brush securely tied together to form an easily handled
package not exceeding four feet in length or 50 pounds in weight.



   COMMERCIAL CONTAINER.  Metal containers supplied by city’s solid
waste contractor for collection of garbage or recycling and affording
capacity to service a customer so as to prevent spillage, unsightly and
unsanitary conditions.



   CURBSIDE SERVICE.  Garbage, trash and recyclable materials to be
picked up by the city’s solid waste contractor which will be located at the
curbside of the street bearing the customer’s address.



   CUSTOMER.  Any owner, occupant, tenant or person otherwise in control
of premises in the city on which garbage and trash are accumulated and from
which the same is removed or required to be removed pursuant to the terms of
this chapter.



   DEBRIS.  Automobile frames, loose brush, and dirt, concrete, rocks,
bricks, lumber, plaster, sand, gravel, or other waste construction materials,
unless the amount of these materials is insignificant.



   ENCLOSURES.  A manmade structure built for the specific purposes of
shielding a commercial container. These ENCLOSURES must be built so that the
refuse collection vehicles have access to the container. ENCLOSURES shall be
built with doors, these shall be opened by the tenants on the day of
collection, and shall remain closed at all other times, except when being
used to access the dumpster for disposal of material. Doors shall be made
with anchor devices that will keep the doors from inadvertently closing on
the collection vehicles. ENCLOSURES shall be at least 12 feet wide and 12
feet deep for ease of collection. Approaches to containers must be of
sufficient strength to support the weight of collection vehicles. Additional
ENCLOSURE or screening requirements may be contained in the city’s zoning
ordinance.



   FENCING.  Wooden fence panels cut into four feet by six feet sections.
Loose pickets must be tied and in bundles weighing no more than 50 pounds in
weight per bundle.



   GARBAGE.  Solid waste that is putrescible animal and vegetable waste
materials from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food,
including waste materials from markets, storage facilities and the handling
and sale of produce and other food products.



   GARBAGE CONTAINER.  A container for garbage and trash constructed of
metal or substantial plastic with a tight fitting lid or cover and handles
strong enough for workers to handle conveniently, or substantial plastic bags
tied closed. Such container’s opening shall have a greater or equal
diameter to the base. When loaded, such container shall not exceed 50 pounds
in weight.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  All fecal material, oil, sludge, and any
radioactive, pathological, toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, acidic
or volatile materials, or other hazardous or improper wastes, including solid
wastes regulated as hazardous under the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act, 42 U.S.C.A. §§ 1002 et seq., or regulated as toxic under the Toxic
Substance Control Act, 15 U.S.C.A. §§ 2601 et seq., and regulations
promulgated thereunder or other applicable federal or state law concerning
the regulations of hazardous or toxic wastes.



   LANDFILL PROHIBITED WASTE MATERIALS.  Non-hazardous materials
prohibited from disposal at Type I landfills pursuant to TCEQ regulations,
Tex. Admin. Code Title 30, § 330.5. PROHIBITED WASTE MATERIALS include, but
are not limited to. tires, used oil filters, and PCBs or PCB containing
equipment.



   LIQUID WASTE.  Any waste material that is determined to be or contain
“free liquid” by a paint filter test (EPA METHOD 9095).



   LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY.  Any municipal officer or department ofthe
city, designated by the City Manager, to administer this chapter.



   OWNER.  The actual fee holder of the title to property and does not
include tenant, lessee or subleases.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL.  A material that has been recovered or diverted
from the nonhazardous waste stream for the purposes of reuse, recycling or
reclamation, a substantia! portion of which is consistently used in the
manufacture of products that may otherwise be produced using raw or virgin
materials. The following constitute recycled materials:



      (1)   Paper products, such as newspapers, magazines and
catalogs, mail, paper bags and other paper, excluding waxed paper products,
such as milk cartons and similar items;



      (2)   Cardboard products, excluding those contaminated by food
products such as pizza and food boxes or other products that have been
saturated by non-recyclable materials;



      (3)   Clear and colored glass bottles and jars, excluding
mirrors, windows, ceramics, light bulbs and other glass products;



      (4)   Metal cans composed of tin, steel or aluminum
(excluding, scrap metals);



      (5)   Plastic containers of polyethylene terephthalate and
high density polyethylene varieties, also designated as #1, #2, #3, #4, #5
and #7 clear plastics; and



      (6)   Other items identified as recyclable by the city and any
person having a franchise or license with the city, or as a result of changes
in local, state, or federal laws, ordinances, or regulation.



   RECYCLING.  The legitimate use, reuse or reclamation of solid waste.



   RECYCLING CONTAINER.  A 95 or 65 gallon wheeled cart for use by
residential or small commercial customers for curbside recyclable collection
by the city’s solid waste contractor.



   RESIDENTIAL PREMISE.  A dwelling within the city limits occupied by a
person or group of persons comprising not more than four families. A
RESIDENTIAL PREMISE may be deemed occupied when either water or domestic
light and power services are being supplied thereto. A condominium dwelling,
whether of single or multi-level construction; consisting of four or fewer
units shall be treated as a RESIDENTIAL PREMISE .



   RESIDENTIAL WASTE.  Garbage and trash generated by a resident and
placed curbside for the regular collection at a residential premise, but does
not include unacceptable waste, debris, or bulky waste.



   RESPONSIBLE PARTY.  Shall include any owner, occupant tenant or person
otherwise in control of a residential premise or any owner, occupant,
operator or other person with legal authority to occupy or operate a business
or otherwise has responsibility for activities on a commercial premise.



   SMALL COMMERCIAL GARBAGE CUSTOMER.  Commercial customers that generate
less than two cubic yards of garbage or waste during a normal work week and
have received written approval from the city to operate as a small commercial
garbage customer.



   SMALL COMMERCIAL RECYCLING CUSTOMER.  Commercial customers that
generate less than one cubic yard of recyclable materials during a normal
work week.



   SPECIAL WASTE.  Any waste defined as Special Waste by Tex. Admin. Code
Title 30, § 330.3 (148).



   STABLE MATTER.  All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated
in or about a stable; or any animal, livestock, or poultry enclosure; and
resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry, or livestock.



   STACKED BRUSH.  Brush cut to no more than five feet in length and
stacked neatly at curbside.



   TRASH.  All household refuse other than garbage, debris, loose brush,
and bulky waste; TRASH shall include grass, yard clippings, weeds, heavy
accumulations of newspaper and magazines, recyclable materials, old clothes,
and other household trash of like kind, but shall not include unacceptable
waste.



   UNACCEPTABLE WASTE.  Any and all waste that is either:



      (1)   Waste which is now or in the future becomes prohibited
from disposal at a sanitary landfill by state, federal, and/or local laws
and/or regulations promulgated there under;



      (2)   Hazardous waste;



      (3)   Special waste, as defined herein;



      (4)   Waste, including landfill prohibited waste materials,
which is prohibited from disposal at the landfill by city’s solid waste
contractor including tires, concrete, and bulk petroleum or chemical products
or by-products;



      (5)   Liquid waste, as defined herein, and septic tank pumping
and grease and grit trap wastes;



      (6)   Sludge waste, including water supply treatment plant
sludge and stabilized and/or unstabilized sludge from municipal or industrial
wastewater treatment plants;



      (7)   Dead animals and/or slaughterhouse waste, except for
animal euthanized under authority and direction of city’s solid waste
contractor;



      (8)   Any waste, including special waste as defined herein,
which because of its quantity, concentration, frequency of disposal, required
disposal procedures, regulatory status, or physical, chemical, infectious or
other characteristics jeopardizes or may jeopardize the environmentally sound
operation of the disposal site, as determined by city’s solid waste
contractor in its sole discretion;



      (9)   Construction debris not generated by a residential
customer;



      (10)   Appliances containing CFC’s that do not bear a
certification tag that shows the CFC’s have been properly recovered in
accordance with federal law; or



      (11)   Stable matter, as defined herein.



   UNHEALTHY OR UNSANITARY SITE.  A site where conditions represent a
threat to human health and public safety, due to accumulations of waste
material or frequency of service.



   UNSIGHTLY SITE.  A site that represents a visual blight to the
surrounding area.



   YARD WASTE.  Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and
brush, including clean woody vegetative material not greater than six inches
in diameter that result from landscaping maintenance. The term does not
include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.02  UNAUTHORIZED DISPOSAL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any garbage or
trash upon or along any alley, sidewalk, street or other public or private
premises except in containers as authorized by the city within the corporate
limits of the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place hazardous wastes,
Class I industrial wastes, radioactive wastes, liquid wastes, used oil, used
oil filters, lead-acid batteries, or other prohibited materials and wastes,
as currently defined by the state environmental regulatory agency for
curbside collection of residential or commercial waste, or in a dumpster for
industrial, commercial, or institutional collection.



   (C)   Rock, concrete, scraps of building materials or other trash
resulting from building or remodeling operations will not be removed by the
city or its solid waste contractor. However, any person may contract with the
city’s solid waste contractor for the disposition of such materials at the
rate included in the current franchise agreement or contract.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a residential customer to place for
collection at a residence, commercial debris or materials generated from some
location other than the collection location.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.03  COLLECTION REQUIRED; AUTHORITY TO COLLECT.



   (A)   Every person who owns, occupies or controls any premises in
the city shall have garbage and trash removal.



   (B)   No person shall collect garbage, trash or refuse within the
city except a person, firm or corporation who has a contract or franchise
with the city.



   (C)   No person shall collect recyclable materials from another
person’s commercial property, in exchange for the payment of a fee. within
the city except for a person, firm or corporation who has a contract with the
city or who has been issued a license from the city.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.04  PICKUP SCHEDULE.



   The pickup schedule for collection of garbage and trash within the city
shall be as specified by the City Council.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.05  CHARGES FOR COLLECTION.



   The charges for the collection and removal of garbage and trash in the
city shall be in an amount as approved by ordinance of the City Council.
Payment for collection is due in accordance with the city’s utility bill or
the city’s solid waste contractor’s billing statement. Failure to render
payment for collection service in a timely manner may result in service
termination. Properties where payment for collection service has not been
made for a period of three months or more may have services terminated. Upon
termination of garbage collection services, properties may not be occupied
and the responsible party becomes subject to collection or other legal
actions.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.06  TAMPERING WITH CONTAINERS.



   (A)   A person shall not remove any item from a garbage container,
trash receptacle or recycling container which has been placed on the curbside
of any residence or at the designated collection location of any business.



   (B)   A person shall not tamper with any garbage can, trash
receptacle or recycling container which has been placed on the curbside of a
residence or at the designated collection location of any business.



   (C)   The provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall
not apply to the following.



      (1)   City employees who may be required to take such action
in order to provide city services;



      (2)   Persons employed by a corporation which has a franchise
or contract with the city to collect garbage, trash or recyclable materials;
or



      (3)   To the owner of the real property on which the garbage
container or recycling container is placed.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.07  PREVENTION OF SCATTERING.



   (A)   Every person shall keep all trash containers closed in such a
manner as to prevent the scattering of the contents thereof and to render
said contents inaccessible to rodents, and other pest animals.



   (B)   All food service establishments shall ensure that any
privately owned trash receptacles on their property are maintained to prevent
the scattering of garbage and trash. At a minimum, these facilities should
survey their property daily and remove any scattered materials.



   (C)   The disturbance of any garbage or recycling container or in
any way pilfering, scattering contents or junking in any alley or street, or
from a commercial container within the city limits is prohibited.



   (D)   All recyclables shall be stored in a manner that prevents
scattering, vector breeding or harboring, or other nuisance.



   (E)   The City Manager and the City Attorney are authorized to file
such claims or lawsuits as might be necessary to recover actual cost of the
city cleaning up or removing such waste or material against any person
responsible for the depositing of the same upon public sidewalks, alleys,
storm drain systems or other public property of the city.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.08  THEFT OF SERVICE.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to place waste or other materials not
generated at the site in an industrial, commercial or institutional
container, if a complaint is made and the source of such materials are
located and identified, a citation may be issued to the person or persons
placing such materials in the container. Any location which has continually
been found to contain hazardous materials, and which corrective or preventive
actions have not been taken, shall be determined to be responsible for the
proper disposal of such material.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.09  CUSTOMER TO PROVIDE GARBAGE CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Every customer using or occupying any building, house or
structure within the city for church, school, college, lodge, commercial
business and other purposes shall provide and maintain garbage cans and
receptacles of sufficient number and size, as hereinafter specified, to hold
the garbage and trash that will normally accumulate on the premises. In
addition, the garbage cans and receptacles shall be serviced at a frequency
necessary to prevent overflow.



   (B)   Every customer shall keep all acceptable solid waste,
recyclable materials, bulky waste, and/or acceptable brush securely closed or
bundled in such a manner as to prevent the scattering of the contents thereof
and to render said contents inaccessible to insects, rodents, and other
animals.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.10  OTHER DISPOSAL PROHIBITED.



   The disposal of any garbage or trash in the city in any other manner
than specified in this chapter is strictly prohibited and is deemed a
violation of this code.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)  Penalty, see § 50.99



RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION



§ 50.25  PICKUP SCHEDULE.



   The pickup schedule for collection of garbage and trash within the city
shall be as specified by the City Council.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.26  SPECIFICATIONS FOR GARBAGE CONTAINERS; NUMBER.



   Each customer shall provide a container for garbage and trash
constructed of metal or substantial plastic with a tight fitting lid or cover
and handles strong enough for workers to handle conveniently, or substantial
plastic bags tied closed. Such container’s opening shall have a greater or
equal diameter to the base. When loaded, such container shall not exceed 50
pounds in weight. The city’s solid waste contractor shall not be expected
to remove garbage, trash, debris or stacked brush from any residence that
exceeds one cubic yard per collection day regardless of the type of container.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.27  PLACING OF GARBAGE CONTAINERS FOR COLLECTION.



   (A)   The pickup schedule for collection of garbage and trash within
the city shall be twice a week during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
for residential customers. To ensure collection of garbage and trash, a
person occupying a residence shall place the garbage and trash containers at
the curb prior to 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled garbage and trash collection
day, but not earlier than 1:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled collection
day or alternative day if the scheduled collection day falls on a holiday;
provided that if the occupant of the residence is a disabled person, he or
she may make arrangements to place the garbage and trash at the front
doorstep or next to the garage door so as to be visible from the street.
Garbage and trash containers shall be removed from the curb after collection
by no later than 12:00 p.m. the day following collection.



   (B)   If the house, building, or premises from which the garbage or
trash is to be collected and removed is adjacent to an alley, the owner,
occupant, tenant or lessee of the premises shall be required to keep the
garbage or trash container at the entrance from the alley in order that it
may be easily accessible to the person collecting and removing the garbage or
trash. In the event it is not practicable to collect and remove the garbage
or trash from the alley, the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of the
premises shall place the container at such point as the proper agent of the
city shall find and designate to be the most accessible for collecting and
removing.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.28  PLACEMENT OF RECYCLING CONTAINERS.



   (A)   To ensure collection of recyclable materials, a person
occupying a residence shall place the recycling container at the curb prior
to 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled recycling collection day. but not earlier than
1:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled recycling collection day or
alternative day if the scheduled collection day falls on a holiday; provided
that if the occupant of the residence is a disabled person, he or she may
place the recycling container at the front doorstep or next to the garage
door so as to be visible from the street. Recycling containers shall be
removed from the curb after collection by no later than 12:00 p.m. the day
following collection.



   (B)   Recycling containers shall be placed at the curb, street or
alley such that no fixed object, for example a parked car. mailbox, tree or
other obstruction, is within two feet of the recycling container on any side
and the container shall be no more than two feet behind the edge or curb,
street or alley; and shall not be placed in a road or alleyway in such a way
as to present a hazard to normal traffic.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.29  RETURN OF RECYCLING CONTAINERS.



   A person who wishes to return the recycling container must contact the
city to request a return of the recycling container. Arrangements will be
made by the customer, the city and the city’s solid waste contractor to
have the recycling container removed from the premises at the earliest
convenient time. A request to withdraw from the city’s recycling program
may be made at any time.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.30  RECYCLING CONTAINERS ASSIGNED TO PROPERTY.



   Recycling containers delivered to a property shall remain with the
property and may not be relocated.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.31  RECYCLING CONTAINER REPLACEMENT.



   Replacement of broken, faulty, or otherwise unserviceable recycling
containers shall be the responsibility of the city’s solid waste
contractor. Customers seeking a replacement recycling container must contact
the city’s solid waste contractor at the customer service number provided
by the city’s solid waste contractor to request the replacement. Excessive
replacements may result in a fee or charge for further replacements, in
accordance with the solid waste contractor’s replacement policy.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.32  MOBILE HOME PARK COLLECTION.



   (A)   The owner of a mobile home park may request curbside service
for each individual housing unit for the collection of garbage, trash, yard
waste and recyclables only. The garbage, trash, yard waste and recyclable
materials must be generated by the tenant of the housing unit.



   (B)   To qualify for individual unit collection, a mobile home park
must meet the following conditions.



      (1)   Maintain adequate pavement to withstand the regular use
of trash and recycling collection vehicles.



      (2)   Maintain commercial waste collection service for its
office.



   (C)   The rates for individual unit collection service shall be the
residential rate multiplied by the number of available units in the park. The
mobile home park shall pay the fees with the master meter water bill.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



COMMERCIAL GARBAGE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION



§ 50.45  COMMERCIAL COLLECTION; MINIMUM COLLECTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   The collection and removal of garbage and trash from houses,
buildings and premises used for industrial, commercial, or institutional
purposes shall be made as often as necessary in order to maintain such
premises free of accumulation of garbage and trash. The local regulatory
authority shall be authorized to require industrial, commercial arid
institutional customers to increase collection frequency or size of
commercial garbage containers to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this article. It will be the responsibility of the owner, occupant or tenant
of any business to ensure the enclosure is accessible by the collection
vehicle on the date of service. Ensuring access may require the gates to be
opened and/or unlocked. Failure by the owner, occupant or tenant to ensure
access may result in a fee charged to the account in accordance with city
ordinance. When an enclosure for the property exists it must be utilized by
the occupant for the minimum container size and frequency necessary to
prevent unsightly or unsanitary conditions from developing.



   (B)   All food service establishments shall maintain garbage and
trash collection at a frequency of not less than two times each week, unless
granted written approval from the local regulatory authority. Such approval
may be revoked, denied or suspended at any time by the local regulatory
authority when, in their opinion, the premises have become unsanitary due to
collections less frequently than two times each week. Food establishments may
not request commercial hand-load service.



   (C)   Garbage and trash collection from multifamily residential
complexes which provide or use mechanical packers or compactors may be made
one time each week upon written approval of the local regulatory authority.
Such approval may be revoked, denied or suspended at any time by the local
regulatory authority when, in their opinion, the premises have become
unsanitary due to collections less frequently than two times each week.
Multifamily residential complexes may not request commercial hand-load
service.



   (D)   All small commercial businesses utilizing commercial hand-load
garbage service on the effective date of this chapter shall have a minimum of
90 days from the effective date of this chapter to begin commercial container
service. Commercial garbage container service may begin prior to the
construction of an appropriate enclosure for the container. However, an
enclosure for the container(s) shall be constructed no more than 12 months
from the effective date of this chapter.



   (E)   Small commercial businesses utilizing commercial hand-load
service at the effective date of this chapter may submit a written request
for small commercial garbage service as provided in this chapter in
accordance with this subchapter. If the request or appeal is denied, the
business must begin commercial container service within 90 days from the date
of denial and or loss of appeal, and must provide an enclosure for the
container(s) within 12 months from the effective date of this chapter.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.46  ENCLOSURES REQUIRED.



   All commercial businesses utilizing commercial container service shall
be required to construct enclosures in compliance with the requirements of
this chapter and the city’s zoning ordinance. A permit for the construction
of the enclosure may be required.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.47  PROOF OF SERVICE.



   All new businesses may be required to provide proof of a valid
collection agreement/contract with the city’s solid waste contractor prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Building permit applicants for
new construction, remodeling and demolition projects may be required to
provide proof of a valid collection agreement/contract with the city’s
solid waste contractor prior to the issuance of a building permit.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.48  SMALL COMMERCIAL GARBAGE SERVICE.



   (A)   A customer may request small commercial garbage service only
if the customer will generate no more than three 30-gallon containers
percollection day, or the commercial property is an existing commercial
hand-load customer and there is no room on the property to place a commercial
container. The request must be made in writing to city staff for review and
approval or denial. Requests for small commercial garbage service which are
denied may be appealed to the City Manager. Individual business customers who
share a private drive, parking area, or may otherwise be considered a member
of a business/commercial/industrial park shall be required to utilize
commercial garbage containers and must provide an enclosure in accordance
with the zoning ordinance. All multi-unit commercial buildings shall utilize
commercial garbage containers and must provide an enclosure in accordance
with the zoning ordinance. It is permissible for
business/commercial/industrial park members or tenants of multi-unit
commercial buildings to utilize the same commercial garbage container,
provided the size and number of the container(s) and frequency of sendee are
adequate to prevent unsightly or unsanitary conditions and the enclosure(s)
is(are) constructed in compliance with the zoning ordinance. In the event of
multi-phase business/commercial/industrial park developments, it is possible
additional commercial garbage containers will be needed as development
occurs, based on the amount of material generated from each of the customers.
Prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy any required
enclosures shall be constructed and an enclosure built in compliance with the
city’s zoning ordinance.



   (B)   Approved commercial hand-load customers shall be provided
garbage containers for the placement of garbage from the business at the curb
for collection by the city’s solid waste contractor. Containers shall be
stored in a manner that is not visible to the general public. Once delivered,
the containers shall be the only authorized means of placing small commercial
garbage for collection on the appropriate service day.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.49  SMALL COMMERCIAL RECYCLING.



   (A)   Operators of small commercial businesses, as defined by this
chapter, may request recycling services utilizing the 95 gallon recycling
carts for residential recycling collection. Requests for small commercial
recycling service will be evaluated by the city’s solid waste contractor
for approval. Once approved it is the customers responsibility to place the
recycling container at the location determined by the city’s contract
hauler on the appropriate day for collection. Placement and removal of the
recycling container shall be in compliance with the residential recycling
requirements of this chapter. The fee for small commercial recycling shall be
in an amount approved by ordinance of the City Council.



   (B)   A person operating a business shall place the recycling
container at the collection location designated by the city official or
representative from the city’s solid waste contractor in charge of garbage
disposal. Commercial garbage or recycling carts shall be placed at the curb
for service no earlier than 1:00 p.m. the day prior to collection and shall
be removed the curb no later than 1:00 p.m. the day after service.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



LICENSE TO REGULATE RECYCLABLES



§ 50.60  LICENSE FOR COMMERCIAL RECYCLABLE COLLECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in the
business of collection of recyclable materials from a commercial, industrial
or institutional property within the city in exchange for a fee without first
having obtained a recyclable license from the city or having a contract or
franchise with the city.



   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for a violation of
division (A) of this section that the person is collecting recyclable
materials from the Independent School District.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.61  APPLICATION.



   (A)   To obtain a recyclable collection license a person must submit
an application on a form provided by the Director of Finance. The applicant
must be the person who will own, control or operate the proposed collection
service.



   (B)   The applicant for a license shall furnish the city the
following information which shall be subscribed and sworn to before a notary
public.



      (1)   Name and address of the applicant.



      (2)   Trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to
do business.



      (3)   The number of vehicles the applicant desires to operate.



      (4)   The class, size and design of each vehicle, including
the type of body and accessory equipment designed for automated collection.



      (5)   Whether or not the applicant ora ny person with whom the
applicant has been associated or employed has a claim or judgment against
such person for damages resulting from the negligent operation of a motor
vehicle.



      (6)   The nature and character of the service the applicant
proposes to render.



      (7)   The rates or fees the applicant proposes to pay or
charge for the services rendered.



      (8)   Num er and location of commercial customers.



      (9)   Proof of liability insurance in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 per occurrence issued by a company authorized to do business in
the state.



      (10)   Such other information as the local regulatory
authority may require.



   (C)   The Director may make or cause to be made an investigation of
the application for a license.



   (D)   The applicant shall submit with the application for the
license a nonrefundable application fee which shall be in an amount approved
by the City Council.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.62  TERM.



   Each license granted by the local regulatory authority for a recyclable
collection service may be issued for a period of one year. Each license may
be renewable annually and may be renewed by making application as provided
herein. A license shall be nontransferable.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.63  LICENSE AND APPLICATION FEES.



   (A)   Each licensee shall pay to the city an annual fee for the
recyclable collection license in an amount equal to 8% of the base fee
charged by the hauler for materials collected from any source facility within
the city.



      (1)   The licensee shall remit the fee to the city quarterly
at the office of the Director of Finance, on or before the thirtieth day of
April, July, October and January, based upon the revenues collected during
the previous calendar quarter.



      (2)   The quarterly payment shall be accompanied by an income
statement certified by the licensee acknowledging compliance with this
section.



      (3)   The licensee shall make available to the city
notifications of new commercial customers as well as cancellations of
existing commercial customers, as they occur.



   (B)   Each license applicant shall submit the appropriate
non-refundable application fee with the license application according to the
following application fee schedule:



 


General Recycling (including one vehicle)



   Additional vehicles

 

$150



$50




Contracted Transporter (per contracted vendor)

 

§150




Construction and Demolition (per license)

 

$500




 



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.64  LICENSE AGREEMENT.



   The local regulatory authority may impose all reasonable rules and
regulations and require the licensee to execute a license agreement as a
condition precedent to issuing a license under this subchapter and as a
condition subsequent to continuing validity. The rules and regulations may
include but are not necessarily restricted to the type of vehicle to be used
in collection, number of pickups per week required, method and route for
transporting the collection, appropriate disposal locations and
identification of trucks. They may also include minimum insurance
requirements and execution of an indemnification. All such rules and
regulations shall be subject to the approval of the City Council and shall be
contained in the license agreement issued by the city to any licensee.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.65  REQUIREMENT TO FURNISH INFORMATION.



   The books and records of the licensee shall be open at reasonable times
for inspection by the local regulatory authority.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.66  MARKING OF VEHICLES AND CONTAINERS.



   The licensee shall identify all vehicles and containers with its name
in letters at least two inches tall.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.67  COMINGLED RECYCLABLE PRODUCTS.



   (A)   A licensee collecting recyclables within the city shall not
collect recyclable materials which have been mixed or comingled with garbage,
trash or refuse. Any residential or commercial customer using recycling
containers shall also provide a container(s) at their residence or commercial
facility for the collection of garbage, trash and refuse. At no time shall
recyclables mixed with garbage, trash and refuse be allowed to be collected
as recyclables. All recycling facilities receiving materials generated within
city limits shall meet the minimum criteria set forth in the Texas Health and
Safety Code as well as the Texas Administrative Code.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation collecting industrial,
commercial, or institutional recyclables that are combined with other
recyclable material must have an approved license from the local regulatory
authority to do so. The materials collected from the generating facility-must
be the same as the materials that can be processed by the destination
facility, and at no times are garbage, trash or refuse to be combined with
the recyclable materials.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.68  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   The Director of Finance may issue a recyclable collection license to
the applicant if the Director determines that the applicant has complied with
all requirements for issuance of the license.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.69  REVOCATION, DENIAL OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   The Director of Finance may revoke, deny or suspend a recyclable
collection license if the Director determines that the licensee has done any
of the following.



   (A)   Given false or inaccurate information on the application for
license or in a hearing concerning the license.



   (B)   Refused to cooperate in the redress of grievances submitted to
the licensee in writing by the city or licensee’s customers.



   (C)   Maintained unsightly or unsanitary collection receptacles
after being notified of same in writing by a city or a customer.



   (D)   Continued to provide, after written notice from the city,
irregular service which is detrimental to the public health.



   (E)   Failed to pay a fee required by this subchapter at the time it
was due.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.70  APPEAL.



   If the Director denies, revokes, or suspends a license, the city shall
give notice by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the applicant or licensee. The applicant or licensee may appeal
the decision to deny, revoke, or suspend by filing a written notice with the
City Manager, within five days after receipt of notice. A person who is
denied a license or whose license is revoked may appeal the decision to deny
a license to the City Manager and the decision to revoke a license to the
Municipal Court. The City Manager, or designee, shall mail or cause to be
personally delivered written notice of the time and place of the hearing to
the person appealing. The notice shall be mailed to the address specified in
the notice of appeal form. The City Manager, or in an appeal from the
revocation of a license, the Municipal Court shall conduct a hearing and
shall make a decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence
presented at the hearing. The decision of the Municipal Court shall be final.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 50.85  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.



   In the event that a customer shall fail to comply with any part of this
chapter, the local regulatory authority may notify such customer by letter
addressed to such customer at the customer’s residential, commercial or
post office address, if personal service may not be had on the customer or
the customer’s address is not known. The notification shall contain in
brief terms the condition or conditions which exist on such customer’s
premises which fail to comply with any part of this article. After issuance
and receipt of the notification, the city may enter upon such premises and
may do such work as necessary, or cause same to be done, to abate the
unlawful condition on the premises in order that the premises may comply with
the requirements of this chapter. A statement of costs incurred by the city
to abate such conditions shall be mailed to the customer and such statement
shall be paid within 30 days of the date of the mailing of the statement of
costs.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $2,000 for each
offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)



CHAPTER 51: SEWER AND WATER SERVICE



Section



General Provisions



   51.001   Extension of water and sewer lines by private developer



   51.002   Sewer repair and maintenance standards



Industrial Wastewater Regulations



   51.010   General provisions



   51.011   General sewer use requirement



   51.012   Pretreatment of wastewater



   51.013   Wastewater discharge permit application



   51.014   Wastewater discharge permit issuance process



   51.015   Reporting requirements



   51.016   Compliance monitoring



   51.017   Confidential information



   51.018   Publication of users in significant noncompliance



   51.019   Administrative enforcement remedies



   51.020   Judicial enforcement remedies



   51.021   Reserved



   51.022   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations



   51.023   Reserved



   51.024   Miscellaneous provisions



   51.025 - 51.035   Reserved



Rates and Charges



   51.050   Water and sewer tap fees; authority to establish



   51.051   Collection of tap fees before connection



   51.052   Water service rates



   51.053   Water reconnection charge



   51.054   Sewer service rates



   51.055   Abnormal wastewater surcharge



   51.056   Industrial cost recovery



Liquid Waste Haulers



   51.070   Definitions



   51.071   Permit required to transport liquid waste



   51.072   Fee and display of permit



   51.073   Maintenance of vehicles transporting liquid waste



   51.074   Inspection of vehicles



   51.075   Responsibilities of liquid waste transporter



   51.076   Responsibilities of liquid waste generator



   51.077   Responsibilities of liquid waste disposers



   51.078   Unsanitary accumulation of liquid waste



   51.079   Improper disposal



   51.080   Rules and regulations



   51.081   Denial, suspension, revocation of permit



   51.082   Appeal



   51.083   Legal responsibility; violations



Impact Fees



   51.095   Definitions



   51.096   Applications and permits



   51.097   Capital improvement plan for water impact fee



   51.098   Capital improvement plan for sewer impact fee



   51.099   Land use assumptions



   51.100   Impact fees assessed



   51.101   Impact fees collected



   51.102   Advisory Committee; duties



   51.103   Failure to pay impact fee



   51.104   Offsets against impact fees



   51.105   Agreement for capital improvements



 



   51.999   Penalty



Cross reference:



   Sewage sludge application, see Ch. 115



Statutory reference:



   Public Utility Regulatory Act, see Tex. Util. Code, Title 2



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.001  EXTENSION OF WATER AND SEWER LINES BY PRIVATE DEVELOPER.



   (A)   When a developer shall have been required to provide and shall
have provided necessary offsite water and sanitary sewer lines and shall have
provided a statement to the city certifying the cost of construction of the
improvements and such statement is considered acceptable documentation for
construction costs associated with the improvements, and such improvements
will also benefit other property owners requiring use of the improvements,
and such cost is deemed by the city to be fair and just, property owners
benefitting from the improvements and desiring to connect onto the water or
sanitary sewer line shall share in the cost of such improvements by making
repayment to the city on a "pro rata basis" in the amount determined by the
City Engineer for the costs associated with the construction of the
improvements.



   (B)   DEVELOPER, as used herein, shall mean any person seeking
extension of water and/or sanitary sewer service for two or more platted lots
in an area in which water and sewer mains have not been extended. An
individual user shall mean any person who is not a developer as defined
herein. The City Engineer shall determine water pro rata charges on the basis
of a front footage formula or on the length of the water line crossing the
individual user's property, lot or tract. As used in this section, front
footage shall mean the width of the property facing on a public street where
the water extension is constructed along and abutting the individual user's
property, lot or tract. A per acre basis pro rata may be used by the City
Engineer to determine the amount of pro rata charge to be made for sanitary
sewer service.



   (C)   In the event a developer is required to construct offsite
water and/or sanitary sewer lines, the city is authorized to enter into a pro
rata agreement with the developer to collect pro rata charges as determined
hereby from property owners making future requests of connections onto the
offsite water or sanitary sewer lines, and to refund to the developer such
collected pro rata charges for any period of time up to ten years from the
acceptance of the line and up to 100% of the cost of the offsite improvements
constructed by the developer.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of a developer to procure, provide and
pay for the necessary easements and rights-of-way along the lines for water
and sewer extensions approved by the city, except to the extent public
easements and rights-of-way are already available for such extensions. All
easements, rights-of-way, lines, mains, valves, hydrants, laterals and
appurtenances shall upon installation and construction become the property of
the city, free and clear of all liens, claims and encumbrances. The pro rata
charges set out herein shall not include payment for any taps, valves,
fittings or other appurtenances necessary to be installed by a property owner
connecting to the line after its completion.



('78 Code, § 17-2.1) (Ord. 949, passed 2-8-93)



§ 51.002  SEWER REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the meaning herein ascribed to them.



      BUILDING.  That structure which contains a drainage system and
uses the public sewer for disposal of sewer.



      BUILDING SEWER.  That part of the horizontal piping of a
drainage system which extends from the end of the building and which receives
the discharge at the building and conveys it to the public sewer.



      PUBLIC SEWER.  Common sanitary sewer system owned and operated
by city.



      USER.  That person or business using the sanitary sewer system
owned and operated by the city.



   (B)   There is hereby adopted, established and promulgated those
certain standards and regulations relating to the maintenance and repair of
sanitary sewer systems as are itemized on Exhibit "A" which is located in the
office of the City Secretary and made a part of this section and referred to
as "Sewer Maintenance and Repair Standards" and which may be amended by the
city from time to time after a review and proper determination of additional
standards.



('78 Code, § 17-3) (Ord. 376, passed 1-22-79)



INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER REGULATIONS



§ 51.010  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Purpose and policy. 



      (1)   These regulations set forth uniform requirements for
users of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works for the city and enables the city
to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean
Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General
Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403).  The
objectives of these regulations are:



         (a)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works that will interfere with its operation;



         (b)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works that will pass through the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;



         (c)   To protect both Publicly Owned Treatment Works
personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public;



         (d)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial
wastewater and sludge from the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;



         (e)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution
of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works; and



         (f)   To enable the control authority to comply with its
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use
and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works is subject.



      (2)   These regulations shall apply to all users of the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works. This subchapter authorizes the issuance of
wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and
enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures;
requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the
equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.



   (B)   Administration.  Except as otherwise provided herein, the
Pretreatment Coordinator shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of these regulations.  Any powers granted to or duties imposed
upon the Pretreatment Coordinator may be delegated by the Director of Utility
Operations to other city personnel.



   (C)   Abbreviations.  The following abbreviations, when used in
this subchapter, shall have the designated meanings:



      BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand



      CFR - Code of Federal Regulations



      COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand



      CRWS - Central Regional Wastewater System



      EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency



      gpd - gallons per day



      MCRWS - Mountain Creek Regional Wastewater System



      mg/l - milligrams per liter



      NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System



      POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works



      RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act



      SIC - Standard Industrial Classification



      SIU - Significant Industrial User



      TCEQ - Texas Commission on Environmental Quality



      TPDES - Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System



      TRA - Trinity River Authority



      TSS - Total Suspended Solids



      TTO - Total Toxic Organics



      U.S.C. - United States Code



   (D)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      (1)   ACT or “THE ACT.” The Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.



      (2)   APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The Regional Administrator of EPA
or the Director of a state agency delegated to act on EPA’s behalf with an
approved pretreatment program (e.g., Director of TCEQ).



      (3)   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.



         (a)   If the user is a corporation:



            1.   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or



            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25 million (in second-quarter
1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated
to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.



         (b)   If the user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.



         (c)   If the user is a federal, state, or local
governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated
to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility, or their designee.



         (d)   The individuals described in subsections (1)
through (3), above, may designate another authorized representative. If it is
in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
City of Mansfield Pretreatment Coordinator.



      (4)   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND OR BOD. The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as
a concentration (e.g., mg/l).



      (5)   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL
STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317)
which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.



      (6)   CITY.  The City of Mansfield or the City Council of
Mansfield, Contracting Party of the Trinity River Authority’s Central
Regional Wastewater System and the Trinity River Authority’s Mountain Creek
Regional Wastewater System.



      (7)   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A sample that is collected over time,
formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples.  The
sample may be composited either as a TIME COMPOSITE SAMPLE: composed of
discrete sample aliquots collected at constant time intervals providing a
sample irrespective of stream flow; or as a FLOW PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE
SAMPLE: collected either as a constant sample volume at time intervals
proportional to flow, or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot
as the flow increases while maintaining a constant time interval between the
aliquots.



      (8)   CONTROL AUTHORITY.  Trinity River Authority of Texas as
holder of the NPDES permit.



      (9)   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA. The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water
Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said
agency.



      (10)   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the
construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA
of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to
such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with
Section 307 of the Act.



      (11)   GRAB SAMPLE.  A sample that is taken from a
wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period
of time not to exceed 15 minutes.



      (12)   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of
pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section
307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.



      (13)   INDUSTRIAL USER.  An industry that discharges
wastewater into the wastewater system.



      (14)   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT.  The
maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time,
determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected,
independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling
event.



      (15)   INTERFERENCE.  A discharge, which alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or
disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge
processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the
Control Authority’s NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use
or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory
provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local
regulations:  Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA); 40 CFR 503 sludge regulations; any state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D
of the Solid Waste Disposal Act and 30 TAC 312; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic
Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries
Act.



      (16)   MEDICAL WASTE.  Isolation wastes, infectious agents,
human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory
wastes, and dialysis wastes.



      (17)   NPDES (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION
SYSTEM).  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program of
the Environmental Protection Agency, and/or the permit program of the state
agency delegated to act on EPA’s behalf with an approved pretreatment
program (e.g., TPDES or Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System).



      (18)   NEW SOURCE.



         (a)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation
from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if
such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:



            1.   The building, structure, facility, or
installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



            2.   The building, structure, facility, or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



            3.   The production or wastewater-generating
processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and
the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.



         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source
is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of subsection (18)(a)2. or 3. above, but
otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



         (c)   Construction of a new source, as defined under
this paragraph, has commenced if the owner or operator has:



            1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a
continuous onsite construction program:



               a.   Any placement, assembly, or
installation of facilities or equipment; or



               b.   Significant site preparation work,
including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures,
or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation
of new source facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time.  Options to purchase or contracts
which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts
for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this subsection.



      (19)   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER.  Water used for cooling,
which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate
product, waste product, or finished product.



      (20)   NORMAL WASTEWATER.  Wastewater which the average
concentration of suspended solids and five-day BOD does not exceed 250 mg/l
each.



      (21)   PASS THROUGH.  A discharge which exits the POTW into
waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause
of a violation of any requirement of the Control Authority’s NPDES permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.



      (22)   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership,
firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns.  This definition includes all federal,
state, and local governmental entities.



      (23)   pH.  A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a
solution, expressed in standard units.



      (24)   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical
wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal,
agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater
(e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).



      (25)   PRETREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other
means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed
by an applicable pretreatment standard.



      (26)   PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR.  The person designated by
the city who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this
subchapter, or a duly authorized representative.



      (27)   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT.  Any substantive or
procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than
a pretreatment standard.



      (28)   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS.  Prohibited
discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.



      (29)   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED
DISCHARGES.  Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in § 51.011.



      (30)   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A “treatment
works,” as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is
owned by the city and/or the Control Authority.  This definition includes
any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling,
and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any
conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.



      (31)   SEPTIC TANK WASTE.  Any sewage from holding tanks such
as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.



      (32)   SEWAGE.  Human excrement and gray water (household
showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).



      (33)   SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive.



      (34)   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.



         (a)   A user subject to categorical pretreatment
standards; or



         (b)   A user that:



            1.   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more
of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling,
and boiler-blowdown wastewater);



            2.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes
up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or



            3.   Is designated as such by the city on the
basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



         (c)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in
subsection (b) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement,
the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR
403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant
industrial user.



      (35)   SLUG LOAD or SLUG. Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in § 51.011(A).



      (36)   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE.  A
classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual
issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget.



      (37)   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any
form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation,
including snowmelt.



      (38)   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  The total suspended matter that
floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other
liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.



      (39)   TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS.  The sum of the masses or
concentration of the toxic organic compounds listed in 40 CFR 122 Appendix D,
Table II, excluding pesticides, found in industrial users’ discharge at a
concentration greater than 0.01 mg/l.  Only those parameters reasonably
suspected to be present, at the discretion of the Pretreatment Coordinator,
if any, shall be analyzed for with noncategorical industries.  With
categorical industries, TTOs will be sampled for as stipulated in the
particular category or those parameters reasonably suspected to be present,
at the discretion of the Pretreatment Coordinator, where not stipulated.



      (40)   USER or INDUSTRIAL USER.  A source of indirect
discharge.



      (41)   WASTEWATER.  Liquid and water-carried industrial
wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.



      (42)   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT.  That
portion of the POTW, which is designed to provide treatment of municipal
sewage and industrial waste.



(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17)



§ 51.011  GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Prohibited discharge standards.



      (1)   General prohibitions.  No user shall introduce or cause
to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass
through or interference.  These general prohibitions apply to all users of
the POTW, whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.



      (2)   Specific prohibitions.  No user shall introduce or
cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or
wastewater:



         (a)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard
in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40
CFR 261.21;



         (b)   Wastewater having corrosive properties capable of
causing damage or injury to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the
POTW, as per the specific prohibition in the applicable local limits in §
51.011(D).  In no case shall wastewater containing a pH less than 5.5
(TRA-CRWS) and less than 6.0 (TRA-MCRWS) be discharged, unless the works is
specifically designated to accommodate such discharges;



         (c)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will
cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW, resulting in interference,
blockage, or damage to the POTW;



         (d)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants
(BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
will cause interference with the POTW;



         (e)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than
150°F (65°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment
plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F
(40°C);



         (f)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or
pass through;



         (g)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems;



         (h)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge
points designated by the Pretreatment Coordinator and the Control Authority
in accordance with § 51.012(D);



         (i)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or
other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;



         (j)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be
removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant’s effluent, thereby violating the applicable NPDES permit;



         (k)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



         (l)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian
well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, and unpolluted wastewater,
unless specifically authorized by the Pretreatment Coordinator and the
Control Authority;



         (m)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



         (n)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized
by the Pretreatment Coordinator and/or the Control Authority in a wastewater
discharge permit;



         (o)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with
other sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail toxicity test;



         (p)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;



         (q)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable
origin in concentrations greater than that specified in the applicable local
limits in § 51.011(D);



         (r)   A discharge of water, normal domestic wastewater,
or industrial waste that in quantity of flow exceeds, for a duration of
longer than 15 minutes, more than four times the average 24-hour flow during
normal operations of the industry;



         (s)   Insecticides and herbicides in concentrations that
are not amenable to treatment;



         (t)   Polychlorinated biphenyls;



         (u)   Garbage that is not properly shredded to such an
extent that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in wastewater mains, with no particle having greater than
one-half inch cross-sectional dimension;



         (v)   Wastewater or industrial waste generated or
produced outside the city, unless approval in writing from the Pretreatment
Coordinator and the Control Authority has been given to the person
discharging the waste; or



         (w)   Without the approval of the Pretreatment
Coordinator and the Control Authority, a substance or pollutant other than
industrial waste, normal domestic wastewater, septic tank waste or chemical
toilet waste that is of a toxic or hazardous nature, regardless of whether or
not it is amenable to treatment, including, but not limited to, bulk or
packaged chemical products.



      (3)   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this
section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.



   (B)   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.  The categorical
pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471
are hereby incorporated.



      (1)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed
only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the Pretreatment Coordinator may impose equivalent concentration
or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).



      (2)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Pretreatment Coordinator shall impose an alternate limit using the combined
wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).



      (3)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical
pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when
developing the categorical pretreatment standard.



      (4)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a
categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.



   (C)   Reserved.



   (D)   Local limits. 



      (1)   The following pollutant limits are established to
protect against pass through and interference.  No person shall discharge,
or cause or permit to be discharged, wastewater containing in excess of the
following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits into the following
system(s):



 


Toxic Pollutant

 

TRA CRWS Instantaneous Maximum Allowable Discharge Limits (mg/l)

 

TRA Mountain Creek Instantaneous Maximum Allowable Discharge Limits (mg/l)





Arsenic
 
0.2
 
N/A


Cadmium
 
0.1
 
0.8


Chromium
 
2.9
 
N/A


Copper
 
2.3
 
1.78


Cyanide
 
0.5
 
N/A


Lead
 
0.9
 
1.0


Mercury
 
0.0004
 
N/A


Molybdenum
 
0.8
 
N/A


Nickel
 
4.6
 
N/A


Selenium
 
0.1
 
N/A


Silver
 
0.8
 
N/A


Zinc
 
8.0
 
2.8


Oil and Grease
 
200
 
200


Total Toxic Organics
 
2.13
 
N/A


pH
 
5.5 to 11.0 Standard Units
 
6.0 to 9.0 Standard Units


Chlorides
 
N/A
 
7605




 



      (2)   The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater
is discharged to the POTW.  All concentrations for metallic substances are
for “total” metal unless indicated otherwise.  The Pretreatment
Coordinator may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the
concentration-based limitations above.



   (E)   Right of revision.  The city reserves the right to establish,
by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or
requirements on discharges to the POTW.



   (F)   Dilution.  No user shall ever increase the use of process
water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge
limitation, unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment
standard or requirement. The Pretreatment Coordinator may impose mass
limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass
limitations is appropriate.



   (G)   Plant loading. 



      (1)   No industry shall discharge wastewater containing a BOD
or TSS loading that causes the city’s pro-rata share of the total BOD or
TSS loading to the POTW System to exceed the city’s pro-rata share of the
total flow to the POTW System.  (Example: If the city contributes 25% of the
total wastewater flow to the system, the city’s cumulative BOD or TSS
loading to the system, as measured at the city’s points of entry to the
system, shall not exceed 25% of the total BOD or TSS loading to the system.)



      (2)   Any industry with a wastewater strength that will cause
the city’s cumulative wastewater loading, at the city’s points of entry,
to exceed the city’s pro-rata share of the total wastewater loading based
upon flow, shall be required to install pretreatment facilities to reduce its
wastewater strength to an acceptable level.



(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-1742-09, passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord.
OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17)



§ 51.012  PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Pretreatment facilities.  Users shall provide wastewater
treatment as necessary to comply with this subchapter and shall achieve
compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the
prohibitions set out in § 51.011(A) within the time limitations specified by
EPA, the state, the Control Authority, or the Pretreatment Coordinator,
whichever is more stringent.  Any facilities necessary for compliance shall
be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense.  Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
Pretreatment Coordinator for review, and shall be acceptable to the
Pretreatment Coordinator before such facilities are constructed.  The review
of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from
the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a
discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   Additional pretreatment measures.



      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Pretreatment Coordinator
may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods,
designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers,
relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams
from industrial wastestreams, and require such other conditions as may be
necessary to protect the POTW and determine the users' compliance with the
requirements of this subchapter.



      (2)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require any person
discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at
their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow.  A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely
for flow equalization.



      (3)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided
when, in the opinion of the Pretreatment Coordinator, they are necessary for
the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and
oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential users.  All interception units shall be of type and capacity
approved by the Pretreatment Coordinator and shall be so located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.  Such interceptors shall be
inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their
expense.



      (4)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable
substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible
gas detection meter, or other control device as deemed necessary by the
Pretreatment Coordinator.



   (C)   Accidental discharge/slug control plans.  At least once every
two years, the Pretreatment Coordinator shall evaluate whether each permitted
significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control
plan.  The Pretreatment Coordinator may require any user to develop, submit
for approval, and implement such a plan.  An accidental discharge/slug
control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Pretreatment
Coordinator and Control Authority of any accidental or slug discharge, as
required by § 51.015(F); and



      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge.  Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



   (D)   Hauled wastewater.



      (1)   Septage waste may be introduced into the POTW only at
locations designated by the Pretreatment Coordinator and Control Authority,
and at such times as are established by the Pretreatment Coordinator and
Control Authority.  Such waste shall not violate § 51.011 or any other
requirements established by the city. The Pretreatment Coordinator and/or
Control Authority may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater
discharge permits.



      (2)   Septage waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form
for every load.  This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address
of the waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses
of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall
identify the type of generator, known or suspected waste constituents, and
whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.



(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17)



§ 51.013  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Wastewater analysis.  When requested by the Pretreatment
Coordinator, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics
of its wastewater by the deadline stipulated.  The Pretreatment Coordinator
is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require
users to update this information.



   (B)   Wastewater discharge permit requirement.



      (1)   No significant industrial user shall discharge
wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge
permit from the Pretreatment Coordinator, except that a significant
industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to § 51.013(C)
may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.



      (2)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require other users to
obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of
these regulations.



      (3)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a
wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter
and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in
§§ 51.018 through 51.021.  Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does
not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and
state pretreatment standards or requirements, and with any other requirements
of federal, state and local law.



   (C)   Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections.  Any
user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging
wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this subchapter, and
who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall apply to the
Pretreatment Coordinator for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with
§ 51.013(E), and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue
after 90 days of the effective date of this subchapter, except in accordance
with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the Pretreatment Coordinator. 
If, in the Pretreatment Coordinator’s judgment, the passing of this
subchapter does not significantly affect the industrial user’s current
permit, then the existing permit will continue through to the expiration date.



   (D)   Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections.  Any user
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit that proposes to begin or
recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the
beginning or recommencing of such discharge.  An application for this
wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with § 51.013(E), must be filed
prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.



   (E)   Wastewater discharge permit application contents.  All users
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit
application.  The Pretreatment Coordinator may require all users to submit
as part of an application the following information:



      (1)   All information required by § 51.015(A)(2);



      (2)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant
processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;



      (3)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation;



      (4)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes, and rate of production;



      (5)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);



      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans,
and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size,
location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;



      (7)   Time and duration of discharges; and



      (8)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Pretreatment Coordinator to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit
application.  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed
and will be returned to the user for revision.



   (F)   Application signatories and certification.  All wastewater
discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an
authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification
statement:



"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted.  Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete.  I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations."



   (G)   Wastewater discharge permit decisions.  The Pretreatment
Coordinator will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information.  Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater
discharge permit application; the Pretreatment Coordinator will determine
whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit.  The Pretreatment
Coordinator may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.



(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17)



.§ 51.014  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS.



   (A)   Wastewater discharge permit duration.  A wastewater discharge
permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years
from the effective date of the permit.  A wastewater discharge permit may be
issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the
Pretreatment Coordinator.  Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a
specific date upon which it will expire.



   (B)   Wastewater discharge permit contents.  A wastewater discharge
permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by
the Pretreatment Coordinator to prevent pass through or interference, protect
the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent,
protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal,
and protect against damage to the POTW.



      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain:



         (a)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge
permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years;



         (b)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit
is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with
§ 51.014(E), and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a
copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;



         (c)   Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment
standards;



         (d)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting,
notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall
include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law;
and



         (e)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule.  Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.



      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not
be limited to, the following conditions:



         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of
discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization;



         (b)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works;



         (c)   Requirements for the development and
implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions, including
management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;



         (d)   Development and implementation of waste
minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;



         (e)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and
fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;



         (f)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;



         (g)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater
discharge permit; and



         (h)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
Pretreatment Coordinator to ensure compliance with this subchapter, and state
and federal laws, rules and regulations.



   (C)   Reserved.



   (D)   Wastewater discharge permit modification.  The Pretreatment
Coordinator may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:



      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or
local pretreatment standards or requirements;



      (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the
user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time
of wastewater discharge permit issuance;



      (3)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;



      (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge
poses a threat to POTW, POTW personnel, or the receiving waters;



      (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit;



      (6)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any
required reporting;



      (7)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;



      (8)   To correct typographical or other errors in the
wastewater discharge permit; or



      (9)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or
operation to a new owner or operator.



   (E)   Wastewater discharge permit transfer. 



      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new
owner or operator only if the permittee gives  advance notice to the
Pretreatment Coordinator and the Pretreatment Coordinator approves the
wastewater discharge permit transfer.  The notice to the Pretreatment
Coordinator must include a written certification by the new owner or operator
which:



         (a)   States that the new owner and/or operator have no
immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes;



         (b)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer
is to occur; and



         (c)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying
with the existing wastewater discharge permit.



      (2)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders
the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.



   (F)   Wastewater discharge permit revocation.



      (1)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may revoke a wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:



         (a)   Failure to notify the Pretreatment Coordinator of
significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;



         (b)   Failure to provide prior notification to the
Pretreatment Coordinator of changed conditions pursuant to § 51.015(E);



         (c)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;



         (d)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;



         (e)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;



         (f)   Failure to allow the Pretreatment Coordinator
timely access to the facility premises and records;



         (g)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;



         (h)   Failure to pay fines;



         (i)   Failure to pay sewer charges;



         (j)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;



         (k)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the
wastewater discharge permit application;



         (l)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer
of business ownership of a permitted facility; or



         (m)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or
requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this
subchapter.



      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership.  All wastewater
discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a
new wastewater discharge permit to that user.



   (G)   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance.  A user with an
expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge
permit re-issuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance
with § 51.013(E), prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater
discharge permit.



(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17)



§ 51.015  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Baseline monitoring reports. 



      (1)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the Pretreatment Coordinator a report which contains the
information listed in subsection (2), below. At least 90 days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that will become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the Pretreatment Coordinator a report which
contains the information listed in subsection (2), below. A new source shall
report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
categorical standards.  A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.



      (2)   Users described above shall submit the information set
forth below.



         (a)   Identifying information.  The name and address of
the facility, including the name of the operator and owner.



         (b)   Environmental permits.  A list of any
environmental control permits held by or for the facility.



         (c)   Description of operations.  A brief description
of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial
classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user.  This
description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates
points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.



         (d)   Flow measurement.  Information showing the
measured or estimated average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per
day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as
necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR
403.6(e).



         (e)   Measurement of pollutants. 



            1.   The categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process.



            2.   The results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
standard or by the Pretreatment Coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process.  Instantaneous, daily maximum, and
long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be
reported.  The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall
be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in § 51.015(J).



            3.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 51.015(K).



         (f)   Certification.  A statement, reviewed by the
user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements.



         (g)   Compliance schedule.  If additional pretreatment
and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or
O&M.  The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard.  A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set
out in § 51.015(B).



         (h)   Signature and certification.  All
baseline-monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
§ 51.013(F).



   (B)   Compliance schedule progress reports.  The following
conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by §
51.015(A)(2)(g).



      (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but
are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final
plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



      (2)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;



      (3)   The user shall submit a progress report to the
Pretreatment Coordinator no later than 14 days following each date in the
schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or
not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay,
and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the
established schedule; and



      (4)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between
such progress reports to the Pretreatment Coordinator.



   (C)   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline.  Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the Pretreatment Coordinator a report containing the information described in
§ 51.015(A)(2)(d) through (f).  For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's
long-term production rate.  For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge
per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall
include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling
period.  All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 51.013(F).



   (D)   Periodic compliance reports.



      (1)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the Pretreatment Coordinator but in no case less than twice per
year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured
or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.  All
periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
§ 51.013(F).



      (2)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the
user's discharge.  Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order
at all times.  The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results
are unrepresentative of its discharge.



      (3)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this
section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the
Pretreatment Coordinator, using the procedures prescribed in § 51.015(J) and
(K), the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.



   (E)   Reports of changed conditions.  Each user must notify the
Pretreatment Coordinator of any planned significant changes to the users
operations or system, which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its
wastewater before the change is made.



      (1)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require the user to
submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application under § 51.013(E).



      (2)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may issue a wastewater
discharge permit under § 51.013(G) or modify an existing wastewater
discharge permit under § 51.014(E) in response to changed conditions or
anticipated changed conditions.



      (3)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes
include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants that are determined to be
of concern.



   (F)   Reports of potential problems.



      (1)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited
to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential
problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the
city and the Control Authority of the incident.  This notification shall
include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.



      (2)   Within five days following such discharge, unless waived
by the Director, the user shall submit a detailed written report describing
the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to
prevent similar future occurrences.  Such notification shall not relieve the
user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability, which may be incurred
as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to
person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any
fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this
subchapter.



      (3)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s
bulletin board or other prominent place, advising employees whom to call in
the event of a discharge described in subsection (1), above.  Employers
shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.



   (G)   Reports from unpermitted users.  All users not required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the
Pretreatment Coordinator as the Pretreatment Coordinator may require.



   (H)   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting.  If
sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the
Pretreatment Coordinator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation.  The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis, and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the Pretreatment Coordinator within 30
days after becoming aware of the violation.  The user is not required to
resample if the Pretreatment Coordinator monitors at the user’s facility at
least once a month, or if the Pretreatment Coordinator samples between the
user’s initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this
sampling.



   (I)   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.



      (1)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste
shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director,
and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR Part 261.  Such notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste
number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).  If the
user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to
the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information, to
the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an
estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the
mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the
following 12 months.  All notifications must take place no later than 180
days after the discharge commences.  Any notification under this section
need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged.  However,
notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under § 51.015(E). 
The notification requirement in his section does not apply to pollutants
already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under
the self-monitoring requirements of § 51.015(A), (C) and (D).



      (2)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of
subsection (1), above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no
more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).  Discharge
of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month,
or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d)
and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.  Subsequent months during
which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do
not require additional notification.



      (3)   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of
RCRA, identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing
any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Pretreatment Coordinator, the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste
Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of
such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.



      (4)   In the case of any notification made under this section,
the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume
and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to
be economically practical.



      (5)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this subchapter, a
permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.



   (J)   Analytical requirements.  All pollutant analyses, including
sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.



   (K)   Sample collection.



      (1)   Except as indicated in subsection (2), below, the user
must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques.  In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the
Pretreatment Coordinator and/or Control Authority may authorize the use of
time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples, where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent
being discharged.  In addition, grab samples may be used to show compliance
with instantaneous discharge limits.



      (2)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide,
phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.



   (L)   Timing.  Written reports will be deemed to have been
submitted on the date postmarked.  For reports, which are not mailed,
postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal
Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.



   (M)   Record keeping.  Users subject to the reporting requirements
of this subchapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and
copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring
activities required by this subchapter and any additional records of
information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user
independent of such requirements.  Records shall



include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of
the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who
performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the
results of such analyses.  These records shall remain available for a period
of at least three years.  This period shall be automatically extended for
the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the Pretreatment
Coordinator, or where the Pretreatment Coordinator and/or Control Authority
have specifically notified the user of a longer retention period.



(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17)



§ 51.016  COMPLIANCE MONITORING.



   (A)   Right of entry: inspection and sampling.  The Pretreatment
Coordinator and/or the Control Authority, TCEQ, or USEPA or their designated
representative shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to
determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this
subchapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. 
Users shall allow inspecting or sampling person ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination
and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.



      (1)   Where a user has security measures in force, which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the city, Control Authority,
TCEQ or USEPA will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of
performing specific responsibilities.



      (2)   The Pretreatment Coordinator and/or Control Authority
shall have the right to set up on the user’s property, or require
installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or
metering of the user’s operations.  All sampling and analysis performed by
the Pretreatment Coordinator and/or Control Authority to monitor compliance
shall be at the expense of the industrial user.



      (3)   The Pretreatment Coordinator and/or Control Authority
may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary.  The
facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own
expense.  All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated, at a minimum, annually to ensure their accuracy.



      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the Pretreatment
Coordinator and/or Control Authority, and shall not be replaced.  The costs
of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.



      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the inspecting or
sampling person access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this
subchapter.



      (6)   In accordance with 40 CFR 403, the city shall inspect
and monitor each permitted Industrial User a minimum of once per year.  If
the city elects to perform compliance monitoring for the industry, then the
city will monitor the industry a minimum of semiannually.



   (B)   Search warrants.  If the Pretreatment Coordinator and/or
Control Authority has been refused access to a building, structure, or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this subchapter, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the Pretreatment Coordinator designed to verify compliance with
this subchapter, or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the
Pretreatment Coordinator and/or Control Authority may seek issuance of a
search warrant or an administrative search warrant from an appropriate court.



(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17)



§ 51.017  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from inspection and sampling activities, shall be
available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city and/or
Control Authority, that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets under applicable state law.  Any such request must be asserted
at the time of submission of the information or data.  When requested and
demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be
held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and
in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data”, as
defined by 40 CFR 2.302, will not be recognized as confidential information
and will be available to the public without restriction.



(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17)



§ 51.018  PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.



   The Pretreatment Coordinator shall publish annually, in the largest
daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a
list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The
term SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE shall mean:



   (A)   CHRONIC VIOLATIONS OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE LIMITS, defined
here as those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a
six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same
pollutant parameter by any amount;



   (B)   TECHNICAL REVIEW CRITERIA (TRC) VIOLATIONS, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product
of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable
criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);



   (C)   Any other discharge violation that the Pretreatment
Coordinator believes has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of
POTW personnel or the general public;



   (D)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the
Pretreatment Coordinator or Control Authority’s exercise of its emergency
authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;



   (E)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;



   (F)   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic
self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;



   (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or



   (H)   Any other violation(s), which the Pretreatment Coordinator
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.



(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17)



§ 51.019  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.



   (A)   Notification of violation.  When the Pretreatment Coordinator
finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this subchapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Pretreatment Coordinator
may serve upon that user a written notice of violation.  Within the time
frame specified in the notice, which is usually, but not always, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted
by the user to the Pretreatment Coordinator.  Submission of this plan in no
way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or
after receipt of the notice of violation.  Nothing in this section shall
limit the authority of the Pretreatment Coordinator to take any action,
including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first
issuing a notice of violation.



   (B)   Reserved.



   (C)   Show cause hearing.  The Pretreatment Coordinator may order a
user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
subchapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the Pretreatment
Coordinator and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken.  Notice shall be served on the user, specifying the time and place
for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such
action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement
actionshould not be taken.  The notice of the meeting shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least ten days prior to the hearing.  Such notice may be served on any
authorized representative of the user.  A show cause hearing shall not be a
bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



   (D)   Compliance orders.  When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds
that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
subchapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Pretreatment Coordinator may
issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge, directing that the
user come into compliance within a specified time.  If the user does not
come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated.  Compliance orders also
may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including
additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the
amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer.  A compliance order may not
extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for
any violation, including any continuing violation.  Issuance of a compliance
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.



   (E)   Cease and desist orders.



      (1)   When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user’s past violations
are likely to recur, the Pretreatment Coordinator may issue an order to the
user, directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the
user to:



         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and



         (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive
action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened
violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.



      (2)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



   (F)   Reserved.



   (G)   Emergency suspensions. 



      (1)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may immediately suspend a
user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension
is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably
appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons.  The Pretreatment Coordinator may also
immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to
respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which
presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.



         (a)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge
shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a
user’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to
the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The
Pretreatment Coordinator may allow the user to recommence its discharge when
the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Pretreatment Coordinator
that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings under § 51.019(H) are initiated against the user.



         (b)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part,
for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed
written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Pretreatment
Coordinator prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under
§ 51.019(C) or (H).



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as
requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.



   (H)   Termination of discharge. 



      (1)   In addition to the provisions in § 51.014(F) of this
subchapter, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to
discharge termination:



         (a)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit
conditions;



         (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of its discharge;



         (c)   Failure to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to
discharge;



         (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's
premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or



         (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §
51.011.



      (2)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination
of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under §
51.019(C) of the Code why the proposed action should not be taken.  Exercise
of this option by the Pretreatment Coordinator shall not be a bar to, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17)



§ 51.020  JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.



   (A)   Injunctive relief.  When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds
that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
subchapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Pretreatment Coordinator may
petition the appropriate court, through the Pretreatment Coordinator’s
attorney, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this
subchapter on activities of the user.  The Pretreatment Coordinator may also
seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief,
including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. 
A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



   (B)   Civil penalties.



      (1)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this subchapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable
to the city for a maximum civil penalty of $1,000 per violation, per day. 
In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit,
penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.



      (2)   The city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court
costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred
by the city.



      (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court
shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not
limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's
violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the
user, and any other factor as justice requires.



      (4)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



   (C)   Criminal prosecution.



      (1)   A user who violates any provision of this subchapter, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000 per violation, per
day.



      (2)   A user who negligently introduces any substance into the
POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction,
be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to the same penalties described in
§ 51.020(C)(1).  This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of
action for personal injury or property damage available under state law.



      (3)   A user who makes any false statements, representations,
or certifications in any application, subchapter, wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this subchapter
shall, upon conviction, be subject to the same penalties described in §
51.020(C)(1).



      (4)   Criminal responsibility.  A culpable mental state is
not required to prove an offense under this subchapter.  A person is
criminally responsible for a violation of this subchapter if:



         (a)   The person commits or assists in the commission of
a violation, or causes or permits another person to commit a violation; or



         (b)   The person owns or manages the property or
facilities determined to be the cause of the illegal discharge under §§
51.011(A), (B), or (D); 51.012(B) or 51.013(B).



   (D)   Remedies nonexclusive.  The remedies provided for in this
subchapter are not exclusive.  The Pretreatment Coordinator may take any,
all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. 
Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with
the city enforcement response plan.  However, the Pretreatment Coordinator
may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. 
Further, the Pretreatment Coordinator is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user.



   (E)   Applicability of more stringent regulations.



      (1)   If national pretreatment standards, categorical or
otherwise, more stringent than the discharge limits prescribed in this
article are promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
for certain industries, the more stringent national pretreatment standards
will apply to the affected industrial user.  A violation of the more
stringent national pretreatment standards will also be considered a violation
of this subchapter.



      (2)   Applicability of more stringent discharge limits.  An
industrial user within the city who discharges industrial waste ultimately
received and treated by another governmental entity pursuant to a wholesale
wastewater contract or a reciprocal agreement with the city is subject to the
following additional rules:



         (a)   If the governmental entity has more stringent
discharge limits than those prescribed by this subchapter, or by a discharge
permit issued hereunder, because the United States Environmental Protection
Agency requires the more stringent discharge limits as part of the
governmental entity's wastewater pretreatment program, the more stringent
discharge limits shall prevail.



         (b)   The Pretreatment Coordinator is authorized to
issue a discharge permit to an industrial user affected by subsection (a), to
insure notice of and compliance with the more stringent discharge limits. 
If the industrial user already has a discharge permit, the Pretreatment
Coordinator may amend the permit to apply and enforce the more stringent
discharge limits.  An industrial user shall submit to the Pretreatment
Coordinator an expected compliance date and an installation schedule if the
more stringent discharge limits necessitate technological or mechanical
adjustments to discharge facilities or plant processes.



         (c)   If the Pretreatment Coordinator chooses not to
issue or amend a permit under subsection (b), the Pretreatment Coordinator
shall notify the affected industrial user in writing of the more stringent
discharge limits and their effective date.  Regardless of whether or not a
permit is issued or amended, an industrial user shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to comply with the more stringent discharge limits.



         (d)   The more stringent discharge limits cease to apply
upon termination of the city's wholesale wastewater contract or reciprocal
agreement with the governmental entity, or upon modification or elimination
of the limits by the government entity or the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.  The Pretreatment Coordinator shall take the appropriate
action to notify the affected industrial user of an occurrence under this
subsection.



      (3)   Variances in compliance dates.  The Pretreatment
Coordinator may grant a variance in compliance dates to an industry when, in
the Pretreatment Coordinator's opinion, such action is necessary to achieve
pretreatment or corrective measures.  In no case shall the Pretreatment
Coordinator grant a variance in compliance dates to an industry affected by
national categorical pretreatment standards beyond the compliance dates
established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.



      (4)   Authority to regulate.  The Pretreatment Coordinator
may establish regulations, not in conflict with this subchapter or other
laws, to control the disposal and discharge of industrial waste into the
wastewater system, and to insure compliance of the city’s pretreatment
enforcement program with all applicable pretreatment regulations promulgated
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. The regulations
established shall, where applicable, be made part of any discharge permit
issued to an industrial user by the Pretreatment Coordinator.



(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17)



§ 51.021  RESERVED.



§ 51.022  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   In an action brought in federal court only:  upset provision.



      (1)   For the purposes of this section, UPSET means an
exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors
beyond the reasonable control of the user.  An UPSET does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.



      (2)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an
action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if
the requirements of subsection (3), below, are met.



      (3)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:



         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset;



         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a
prudent and workman-like manner, and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and



         (c)   The user has submitted the following information
to the Pretreatment Coordinator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
upset, if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be
provided within five days:



            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and
cause of noncompliance;



            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact
dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance
is expected to continue; and



            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



      (4)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



      (5)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.



      (6)   The user shall control production of all discharges to
the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until
the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. 
This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.



   (B)   In an action brought in municipal or state court only:  act
of God provision.



      (1)   An event that would otherwise be a violation that is
caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe is
not a violation.



      (2)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other
catastrophe shall have the burden of proof.



      (3)   In the event that divisions (B)(1) and (2) above have
been demonstrated, the user shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.



   (C)   Bypass.



      (1)   For the purposes of this section:



         (a)   BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of
wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.



         (b)   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE.  Substantial physical
damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities, which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources,
which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. 
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays in
production.



      (2)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of division (C)(3) and (4) of this
section.



      (3)   (a)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the Pretreatment Coordinator, at
least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible.



         (b)   A user shall submit oral notice to the
Pretreatment Coordinator of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the
bypass.  A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the
time the user becomes aware of the bypass.  The written submission shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the
bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken
or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The
Pretreatment Coordinator may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis
if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.



      (4)   (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Pretreatment
Coordinator may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass,
unless:



            1.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of
life, personal injury, or severe property damage;



            2.   There were no feasible alternatives to the
bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime.  This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment
should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment
to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment
downtime or preventive maintenance; and



            3.   The user submitted notices as required under
division (C)(3) of this section.



         (b)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may approve an
anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the
Pretreatment Coordinator determines that it will meet the three conditions
listed in division (C)(4)(a)1. of this section.



(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17)



§ 51.023  RESERVED.



§ 51.024  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Pretreatment charges and fees.



      (1)   The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of
costs of setting up and operating the City of Mansfield's Pretreatment
Program, which may include:



         (a)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications,
including the cost of processing such applications;



         (b)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance
procedures, including the cost of collection and analyzing a user’s
discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;



         (c)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental
discharge procedures and construction;



         (d)   Fees for filing appeals; and



         (e)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry
out the requirements contained herein.  These fees relate solely to the
matters covered by this subchapter and are separate from all other fees,
fines, and penalties chargeable the city.



         (f)   Fees for treating abnormal strength wastes.



         (g)   Fees incurred from an upset, bypass or
unauthorized discharge.



      (2)   Surcharge.



         (a)   The city may surcharge industrial users for the
treating of abnormal strength wastes. Water or wastes having: 1. a five-day
biochemical oxygen demand greater than 250 parts per million (ppm) by weight;
or 2.  containing more than 250 parts per million by weight of total
suspended solids, shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Pretreatment Coordinator.  Where the Pretreatment Coordinator has approved
the admission of § 51.024(A)(2)(a)1. and 2. above into the POTW, that
discharge may be subject to a surcharge as determined by the Pretreatment
Coordinator.  In no case shall a discharge be accepted that will prevent the
POTW from meeting its limits.



         (b)   The surcharge will be assessed according to the
following formula each month, using the most current pollutant concentration
data and the current month’s wastewater flow:



Surcharge =             Q      , x [a(BOD - x) + b(TSS - y)][8.34]
      1,000,000



Where:   



   Q    =   flow in gallons



   8.34    =   weight in pounds of one gallon water



   x    =   normal limits of BOD in domestic wastewater expressed in
milligrams per liter



   y    =   normal limits of TSS in domestic wastewater expressed in
milligrams per liter



   a   =   unit cost of treatment per pound of BOD



   b   =   unit cost of treatment per pound of TSS



   BOD   =   measured amount of BOD, in mg/l



   TSS   =   measured amount of TSS, in mg/l



         (c)   A surcharge is an additional charge by the POTW
for the increased cost of handling discharge of unusual strength and
character, and shall not serve as a variance to the requirements of this
subchapter.  Exercise of this provision shall not be a bar to, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17)



§§ 51.025 - 51.035  RESERVED.



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 51.050  WATER AND SEWER TAP FEES; AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH.



   In all instances of water tap or connections for water lines and taps
for sewer service, it is deemed and found to be reasonable and just that the
rates charged for same shall be calculated by the City Manager or a
representative designated by him/her. Such charge shall be calculated at the
time of such request or within a reasonable period of time thereafter and
shall take into consideration the prevailing charges for labor and materials
necessary to perform the requested services. Such charge for labor, materials
and service shall, insofar as practicable, be maintained on an appropriate
schedule which shall be prepared by and shall be available from the City
Manager. The City Manager is hereby directed and authorized to prepare the
schedule and to revise the schedule to reflect appropriate increases or
decreases no less often than once each year.



('78 Code, § 17-1) (Ord. 353, passed 4-24-78)



§ 51.051  COLLECTION OF TAP FEES BEFORE CONNECTION.



   The tap charges and rates for which provision is hereby made above
shall be paid to and collected by the city prior to the connection of the
utility service.



('78 Code, § 17-2) (Ord. 305, passed 7-22-75; Ord. 353, passed 4-24-78)



§ 51.052  WATER SERVICE RATES.



   The water service rates to be charged to users of the city water system
shall be as follows:



   (A)   The minimum rate per billing period for residential water
services using 2,000 gallons or less shall be $7.16.



   (B)   All water service connections using more than 2,000 gallons in
a billing period will be charged the following monthly base rate dependent on
the water meter size:



 


Meter Sizes

 

Meter Base Rate





5/8 or 3/4-inch meter
 

$21.47



1-inch meter
 

$53.68



1 1/2-inch meter
 

$107.35



2-inch meter
 

$171.76



3-inch meter
 

$343.52



4-inch meter
 

$590.43



6-inch meter
 

$1,207.69





 



   (C)   The base rate per billing period for any water meter larger
than six inches will be calculated based on the projected demand the meter
could place on the water system and shall be proportionate to the costs
listed above.



   (D)   For all residential and commercial water service connections
using more than 2,000 gallons per billing period, the following volume rates
will be added to the base rate:



 


0 to 2,000 gallons

 
Included in the base rate


2,000 to 32,000 gallons
 
$2.89 per 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof


32,000 gallons and above
 
$3.62 per 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof



 



   (E)   For all industrial water service connections using more than
2,000 gallons per billing period, the following volume rates will be added to
the base rate:



 


0 to 2,000 gallons

 
Included in the base rate


2,000 to 32,000 gallons
 
$2.21 per 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof


32,000 gallons and above
 
$2.77 per 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof



 



   (F)   An INDUSTRIAL WATER SERVICE CONNECTION is defined as a
business that is primarily engaged in manufacturing, processing, or
assembling any products or goods of any kind or description where materials
of a lower value are converted to forms having greater usability or value.



   (G)   Any water service connection or water delivery that is trucked
or transported outside of the incorporated city limits, other than water
sales defined by wholesale contracts, will be charged an additional 10% above
the stated base rate and volume rate for each billing period.



(‘78 Code, § 17-4) (Ord. 323, passed 2-28-77; Ord. 361, passed 9-19-78;
Ord. 426, passed 9-15-80; Ord. 435, passed 1-12-80; Ord. 473, passed 9-15-82;
Ord. 568, passed 10-8-84; Ord. 629, passed 9-9-85; Ord. 685, passed 7-28-86;
Ord. 791, passed 9-12-88; Ord. 851, passed 9-25-89; Ord. 952, passed 2-8-93;
Am. Ord. 1559, passed 2-13-06; Am. Ord. OR-1735-09, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord.
OR-1758-09, passed 12-14-09; Am. Ord. OR-1781-10, passed 8-30-10; Am. Ord.
OR-1839-12, passed 9-10-12)



§ 51.053  WATER RECONNECTION CHARGE.



   The city hereby assesses a charge of $10 to reconnect water service to
any of its customers to whom such water service has previously been
disconnected.



('78 Code, § 17-5) (Ord. 280, passed 7-9-74)



§ 51.054  SEWER SERVICE RATES.



   The sewer service rates to be charged to users of the city sewer system
shall be as follows:



   (A)   Residential sewer service rates.



      (1)   Billing period base minimum less than 2,000
gallons            $7.26



      (2)   Billing period base minimum more than 2,000
gallons            $21.77



      (3)   For all volumes in excess of the 2,000 gallon base
minimum a volume charge of $2.57 per 1,000 gallons (or fraction thereof) will
be added to the base minimum up to a maximum residential sewer charge of
$52.61 per billing period.



      (4)   Residential sewer service only (no water service) will
be charged a flat rate of $42.33 per billing period for an estimated flow of
10,000 gallons.



   (B)   Commercial and industrial sewer service rates.



      (1)   Billing period base minimum for all
volumes               $21.77



   For all volumes in excess of the 2,000 gallon base minimum a volume
charge of $2.57 per 1,000 gallons (or fraction thereof) will be added to the
base minimum. (There is no maximum volume charge for nonresidential,
commercial, or industrial sewer service.)



(‘78 Code, § 17-6 (part)) (Ord. 324, passed 2-28-77; Ord. 362, passed
9-19-78; Ord. 427, passed 9-15-80; Ord. 474, passed 9-15-82; Ord. 571, passed
10-22-84; Ord. 630, passed 9-9-85; Ord. 686, passed 7-28-86; Ord. 852, passed
9-25-89; Ord. 938, passed 8-10-92; Ord. 953, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 1560,
passed 2-13- 06; Am. Ord. OR-1734-09, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. OR-1759-09,
passed 12-14-09; Am. Ord. OR-1782- 10, passed 8-30-10; Am. Ord. OR-1840-12,
passed 9-10-12)



§ 51.055  ABNORMAL WASTEWATER SURCHARGE.



   When discharges of abnormal wastewaters are approved by the approving
authority, the persons generating such waste shall be excised a monthly
surcharge for excess B.O.D. and/or S.S. calculated in accordance with the
following formula.



   SC   =   (Q) (8.34) [a (B.O.D. - 250) + b (SS - 250)]



         where:



   SC   =   surcharge based on excessive concentrations of B.O.D.
and/or S.S. (dollars per month)



   Q   =   flow (million gallons per month)



   a   =   annually adjusted unit cost of treatment, chargeable to
B.O.D. (dollars per pound of B.O.D. introduced to system)



   b   =   annually adjusted unit cost of treatment, chargeable to
S.S. (dollars per pound of S.S. introduced to system)



   The value of B.O.D. and/or S.S. concentrations will be the average of
values determined by testing procedures as defined in § 51.027. The value of
a and b will be determined by the approving authority based on the current
adjusted surcharge rate determined by the Trinity River Authority.



('78 Code, § 17-38) (Ord. 328, passed 6-13-77)



§ 51.056  INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.



   (A)   In providing a waste treatment system, the city shall have the
authority to collect from such industrial users all or any part of the
construction costs of the waste treatment system reasonably attributed to the
industrial wastes. The apportionment of the costs shall be equitable as among
industrial users, and the costs may be collected by assessment, connection
fee, periodic charges or in other manners or combinations thereof as in the
judgment of the City Manager, or his/her designee, of the city is equitable
and will assure such industrial cost recovery.



   (B)   (1)   An industrial user is any nongovernmental user of the
city's waste treatment system, identified in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and
supplemented, under the following divisions.



      Division A:      Agriculture, forestry and fishing



      Division B:      Mining



      Division D:      Manufacturing



      Division E:      Transportation, communications, electric,
gas and sanitary services



      Division I:      Services



      (2)   Any industrial user may be excluded if it is determined
that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.



   (C)   The annual amount to be recovered from each industrial user
shall be predicated on the following formula.



   $A     $B   $C   



  1   (D x G) +  (E x H) + (F x X)  1 ÷ J = Annual payments ($/year)



where:



      A:   Eligible federal grant allocable to flow (Q) in dollars.



      B:   Eligible federal grant allocable to B.O.D., in dollars.



      C:   Eligible federal grant allocable to S. S., in dollars.



      D:   Total design flow (q), in Ccf/day.



      E:   Total design B.O.D., in lbs/day.



      F:   Total design S.S., in lbs/day.



      G:   Industrial users' flow discharge to system, in Ccf.



      H:   Industrial users' B.O.D. discharge to system, in lbs/day.



      I:   Industrial users' S.S. discharge to system, in lbs/day.



      J:   Amortization period equals 30 years.



   (D)   For the purpose of computing the industrial users' annual
payment, a cost recovery period of 30 years is hereby established.



   (E)   The industrial user shall be billed monthly on the basis of
his/her computed annual industrial cost recovery payment divided by 12.



   (F)   Funds collected under industrial costs recovery shall be
deposited into a special fund entitled "Industrial Cost Recovery Fund," which
is hereby established.



   (G)   Pending use, retained amounts shall be invested in the
following.



      (1)   Obligations of the U. S. government.



      (2)   Obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by
the U. S. government or any agency thereof.



      (3)   Shall be deposited in accounts fully collateralized by
obligations of the U. S. government or by obligations fully guaranteed as to
principal and interest by the U. S. government or any agency thereof.



   (H)   Industrial users shall be reviewed annually by the city for
quantity and strength of waste, and the industrial cost recovery rate
adjusted accordingly.



   (I)   The city shall maintain records and submit reports and
financial statements to the appropriate authorities.



('78 Code, § 17-38.1) (Ord. 356, passed 6-12-78)



LIQUID WASTE HAULERS



§ 51.070  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVED.  Accepted as satisfactory under the terms of this subchapter
and given formal and official sanction by the approving authority.



   APPROVING AUTHORITY.  The Director, or any other official designated
by the City Manager of any city party to this subchapter, or his/her duly
authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the department designated by the City
Manager to enforce and administer this subchapter.



   DISPOSAL.  The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of any solid or semi-solid grease trap waste, grit trap
waste and/or septage into or on any land or water so that such waste or any
constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or
discharged into any waters, including ground waters.



   DISPOSAL SITE.  A permitted site or part of a site at which grease
trap waste, grit trap waste or septage is processed, treated and/or
intentionally placed into or on any land and at which the waste will remain
after closure.



   DISPOSER.  A person which receives, stores, retains, processes or
disposes of liquid waste.



   GENERATOR.  A person who causes, creates, generates or otherwise
produces liquid waste.



   GREASE TRAP.  A watertight receptacle designed and constructed to
intercept and prevent the passage of greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid and/or
solid wastes generated from commercial operations into the sanitary sewer
system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected.



   GREASE TRAP WASTE.  Greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid and/or solid
wastes removed from commercial operations by a grease trap.



   GRIT TRAP.  A watertight receptacle designed and constructed to
intercept and prevent the passage of petroleum based oil, grease wastes and
solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or
indirectly connected.



   GRIT TRAP WASTE.  Petroleum based oil, grease wastes and solids from
commercial automotive or heavy machinery repair and/or washing facilities.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  Any liquid, semi-liquid or solid waste (or
combination of wastes), which because of its quantity, concentration,
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may meet the following
conditions.



      (1)   Have any of the following characteristics: toxic,
corrosive, an irritant, a strong sensitizer, flammable or combustible,
explosive or otherwise capable of causing substantial personal injury or
illness.



      (2)   Pose a substantial hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or
otherwise improperly managed, and is identified or listed as a hazardous
waste as defined by the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act or the Administrator,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Federal "Solid
Waste Disposal Act," as amended by the "Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act of 1976" and as may be amended in the future.



   LIQUID WASTE.  Water-borne solids, liquids and gaseous substances
derived from a grease trap, grit trap, chemical/portable toilet and/or septic
tank and described as grease trap waste, grit trap waste or septage.



   MANAGER.  The person conducting, supervising, managing or representing
the activities of a generator, transporter or disposer.



   MANIFEST SYSTEM.  A system consisting of a four-part trip ticket used
to document the generation, transportation and disposal of liquid waste.



   OWNER.  The person who owns a facility or part of a facility.



   PERMIT.  The formal written document issued to a person by the
approving authority authorizing collection of grease trap waste, grit trap
waste and septage.



   PERMITTEE.  A person granted a permit under this subchapter.



   POTW.  Publicly owned treatment works.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not normally admitted.



   SEPTAGE.  Wastes removed from a portable toilet, chemical toilet or
septic tank.



   SPECIAL WASTES.  Solid waste or combination of solid wastes that,
because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics
or biological properties, requires special handling and disposal to protect
the human health or the environment.



   SPILL.  The accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge
of grease trap waste, grit trap waste and septage.



   TANK.  A device designated to contain an accumulation of grease trap
waste, grit trap waste and septage which is constructed primarily of
non-earthen materials (for example, concrete, steel, plastic) to provide
structural support for the containment.



   TDH.  Texas Department of Health.



   TWC.  Texas Water Commission.



   TOXIC WASTE.  Any liquid, semi-liquid or solid waste material which
has the ability to chemically produce injury, once it reaches a susceptible
site in or on the body.



   TRANSPORTER.  A person who operates a vehicle for the purpose of
transporting liquid waste.



   TRIP TICKET.  The shipping document originated and signed by the
transporter which contains the information required by the approving
authority.



   VEHICLE.  A permitted mobile device in which or by which liquid waste
may be transported upon a public street or highway.



('78 Code, § 17-71) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87)



§ 51.071  PERMIT REQUIRED TO TRANSPORT LIQUID WASTE.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he/she operates or causes to be
operated a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste without an
applicable permit. A permit shall be issued for transportation of liquid
waste and the approving authority shall designate on the permit the liquid
waste authorized for transportation in the vehicle. A separate vehicle permit
number is issued for each vehicle operated.



   (B)   A person who desires to obtain a permit application must
purchase the permit application from the city.



   (C)   A person who desires to obtain a permit must submit to the
approving authority at the time of application a photocopy of the Manager's
drivers license. The approving authority shall be notified of Manager
employment changes during the permit period and shall be provided a copy of
the new Manager's drivers license.



   (D)   The approving authority shall not issue a permit unless the
applicant submits for inspection by the approving authority the vehicle the
applicant proposes to use to transport liquid waste and such vehicle is found
by the approving authority to be constructed and equipped in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter.



   (E)   A permit is not transferable.



   (F)   A permit issued by the city excludes the hauling of materials
that are hazardous in nature.



   (G)   Transporters transporting hazardous wastes must have the
applicable Texas Water Commission and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) registration number and use the appropriate EPA manifest system.



   (H)   Each applicant must specify the disposal site or sites to be
used for the authorized disposal of liquid wastes. The approving authority
shall be immediately notified of additional disposal sites used during the
permit period.



('78 Code, § 17-72) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87) Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.072  FEE AND DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The approving authority shall not issue a permit application
until the appropriate established fee is paid. Each permit must be renewed
annually.



   (B)   The approving authority shall number permits consecutively,
and each permit holder shall cause to be displayed on each side of each
vehicle in a color contrasting with the background in three-inch letters or
larger the business name, TDH registration number and the following.



   Example: MAN



   The first three letters (MAN) shall represent the city issuing the
permit. The blank space shall contain the permit number. The permit holder
shall place business name, TDH registration number and the vehicle permit
number on each vehicle before the vehicle is operated. The permit holder
shall keep the permit receipt, or a copy, in the vehicle at all times.



('78 Code, § 17-73) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87) Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.073  MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES TRANSPORTING LIQUID WASTE.



   (A)   A liquid waste transporter shall do the following.



      (1)   Maintain hoses, tanks, valves, pumps, cylinders,
diaphragms, pipes, connections and other appurtenances on a vehicle in good
repair and free from leaks.



      (2)   Provide a safety plug or cap for each valve of a tank.



      (3)   Cause a vehicle exterior to be clean and the vehicle
odor-free at the beginning of each workday.



      (4)   Maintain current vehicle registration and state
inspection.



   (B)   The approving authority may cause to be impounded a vehicle
which is being operated in violation of this subchapter, and he/she may
authorize the holding of the vehicle until the violation is corrected. The
approving authority may also revoke the permit for the improperly operated
vehicle. If a vehicle is impounded or if a permit is revoked an appeal may be
filed by the transporter pursuant to § 51.082.



(’78 Code, § 17-74) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87; Am. Ord. OR-1760-09,
passed 12-14-09)



§ 51.074  INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.



   A liquid waste transporter's vehicle shall be inspected by the
approving authority prior to the issuance of a vehicle permit with
qualifications as follows.



   (A)   Use a vehicle with a single tank as an integral portion of
vehicle to transport liquid wastes portable tanks or other containers
temporarily installed in vehicles are prohibited.



   (B)   Piping, valves and connectors shall be permanently attached to
tank and/or vehicle.



   (C)   Tank to be liquid-tight.



   (D)   Tank to be constructed so that every interior and exterior
portion can be easily cleaned.



   (E)   Piping, valves and connections shall be accessible and easy to
clean.



   (F)   Inlet or opening of tank to be constructed so that collected
waste will not spill during filling, transfer or during transport.



   (G)   Outlet connections to be constructed so that no liquid waste
will leak, run or spill out from the vehicle.



   (H)   Outlets to be of a design and type suitable for the liquid
waste handled and capable of controlling flow or discharge without spillage
or undue spray on or flooding of immediate surroundings while in use.



   (I)   Pumps, valves, cylinders, diaphragms and other appurtenances
to be of a design and type suitable for the type of waste handled, capable of
operation without spillage, spray or leakage, and capable of being easily
disassembled for cleaning.



('78 Code, § 17-75) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87)



§ 51.075  RESPONSIBILITIES OF LIQUID WASTE TRANSPORTER.



   (A)   Before accepting a load of liquid waste for transportation, a
liquid waste transporter shall determine the nature of the material to be
transported and that his/her equipment is sufficient to properly handle the
job without spillage, leaks or release of toxic or harmful gases, fumes,
liquids or other substances. Upon delivery of the waste to the disposer, the
transporter shall inform the disposer of the nature of the waste.



   (B)   A transporter with a city liquid waste transporter permit
shall not transport materials that are hazardous as defined in § 51.070 in
vehicles permitted by the city for transporting liquid waste.



   (C)   A transporter holding a city permit must use a disposal site
permitted and approved by the city or the state or the federal government.



   (D)   Manifest requirements:



      (1)   Manifest books shall be purchased at the City of
Mansfield Utility Field Operations Department.



      (2)   Each pump-out of a grease trap or interceptor must be
accompanied by a manifest to be used for record keeping purposes.



      (3)   Persons who generate, collect and transport grease waste
shall maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such
records shall be in the form of a manifest.  The manifest shall include:



         (a)   Name, address, telephone, and commission
registration number of transporter;



         (b)   Name, signature, address, and phone number of the
person who generated the waste and the date collected;



         (c)   Type and amount(s) of waste collected or
transported;



         (d)   Name and signature(s) of responsible person(s)
collecting, transporting, and depositing the waste;



         (e)   Date and place where the waste was deposited;



         (f)   Identification (permit or site registration
number, location, and operator) of the facility where the waste was deposited;



         (g)   Name and signature of facility on-site
representative acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of waste
received;



         (h)   The volume of the grease waste received; and



         (i)   A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist
transporters, waste generators, and regulating authorities in tracking the
volume of grease transported.



      (4)   Manifests shall be divided into five parts and records
shall be maintained as follows:



         (a)   One part of the manifest (green copy) shall have
the generator and transporter information completed and is given to the
generator at the time of waste pickup.



         (b)   The remaining four parts of the manifest shall
have all required information completely filled out and signed by the
appropriate party before distribution of the manifest.



         (c)   One part of the manifest (yellow copy) shall go to
the receiving facility/disposal site.



         (d)   One part of the manifest (pink copy) shall go to
the transporter, who shall retain a copy of all manifests showing the
collection and disposition of waste.



         (e)   One copy of the manifest (gold copy) shall be
returned by the transporter to the person who generated the wastes within 15
days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility.



         (f)   One part of the manifest (white copy) shall go to
the City of Mansfield Utility Field Operation Department.



      (5)   Copies of manifests returned to the waste generator
shall be retained for five years and be readily available for review by the
POTW.



   (E)   Alternative treatment.



      (1)   A person commits an offense if the person introduces, or
causes, permits, or suffers the introduction of any surfactant, solvent, or
emulsifier into a grease trap.  Surfactants, solvents, and emulsifiers are
materials which allow grease to pass from the trap into the collection
system, and include but are not limited to enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene,
terpene, and solvents.



      (2)   The use of surfactants or soaps which are incidental to
normal kitchen hygiene operations is an affirmative defense to enforcement of
this section.



(’78 Code, § 17-76) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87; Am. Ord. OR-1760-09,
passed 12-14-09) Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.076  RESPONSIBILITIES OF LIQUID WASTE GENERATOR.



   (A)   A generator of liquid waste shall have all liquid waste
material picked up from his/her premises by a liquid waste transporter who
holds a valid permit from the city, and the liquid waste shall be transported
to an approved site for disposal. This shall include residential sewage.



   (B)   A generator of liquid wastes shall not have hazardous wastes
or liquid waste in combination with hazardous waste removed from his/her
premises by a liquid waste hauler operating under a city permit.



   (C)   A generator shall sign the trip ticket from the transporter
when a load is picked up by the transporter and shall keep a copy of all trip
tickets for a period of five years. The approving authority may inspect these
records during normal business hours.



   (D)   A generator shall do the following.



      (1)   Install or provide a collection device of size and type
specified by approving authority.



      (2)   Maintain the collection device in continuous, proper
operation.



      (3)   Supervise proper cleaning of the collection device.



      (4)   Report spills and accidents involving the collection
device to approving authority within 24-hours.



      (5)   Clean up all spills and accidents immediately and have
material disposed of by permitted transporter by proper means.



      (6)   Commit an offense if he/she allows accumulation of
liquid waste on his/her premises so that rainfall could carry the material to
storm sewers or adjacent property or create a noxious odor or health hazard.



      (7)   Each grease trap pumped shall be fully evacuated unless
the trap volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck in
which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation
capacity so that the trap is fully evacuated within a 24-hour period, in
accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code § 312.143.



   (E)   Cleaning schedules.



      (1)   Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be cleaned as
often as necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not
accumulate to impair the efficiency of the grease trap/interceptor; to ensure
the discharge is in compliance with local discharge limits; and to ensure no
visible grease is observed in discharge.



      (2)   Grease traps and grease interceptors subject to these
standards shall be completely evacuated a minimum of every 180 days, or more
frequently when:



         (a)   Twenty-five percent or more of the wetted height
of the grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the
device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials,
sediment, oils or greases; or



         (b)   The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, O&G, pH, or
other pollutant levels established by the POTW; or



         (c)   If there is a history of non-compliance.



      (3)   In any event, a grease trap and grease interceptor shall
be fully evacuated, cleaned and inspected at least once every 180 days.



(’78 Code, § 17-79) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87; Am. Ord. OR-1760-09,
passed 12-14-09) Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.077  RESPONSIBILITIES OF LIQUID WASTE DISPOSERS.



   (A)   A liquid waste disposer commits an offense if he/she allows
accumulation of liquid waste on his/her premises so that rainfall could carry
the material to storm sewers or adjacent property or create a noxious odor or
health hazard.



   (B)   A liquid waste disposer shall do the following.



      (1)   Obtain and maintain compliance with all licenses and/or
permits required by local, state or federal law.



      (2)   Accept waste only from a permitted transporter.



      (3)   Maintain trip ticket copies for a period of two years.



      (4)   Accept only those classes of wastes authorized by
license or permit.



      (5)   Make available all records required to be kept for
inspection by the approving authority during normal business hours.



('78 Code, § 17-80) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87) Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.078  UNSANITARY ACCUMULATION OF LIQUID WASTE.



   A person commits an offense if he/she allows liquid waste that emits
noxious or offensive odors or is unsanitary or injurious to public health to
accumulate upon property under his/her control.



('78 Code, § 17-77) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87) Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.079  IMPROPER DISPOSAL.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he/she unloads or offers for
sale or exchanges liquid waste, except at a place permitted by the city, the
state or the federal government.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if he/she deposits or discharges
liquid waste onto a street or into a storm or sanitary sewer or an area that
drains into the storm sewer system.



   (C)   A person commits an offense if he/she fails to have a grease,
sand/grit trap cleaned a minimum of once every six months, or more frequently
as determined by the City of Mansfield Utility Field Operations Department.



(’78 Code, § 17-78) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87; Am. Ord. OR-1760-09,
passed 12-14-09) Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.080  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The approving authority may promulgate rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter and protect the
public from health and safety hazards. The approving authority may undertake
such immediate actions as may be necessary to protect the public from health
and safety hazards. The approving authority may amend any permit issued
hereunder to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations.



('78 Code, § 17-81) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87) Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.081  DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The approving authority may deny a permit if it is determined
that any applicant is not qualified under §§ 51.071 through 51.076 and may
suspend or revoke a permit if it is determined that a permittee meets any of
the following conditions.



      (1)   Is not qualified under §§ 51.071 through 51.076 of
this subchapter.



      (2)   Has violated a provision of this subchapter.



      (3)   Has failed to pay a required fee.



      (4)   Has failed to comply with maintenance or inspection
requirements.



      (5)   Has failed to deliver trip tickets to the approving
authority.



   (B)   After suspension under this section, a permittee may file a
request for reinstatement of the permit. When the approving authority
determines that the permittee is again qualified, all violations have been
corrected, precautions have been taken to prevent future violations and all
required fees have been paid, he/she shall reinstate the permit.



   (C)   The approving authority may revoke for a period of one year or
less all permits held by a liquid waste transporter if the transporter or an
employee of the transporter violates any of the provisions of this
subchapter, any rule or regulation promulgated by the approving authority, or
applicable provisions of this code or state law.



   (D)   A permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked shall not
collect, transport or dispose of any waste materials within the jurisdiction
of the approving authority.



('78 Code, § 17-82) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87) Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.082  APPEAL.



   If the approving authority denies the issuance of a permit or revokes a
permit, he/she shall send the applicant, or permit holder, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, written notice of his/her action and the right to
an appeal. The applicant, or permit holder, may appeal the decision of the
approving authority in accordance with the code of appeal in the city.



('78 Code, § 17-83) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87)



§ 51.083  LEGAL RESPONSIBILITIES; VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by natural persons,
it is the intent of this subchapter to hold a corporation or association
legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting in
behalf of a corporation or association and within the scope of his/her office
of employment.



   (B)   Any person or establishment found to be in violation of any
provisions of this subchapter shall become liable to the city for any
expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city for reason of appropriate
cleanup and proper disposal of the waste materials. Additionally, an
administrative fee equal to one-half of assessed cleanup costs shall be
levied by the city against the guilty person.



(’78 Code, § 17-84 (a) and (c)) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87; Am. Ord.
OR-1760-09, passed 12-14-09)



IMPACT FEES



§ 51.095  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADVISORY COMMITTEE.  The City Planning and Zoning Commission.



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any water supply, treatment and distribution
facility; or wastewater collection and treatment facilities having a life
expectancy of three or more years and which are owned and operated by or on
behalf of the city.



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.  The plans adopted by this subchapter that
identify water and sewer capital improvements or facility expansions for
which impact fees are assessed.



   EQUIVALENT SERVICE UNIT (ESU).  A unit that consumes the amount of
water or discharges the amount of wastewater that a standard residential unit
would (1.00 ESU per connection).



   IMPACT FEE.  The charge or assessment imposed by this subchapter
against new development in order to generate revenue for funding or recouping
the costs of capital improvements or facility expansions necessitated by and
attributable to the new development.



   LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.  The description of the service area and
projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities and population in
the service area over a ten-year a period.



   NEW DEVELOPMENT.  The subdivision of land; the construction,
reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation
or enlargement of any structure; or any use or extension of the use of land;
any of which increases the number of service units.



   OFFSET.  The amount of the reduction of a captial recovery fee
designed to fairly reflect the value of system-related facilities, pursuant
to rules herein established or administrative guidelines, provided and funded
by a developer pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations or requirements.



   SERVICE AREA.  The area within the corporate boundaries or
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city to be served by the capital
improvements or facilities expansions specified in the capital improvements
plan, such area being specified by this subchapter by a map attached to and
included within the land use assumptions and capital improvements plan being
approved hereby.



   SERVICE UNIT.  The standardized measure of consumption, use,
generation or discharge attributable to an individual unit of development.



   SITE-RELATED FACILITY.  Improvement or facility which is for the
primary use or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary
purpose of safe and adequate provision of water or wastewater to serve the
new development, and which is not included in the Capital Improvements Plans
for Water and Sewer Impact Fees, and for which the developer or property
owner is solely responsible under subdivision and other applicable
regulations.



   SYSTEM-RELATED FACILITY.  A capital improvement or facility expansion
which is designated in the Capital Improvements Plans for Water and Sewer
Impact Fees and which is not a site-related facility.  A SYSTEM-RELATED
FACILITY may include a capital improvement which is located offsite, within
or on the perimeter of the development site.



   TAP PURCHASE.  The filing with the city of a written application for a
water or wastewater tap and the acceptace of applicable fees by the city. 
The term TAP PURCHASE shall not be applicable to a meter purchased for and
exclusively dedicated to fire protection.



('78 Code, § 17-85) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90; Am. Ord. 1587, passed 8-29-06)



§ 51.096  APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS.



   No application for new development shall be approved within the city
without assessment of an impact fee pursuant to this subchapter, and no
building permit shall be issued unless the applicant has paid the impact fee
imposed by and calculated under this subchapter.



('78 Code, § 17-86) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90)



§ 51.097  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN FOR WATER IMPACT FEE.



   The Capital Improvement Plan in the Water and Wastewater Impact Fee
Report, dated June 2011, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference for
all purposes.



(’78 Code, § 17-87) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90; Ord. 1078, passed 6-12-95;
Am. Ord. 1213, passed 7-13-98; Am. Ord. 1365, passed 8-27-01; Am. Ord. 1587,
passed 8-29-06; Am. Ord. OR-1811-11, passed 8-8-11)



§ 51.098  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN FOR SEWER IMPACT FEE.



   The Capital Improvement Plan in the Water and Wastewater Impact Fee
Report, dated June 2011, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference for
all purposes.



(’78 Code, § 17-88) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90; Ord. 1078, passed 6-12-95;
Am. Ord. 1213, passed 7-13-98; Am. Ord. 1365, passed 8-27-01; Am. Ord. 1587,
passed 8-29-06; Am. Ord. OR-1811-11, passed 8-8-11)



§ 51.099  LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.



   The Land Use Assumptions in the Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Report,
dated June 2011, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference for all
purposes.



(’78 Code, § 17-89) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90; Ord. 1078, passed 6-12-95;
Am. Ord. 1213, passed 7-13-98; Am. Ord. 1365, passed 8-27-01; Am. Ord. 1587,
passed 8-29-06; Am. Ord. OR-1811-11, passed 8-8-11)



§ 51.100  IMPACT FEES ASSESSED.



   (A)   The impact fee per equivalent service unit or ESU which is to
paid by each new development within the service area shall be as established
herein and may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   The impact fees due for a new development shall be assessed
prior to or at the time of platting in the case of a new subdivision or, if
new development occurs or is proposed to occur without platting, such fees
shall be assessed at the time of connection to the city's water or sewer
system, and all such fees shall be collected at the time of issuance of a
building permit. Where service is connected without the necessity of a
building permit, all such fees shall be collected at the time of connection
to the city's water or sewer system.



   (C)   For new development platted prior to the adoption of this
subchapter for which no impact fee was charged or assessed prior to June 20,
1987, an impact fee may not be collected under this subchapter for a period
of one year from the date of adoption hereof, provided, however, any other
ordinance of the city requiring dedication of land for public parks or
payment in lieu of the dedication to serve park needs, requiring dedication
of right-of-way or easements, or construction or dedication of on-site water
distribution, wastewater collection or drainage facilities or streets,
sidewalks or curbs necessitated by and attributable to new development; or
fees to be placed in trust for the purpose of reimbursing the city or
developers for oversizing or constructing water or sewer mains or lines shall
remain in full force and effect and not be repealed by the terms of this
subchapter.



   (D)   The maximum assessable impact fee for water supply treatment
and distribution facilities shall be $5,301 per equivalent service unit or
ESU. The amount of the water impact fee to be collected hereunder shall be
$2,600 per equivalent service unit or ESU. The maximum assessable impact fee
for wastewater collection and treatment facilities shall be $1,962 per
equivalent service unit or ESU. The amount of the wastewater impact fee to be
collected hereunder shall be $1,900 per equivalent service unit or ESU. The
amount of each impact fee due shall be determined by multiplying the impact
fee to be collected hereunder by the number of ESU generated by the new
development. The impact fees to be collected hereunder may be increased by
adoption of an ordinance to an amount not to exceed the maximum assessable
impact fee.



   (E)   For new development that is part of a valid preliminary or
final plat approved prior to the adoption or revision of any impact fees, the
new or revised impact fees shall not be collected on any lot for which a
valid building permit is issued within one year after the date of adoption of
the new or revised impact fee; provided, however, lots in such development
shall continue to be subject to any previously assessed impact fees.



(’78 Code, § 17-90) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90; Ord. 1078, passed 6-12-95;
Am. Ord. 1213, passed 7-13-98; Am. Ord. 1365, passed 8-27-01; Am. Ord. 1587,
passed 8-29-06; Am. Ord. OR-1811-11, passed 8-8-11)



§ 51.101  IMPACT FEES COLLECTED.



   (A)   All funds collected through the adoption of this subchapter
shall be deposited in interest bearing accounts clearly identifying the
category of capital improvements or facility expansions within the service
area for which these fees were adopted. Interest earned on such fees is
considered funds of the account on which it is earned and is subject to all
restrictions placed on the use of these fees.



   (B)   Impact fee funds may be spent only for the purposes for which
the fee was imposed.



   (C)   The records of account into which impact fees are deposited
shall be open for public inspection and copying during ordinary business
hours of the city.



   (D)   Impact fees may be assessed to areas where services are not
currently available, but impact fees may not be collected under this
subchapter as follows.



      (1)   Unless the collection is made to pay for a capital
improvement or facility expansion that has been identified, and the city
commits to commence construction within two years of such capital improvement
or facility expansion, and commits to have the service available within a
reasonable period of time not to exceed five years.



      (2)   Unless the city agrees that an owner of a new
development may construct or finance the capital improvements or facility
expansions and agrees that the costs incurred or funds advanced will be
credited against the impact fees otherwise due from the new development or
the city agrees to reimburse the owner for such costs from impact fees paid
from other new developments that will use such capital improvements or
facility expansions.



      (3)   Unless the owner voluntarily requests the city to
reserve capacity to serve future development and the city and the owner enter
into a valid written agreement.



('78 Code, § 17-91) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90)



§ 51.102  ADVISORY COMMITTEE; DUTIES.



   The Advisory Committee shall file semi-annual reports with respect to
the progress of the capital improvements plan and report to the City Council
any perceived inquisites in implementing the plan or imposing the impact
fees. The committee shall advise the City Council of the need to update or
revise the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan and impact fees.
The procedural rules of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
applicable to the Advisory Committee in carrying out these functions.



('78 Code, § 17-92) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90)



§ 51.103  FAILURE TO PAY IMPACT FEE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct
any building or structure on any lot or land on which an impact fee is due
under this subchapter or prior ordinances without first paying the impact fee
to the city.



('78 Code, § 17-93) (Ord. 1078, passed 6-12-95) Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.104  OFFSETS AGAINST IMPACT FEES.



   (A)   The city may offset the present value of any system-related
facilities, pursuant to rules established in this section, which have been
dedicated to and have been received by the city, including the value of
capital improvements constructed pursuant to an agreement with the city as
set forth in § 51.105, against the value of the impact fee due for that
category of capital improvement.



   (B)   All offsets against impact fees shall be subject to the
following limitations and shall be granted based on this chapter and
additional standards promulgated by the city, which may be adopted as
administrative guidelines.



      (1)   No offset shall be given for the dedication or
construction of site-related facilities.



      (2)   The unit costs used to calculate the offsets shall not
exceed those assumed for the capital improvements included in the Capital
Improvements Plans for the category of facility for which the impact fee is
imposed.



      (3)   If an offset applicable to a plat has not been exhausted
within ten years from the date of the acquisition of the first tap purchase
made after the effective date of this chapter or within such period as may be
otherwise designated by contract, such offset shall lapse.



      (4)   In no event will the city reimburse the property owner
or developer for an offset when no impact fees for the new development can be
collected pursuant to this chapter or for any value exceeding the total
impact fees due for the development for that category of capital improvement,
unless otherwise agreed to by the city.



   (C)   An applicant for new development must apply for an offset
against impact fees due for the development either at or before the time of
fee payment, unless the city agrees to a different time.  The applicant
shall file a petition for offsets with the city on a form provided for such
purpose.  The contents of the petition shall be established by
administrative guidelines.  The city must provide the applicant, in writing,
with a decision on the offset request, including the reasons for the
decision.  The decision shall specify the maximum value of the offset which
may be applied against an impact fee, which value and the date of the
determination shall be associated with the plat for the new development.



   (D)   The available offset associated with the plat shall be applied
against an impact fee in the following manner:



      (1)   Such offset shall be prorated equally among all
equivalent service units (ESU's) associated with the plat and remain
applicable to such ESU's, to be applied at time of filing and acceptance of
an application for a building permit or tap purchase, as appropriate, against
impact fees due.



      (2)   If the total number of ESU's used by the city in the
original offset calculation described in division (D)(1) is eventually
exceeded by the number of total ESU's realized by the actual development, the
city may, at its sole discretion, collect the full impact fee exclusive of
any associated offset for the excess ESU's.



      (3)   At its sole discretion, the city may authorize
alternative offset agreements upon petition by the owner in accordance with
guidelines promulgated by the city.



(Ord. 1587, passed 8-29-06)



§ 51.105  AGREEMENT FOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.



   The City Council may authorize the owner of a new development to
construct or finance some of the public improvements identified in the
Capital Improvement Plans for Water and Sewer Impact Fees. In the case of
such approval, the property owner must enter into an agreement with the city
prior to fee collection. The agreement shall be on a form approved by the
city, and shall establish the estimated cost of improvement, the schedule for
initiation and completion of the improvement, a requirement that the
improvement shall be completed to city standards, and any other terms and
conditions the city deems necessary.  The Director of Public Works shall
review the improvement plan, verify costs and time schedules, determine if
the improvement is contained in the Capital Improvement Plans for Water and
Sewer Impact Fees, and determine the method and timing of reimbursing the
owner for construction costs from impact fee or other revenues.



(Ord. 1587, passed 8-29-06)



§ 51.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is set forth shall be punished as set forth in § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   A person who continues a prohibited discharge or
otherwise violates the provisions of §§ 51.010 et seq. is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000
for each act of violation and for each day of violation.



      (2)   In addition to proceeding under authority of division
(A)(1) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and
civil remedies, including injunctive relief, to which it is entitled under
authority of statutes or ordinances against a person continuing prohibited
discharges.



('78 Code, § 17-44)



   (C)   Any person, operator or owner who shall violate any provision
of §§ 51.070 et seq., shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, and each
violation and each day a violation continues, shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punished accordingly.



('78 Code, § 17-84(b))



(Ord. 328, passed 6-13-77; Ord. 519, passed 11-28-83; Ord. 763, passed
12-28-87; Ord. 773, passed 4-11-88)



CHAPTER 52:  STORMWATER QUALITY PROTECTION



Section



General Provisions



   52.01   Adoption and title



   52.02   Findings of fact



   52.03   Statement of purpose



   52.04   Lands to which this chapter applies



   52.05   Related ordinances



   52.06   Incorporation of federal and state statutes, rules, and
regulations



Discharges to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System



   52.15   Applicability



   52.16   Administration



   52.17   Acronyms



   52.18   Definitions



   52.19   General prohibition



   52.20   General prohibition exemptions



   52.21   Specific prohibitions and requirements



   52.22   Acts adversely affecting water quality



   52.23   Notification of release and cleanup



   52.24   Watercourse protection



   52.25   Topsoil requirements



Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activity



   52.35   Applicability



   52.36   Access to facilities



   52.37   Non-permitted discharges prohibited



   52.38   Submission of notice of intent, construction site notice,
and notice of termination to the city



   52.39   Damage to stormwater control measures



   52.40   Discharges associated with construction activity



   52.41   Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans



Nuisances, Right of Entry, Enforcement, and Appeals



   52.50   Nuisances



   52.51   Right of entry



   52.52   Citizen reports of violations



   52.53   Administrative enforcement remedies



   52.54   Right to reconsideration, hearing, and appeal



   52.55   Remedies nonexclusive



 



   52.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.01  ADOPTION AND TITLE.



   This chapter is hereby adopted and shall be known as the "Stormwater
Quality Protection Ordinance" of the City of Mansfield, Texas.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   Reports from the United States Environmental Protection Agency's Nation
Water Quality Inventory to Congress and the public indicate polluted urban
runoff as one of the primary reasons for impaired water bodies throughout the
nation. Most of the city is located within the Dallas/Fort Worth Urbanized
Area. In order to protect the quality of water resources, preserve the
quality of life for residents, and protect the health and safety of residents
and the environment it is necessary to establish permissible discharges,
including discharges from construction activity, to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) and waterways within the city.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   This chapter sets forth the minimum performance standards necessary to
protect water quality within the city and to establish the various public and
private responsibilities for providing this protection. Further, it is the
purpose of this chapter to:



   (A)   To maintain and improve the quality of surface water and
groundwater within the city;



   (B)   To prohibit the illicit connections and discharges of
pollutants from any user into the MS4 and natural waters within the city;



   (C)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this chapter;



   (D)   To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the
improper discharge of hazardous substances, petroleum products, household
hazardous waste, industrial waste, sediment from construction sites,
pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, and other contaminants into the storm
sewers and natural waters of the city;



   (E)   To facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and
permits by owners and operators of industrial and construction sites within
the city;



   (F)   To enable the city to comply with all federal and state laws
and regulations applicable to stormwater discharges.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.04  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   All lands within the City of Mansfield, Texas are subject to the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.05  RELATED ORDINANCES.



   In addition to this chapter, the city has other ordinances, regulations
and specifications possibly affecting water quality. In the event of an
irreconcilable conflict between this chapter and any other ordinances of the
city, the most restrictive ordinance shall govern.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.06  INCORPORATION OF FEDERAL AND STATE STATUTES, RULES, AND
REGULATIONS.



   A reference within this chapter to a federal or state statute, rule, or
regulation includes all amendments to such statute, rule, or regulation made
after the adoption of the chapter.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



DISCHARGES TO THE MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM



§ 52.15  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter shall apply to all water entering the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) generated on any developed or undeveloped
lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.16  ADMINISTRATION.



   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works or his or her
authorized representatives to administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.17  ACRONYMS.



   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:



   (A)   BMP - Best management practices;



   (B)   BTEX - Benzene, Toluene, Ethylbenzene, and Xylene;



   (C)   CFR - Code of Federal Regulations;



   (D)   EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency;



   (E)   HHW - Hazardous household waste;



   (F)   mg/l - Milligrams per liter;



   (G)   MS4 - Municipal separate storm sewer system;



   (H)   NOI - Notice of intent;



   (I)   NOT - Notice of termination;



   (J)   NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System;



   (K)   ppb - Parts per billion;



   (L)   PST - Petroleum storage tank;



   (M)   RPE - Registered professional engineer;



   (N)   RQ - Reportable quantity;



   (O)   SWPPP - Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan;



   (P)   TPDES - Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System;



   (Q)   TPH - Total petroleum hydrocarbons;



   (R)   USC - United States Code.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.18  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGRICULTURAL STORMWATER RUNOFF.  Any stormwater runoff from orchards,
cultivated crops, pastures, range lands, and other non-point source
agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding
operations as defined in 40 CFR 122.23 or discharges from concentrated
aquatic animal production facilities as defined in 40 CFR 122.24.



   AQUATIC MONITORING ORGANISM.  The Fathead minnow Pimephales promelas,
the bacterium Vibrio ficheri, or the daphnid Ceriodaphnia dubia, or suitable
equivalent species.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP).  Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of the MS4. BMPs also include
treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from
raw material storage.



   CELLAR DIRT.  Construction site waste materials, such as natural rock
and soil overburden.



   CFR.  The Code of Federal Regulations.



   CITY.  The City of Mansfield, Texas.



   CLASSIFIED SEGMENT.  Refers to a water body that is listed and
described in Appendix A or Appendix C of the Texas Surface Water Quality
Standards, at 30 TAC § 307.10.



   COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE.  A construction activity that is
completed in separate stages, separate phases, or in combination with other
construction activities. A common plan of development or sale is identified
by the documentation for the construction project that identifies the scope
of the project, and may include plats, blueprints, marketing plans,
contracts, building permits, a public notice or hearing, zoning requests, or
other similar documentation and activities.



   CONTAMINATED.  Containing a harmful quantity of any substance.



   CONTAMINATION.  The presence of or entry into a public water supply
system, the MS4, of any substance which may be deleterious to the public
health and/or the quality of the water.



   COSMETIC CLEANING.  Cleaning done for cosmetic purposes. It does not
include industrial cleaning, cleaning associated with manufacturing
activities, hazardous or toxic waste cleaning, or any cleaning otherwise
regulated under federal, state, or local laws.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the Department of Public Works or the
Director's authorized representatives.



   DISCHARGE.  Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stonnwater,
or any other substance whatsoever into the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4).



   DISCHARGER.  Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise
responsible for a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a
construction-site or industrial facility.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA.  The United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or any duly authorized official of said
agency.



   FACILITY.  Any facility, including construction sites, required by the
Federal Clean Water Act to have a permit to discharge stonnwater associated
with industrial activity.



   FIRE CODE.  The "Fire Prevention and Protection" chapter of the city
code.



   FIRE DEPARTMENT.  The Fire Department of the city, or any duly
authorized representative thereof.



   FIRE PROTECTION WATER.  Any water, and any substances or materials
contained therein, used by any person other than the Fire Department to
control or extinguish a fire.



   HARMFUL QUANTITY.  The amount of any substance that will cause
pollution of the MS4, or that will cause lethal or sub-lethal adverse effects
on representative, sensitive aquatic monitoring organisms belonging to the
city, upon their exposure to samples of any discharge into waters in the MS4.



   MOBILE COMMERCIAL COSMETIC CLEANING.  Power washing, steam cleaning,
and any other mobile cosmetic cleaning operation, of vehicles and/or exterior
surfaces, engaged in for commercial purposes.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4).  The system of
conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) owned and operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or
conveying stormwater, and which is not used for collecting or conveying
sewage.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES).  The national
program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating,
monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment
requirements, under sections 307, 402, 318, and 405 of the federal Clean
Water Act.



   NOI.  Notice of intent.



   NON-POINT SOURCE.  Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is
not a "point source," Notice of intent means the notice of intent that is
required by the NPDES Stormwater  Multi-Sector General Permit, the EPA
Region 6 NPDES Stormwater Construction general permit, or any similar general
permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial or construction
activity that is issued by the EPA or the TCEQ.



   NPDES.  The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



   NPDES PERMIT.  A permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable
on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.



   OPERATE.  Drive, conduct, work, run, manage, or control.



   OPERATOR.  The party or parties that either individually or taken
together meet the following two  criteria:



      (1)   They have operational control over the site
specifications (including the ability to make modifications in
specifications); and



      (2)   They have the day-to-day operational control of those
activities at the site necessary to ensure compliance with SWPPP requirements
and any permit conditions.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.



   pH.  The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the
concentration in grams per liter of hydrogen ions; a measure of the acidity
or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.



   POINT SOURCE.  Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit,
well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding
operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating
craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not
include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater
runoff.



   POLLUTANT.  Dredged spoil; solid waste; incinerator residue; sewage;
garbage; sewage sludge; filter backwash; munitions; chemical wastes;
biological materials; toxic materials; radioactive materials; heat; wrecked
or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt; and industrial, municipal,
recreational, and agricultural waste discharged into water or into the
municipal separate storm sewer system.



   POLLUTION.  The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or
biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water of the state or
water of the United States, that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or
injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public
health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment
of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.



   RELEASE.  Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into
ground-water, subsurface soils, surface soils, the MS4.



Stare means the State of Texas.



   STORMWATER.  Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snow
melt.



   SWPPP.  Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.



   TAC.  The Texas Administrative Code.



   TEXAS POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM.  The program delegated
to the State of Texas by the EPA pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b).



   TPDES.  The Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



   TSS (TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS).  Solids that either float on the
surface, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and
which are generally removable by a laboratory filtration device. TSS is
expressed in milligrams per liter.



   UNCONTAMINATED.  Not containing a harmful quantity of any substance.



   USC.  United States Code.



   WASTEWATER.  Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.



   WATERS OF THE STATE. Ground-water, percolating or otherwise, lakes,
bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks,
wetlands, marshes, inlets, canals inside the territorial limits of the state,
and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or
non-navigable, and including the bed and banks of all watercourses and bodies
of surface water that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state
or inside the jurisdiction of the state.



   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES.  All waters which are currently used,
were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign
commerce; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other
waters the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could
affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise
defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries
of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters
identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition
of WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES at 40 CFR § 122.2; but not including any
waste treatment systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the
requirements of the federal Clean Water Act.



   WETLAND.  An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or
ground-water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. WETLANDS generally include
swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.19  GENERAL PROHIBITION.



   A person commits an offense if the person introduces or causes to be
introduced into the MS4 any discharge that is not composed entirely of
stormwater.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.20  GENERAL PROHIBITION EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for a
violation of § 52.03 of this chapter that the discharge was composed
entirely of one or more of the following categories of discharges:



      (1)   A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with,
an NPDES and/or TPDES permit (other than the NPDES and/or TPDES permit for
discharges from the MS4);



      (2)   A discharge or flow resulting from firefighting by the
Fire Department:



      (3)   A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does
not contain oil or hazardous substances or materials that the Fire Code
requires to be contained and treated prior to discharge, in which case
treatment adequate to remove harmful quantities of pollutants must have
occurred prior to discharge;



      (4)   A discharge from a fire hydrant flushing;



      (5)   Incidental discharges from water line pressure release
valves;



      (6)   Uncontaminated runoff or return flow from landscape
irrigation, lawn irrigation, and other irrigation utilizing potable water,
groundwater, or surface water sources;



      (7)   Uncontaminated water used for dust control purposes;



      (8)   A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or
natural spring;



      (9)   A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped
groundwater or rising groundwater;



      (10)   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined as
40 C.P.A. 35.2005(20)) to the MS4;



      (11)   Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation
drain, crawl space footing drain, or sump;



      (12)   A discharge or flow from a potable water source not
containing any harmful substance or material from the cleaning or draining of
a storage tank or other container;



      (13)   A discharge or flow from air conditioning condensation
that is unmixed with water from a cooling tower, emissions scrubber,
emissions filter, or any other source of pollutant;



      (14)   A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland;



      (15)   A discharge or flow from water used in street washing
that is not contaminated with any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent,
surfactant, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance;



      (16)   Stormwater runoff from a roof that is not contaminated
by any runoff or discharge from an emissions scrubber, filter, or any other
source of pollutant;



      (17)   Swimming pool water that contains no harmful quantity
of free chlorine (less than 0.5ppm), muriatic acid or other chemical (less
than 20ppm cyanuric acid) used in the treatment or disinfection of the
swimming pool water or in pool cleaning;



      (18)   A discharge of flow from a temporary car wash sponsored
by a civic group, school, religious, and/or nonprofit organization;



      (19)   A discharge of flow from individual residential car
washing activities;



      (20)   Other allowable non-stormwater discharges listed in 40
CFR § 122.26(d)(2)(iv)(B)(1);



      (21)   Non-stormwater discharges that are specifically listed
in the TPDES multi-sector general permit (MSGP) or the TPDES construction
general permit; and



      (22)   Other similar occasional incidental non-stormwater
discharges, unless the TCEQ develops permits or regulation addressing these
discharges.



   (B)   No affirmative defense is available under this section if the
discharge or flow in question has been determined by the Director to be a
source of a pollutant or pollutants to the MS4, written notice of that
determination has been provided to the discharger, and the discharge has
occurred more than 15 days beyond the notice. The correctness of the
Director's determination that a discharge is a source of a pollutant or
pollutants may be reviewed in any administrative or judicial enforcement
proceeding.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.21  SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are
not inclusive of all the discharges prohibited by this chapter.



   (B)   No person shall recklessly introduce or cause to be introduced
into the MS4 any discharge that causes or contributes to causing the city to
violate a water quality standard, the city's TPDES permit, or any other
discharge permit for discharges from its MS4.



   (C)   No person shall dump, spill, pump, pour, empty, discharge,
dispose, recklessly leak, leach or emit, or otherwise introduce or cause to
be introduced any of the following substances into the MS4:



      (1)   Any used motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor
vehicle fluid.



      (2)   Any industrial waste.



      (3)   Any hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste.



      (4)   Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap
waste, or grit trap waste.



      (5)   Any garbage, rubbish, or yard waste, to include leaves
from locations not directly in front of an inlet or natural drainage channel.



      (6)   Any wastewater from a commercial carwash facility; from
any vehicle washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any new or used automobile
or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop,
maintenance facility, or automotive related facility; or from any washing,
cleaning, or maintenance of any business or commercial or public service
vehicle, including a truck, bus or heavy equipment, by a business that
operates more than two such vehicles.



      (7)   Any wastewater from washing, cleaning, de-icing, or
other maintenance of aircraft.



      (8)   Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or
from the washing or other cleaning of a building exterior that contains any
soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other harmful cleaning substance.



      (9)   Any wastewater from commercial floor, rug, or carpet
cleaning.



      (10)   Any wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of
pavement that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent,
degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance;
or any wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of any pavement where
any spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or
hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of the
released material have been previously removed.



      (11)   Any effluent from a cooling tower condenser,
compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions filter or the blowdown from a
boiler.



      (12)   Any commercial runoff or washdown water from any animal
pen, kennel or fowl or livestock containment area.



      (13)   Any filter backwash from a swimming pool or fountain,
without the backwash first being filtered through a vegetated area to remove
any suspended solids.



      (14)   Any discharge from water line disinfection by
superchlorination, or other means, if the total residual chlorine exceeds 75
mg/l of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection.



      (15)   Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous
substances or materials that the Fire Code in this code requires to be
contained and treated prior to discharge, unless treatment adequate to remove
pollutants occurs prior to discharge (this prohibition does not apply to
discharges or flow from firefighting by the Fire Department).



      (16)   Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for
painting vehicles or equipment.



      (17)   Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle wrecking yard.



      (18)   Any substance or material that will damage, block, or
clog the MS4.



      (19)   Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST); any
leachate or runoff from soil contaminated by a leaking PST; or any discharge
of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from the remediation of any such
PST release unless the discharge.



         (a)   Is in compliance with all state and federal
standards and requirements; and



         (b)   Does not contain a harmful quantity of any
pollutant.



      (20)   No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the MS4 any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil or other
material associated with clearing, grading, excavation, or other construction
activities in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by
employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum extent
practicable.



      (21)   No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary
sewage, domestic or industrial, to the MS4, or allow such a connection to
continue.



      (22)   No person shall cause or allow any pavement washwater
from a service station to be discharged into the MS4 unless such washwater
has passed through a properly functioning and maintained, grease, oil, and
sand interceptor before discharge into the MS4.



      (23)   Regulation of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers.



         (a)   Any sale, distribution, application, labeling,
manufacture, transportation, storage, or disposal of a pesticide, herbicide,
or fertilizer must comply fully with all state and federal statutes and
regulations including, without limitation, the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide
and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) and all federal regulations promulgated pursuant
to FIFRA; Chapters 63, 75, and 76 of the Tex. Agric. Code and all state
regulations promulgated pursuant to it; and any other state or federal
requirement.



         (b)   Any license, permit, registration certification,
or evidence of financial responsibility required by state or federal law for
sale, distribution, application, manufacturer transportation, storage, or
disposal of a pesticide herbicide or fertilizer must be presented to the
Director or his or her delegate and any city law enforcement officer for
examination upon request.



         (c)   No person shall use or cause to be used any
pesticide or herbicide contrary to any directions for use on any labeling
required by state or federal statute or regulation.



         (d)   No person shall use or cause to he used any
pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer in any manner that the person knows or
reasonably should know, is likely to cause, or does cause, a harmful quantity
of the pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer to enter the MS4.



         (e)   No person shall dispose of, discard, store, or
transport a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer or a pesticide, herbicide, or
fertilizer container in a manner that the person knows or reasonably should
know is likely to cause or does cause a harmful quantity of the pesticide,
herbicide or fertilizer to enter the MS4.



      (24)   Used-oil regulation.



         (a)   No person shall:



            1.   Discharge used oil into the MS4 or a sewer,
drainage system, septic tank, surface water, groundwater, or water course;



            2.   Knowingly mix or commingle used oil with
solid waste that is to be disposed of in a landfill or knowingly directly
dispose of used oil on land or in a landfill;



            3.   Apply used oil to a road or land for dust
suppression, weed abatement, or other similar use that introduces used oil
into the environment.



         (b)   All businesses that change motor oil for the
public, municipal waste landfills are encouraged to serve as public used oil
collection centers as provided by state statute in § 371.024 of the Tex.
Health & Safety Code.



      (25)   Erosion control. It is unlawful for any person having
control of real property in the city to suffer or permit soil, rock, mud, or
debris to wash, slide, or otherwise be moved from the real property onto any
adjacent property, street, alley, utility facility, right-of-way, or easement
through erosion. Any person in control of real property shall:



         (a)   Prevent soil, mud, rock, or debris from being
deposited on or transported through erosion to any adjacent property, street,
alley, utility facility, right-of-way, or easement;



         (b)   Inspect the property and acquaint himself or
herself with the conditions existing; and



         (c)   Remedy any condition that might allow soil, mud,
rock, or debris to wash, slide, or otherwise be transported to any adjacent
property, street, alley, utility facility, right-of-way, or easement through
erosion.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.22  ACTS ADVERSELY AFFECTING WATER QUALITY.



   It is unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Maintain grease and sand traps in any automotive center,
service station, vehicle maintenance center or vehicle wash operation which
is not connected to the sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Dump excessive grass clippings, leaves, brush or any rubbish
or debris to the curb, gutter, storm inlet, storm drain or water course.



   (C)   Permit crankcase draining, drainage from engine oil filters,
vehicle engine wash, or other oils or oily substances, greases, or like
material to go to or remain in or on any area that may drain to the storm
system or watercourses.



   (D)   Deposit liquid waste, semi-liquid waste, or chemical waste in
any area that may drain to the storm system or watercourses or dispose of
them at any site other than one approved for that purpose.



   (E)   Permit cooling tower, compressor, or boiler blowdown water
that is not clean, untreated water to flow to the storm system or
watercourses.



   (F)   Permit water from nurseries which is used to water plants to
flow to streets and alleys to the extent that a nuisance may be created by
standing water, damage may result to streets or alleys, or the free passage
of foot traffic may be affected.



   (G)   Permit waste water resulting from floor cleaning, rug and
carpet cleaning, and laundering processes to flow to streets and alleys or
into any storm drain or water course or to any place that could threaten
water quality within the MS4.



   (H)   Permit filter backwash from swimming pools and fountains to
drain to the MS4 without the backwash first being filtered through a
vegetated area to remove any suspended solids.



   (I)   Permit liquid wastes from animal pens used for kennels, animal
hospitals, packinghouses, poultry processing plants and dairies to flow to
any area other than the sanitary sewer.



   (J)   Permit unused materials from ready-mix concrete mortar, and
asphalt base delivery trucks to be dumped to any area that may drain to any
stream, watercourse, storm sewer, or sanitary sewer.



   (K)   Permit any commercial vehicle to be washed down at any site
not approved for that purpose, except as authorized within this chapter.



   (L)   Permit waste oil storage drums or any other containers which
are filled or partially filled with waste oil, solvents, or chemicals to
remain in the open or under the eave of a building or structure in such a
manner that the storage vessels may overflow as the result of precipitation
or leak as a result of corrosion or damage.



   (M)   Permit old motors, transmissions, automobile parts, or any
other machinery parts which are coated or partially coated with grease, oil,
or solvents to remain uncovered in the open where portions of the coating
materials may be washed to the storm sewers or water courses from
precipitation.



   (N)   Permit sewage wastes, whether domestic or industrial, to flow
to any area other than a sanitary sewer or approved septic tank.



   (O)   Permit any sanitary sewer pipe to be open. It is an
affirmative defense to this section that the sewer pipe is open while being
actively constructed, cleaned, repaired, or inspected.



   (P)   On any premises he or she manages, owns, leases, or otherwise
has control over, fail to complete repair of all malfunctioning sewer systems
within 72 hours, unless prevented by demonstrable extraneous circumstances,
and complete removal of all residue, and complete treatment of affected areas
with a suitable disinfectant within 24 hours after written notice. Such
notice shall be effective upon the earliest of any of the following:



      (1)   Upon personal service;



      (2)   Upon delivery to the person's office during normal
working hours;



      (3)   Upon posting such notice on the door to the person's
residence or office; or



      (4)   Seventy-two hours after depositing the notice, enclosed
in a postpaid, properly addressed wrapper, in a post office or official
depository under the care and custody of the United States Postal Service.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.23  NOTIFICATION OF RELEASE AND CLEANUP.



   (A)   The person in charge of any vehicle, facility, or other source
of any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging,
escaping, leaching, dumping, disposing, or any other release of any of the
following quantities of any of the following substances that may flow, leach,
enter, or otherwise be introduced into the MS4, shall telephone and notify
the city as soon as practicable concerning the incident:



      (1)   An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity
of any hazardous substance, as established under 40 CFR Part 302;



      (2)   An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity
of any extremely hazardous substance, as established under 40 CFR Part 355;



      (3)   An amount of oil that either:



         (a)   Violates applicable water quality standards; or



         (b)   Causes a film or discoloration of the surface of
the water or an adjoining shoreline or causes a sludge or emulsion to be
deposited beneath the surface of the water or upon an adjoining shoreline; or



      (4)   Any harmful quantity of any pollutant.



   (B)   The immediate notification shall include the following
information:



      (1)   The identity or chemical name of the substance released,
and whether the substance is an extremely hazardous substance, as established
under 40 CFR Part 355;



      (2)   The exact location of the release, including any known
name of the waters involved or threatened and any other environmental media
affected;



      (3)   The time and duration (thus far) of the release;



      (4)   An estimate of the quantity and concentration (if known)
of the substance released;



      (5)   The source of the release;



      (6)   Any known or anticipated health risks associated with
the release and, where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention that
may be necessary for exposed individuals;



      (7)   Any precautions that should be taken as a result of the
release;



      (8)   Any steps that have been taken to contain and clean up
the released material and minimize its impacts; and



      (9)   The names and telephone numbers of the person or persons
to be contacted for further information.



   (C)   Within 14 days following such release, the responsible person
in charge of the vehicle, facility, or other source of the release shall,
unless waived by the city, submit a written report containing each of the
items of information specified above, as well as the following additional
information:



      (1)   The ultimate duration, concentration, and quantity of
the release;



      (2)   All actions taken to respond to, contain, and clean up
the released substances, and all precautions taken to minimize the impacts;



      (3)   Any known or anticipated acute or chronic health risks
associated with the release;



      (4)   Where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention
necessary for exposed individuals;



      (5)   The identity of any governmental/private sector
representatives responding to the release; and



      (6)   The measures taken or to be taken by the responsible
person(s) to prevent similar future occurrences.



   (D)   Any release report required by a state or federal authority
containing the information described above shall be adequate to meet the
reporting requirements for submittal to the city.



   (E)   The notifications required above shall not relieve the
responsible person of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may
be incurred as a result of the release, including any liability for damage to
the city, to natural resources, or to any other person or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the responsible person of any fine, penalty, or
other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this subchapter or to state
or federal law.



   (F)   Any person responsible for any release as described above
shall comply with all state, federal, and any other local law requiring
reporting, cleanup, containment, and any other appropriate remedial action in
response to the release.



   (G)   Any person responsible for a release described in above shall
reimburse the city for any cost incurred by the city in responding to the
release.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.24  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Any person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate, or retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In
addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned
structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will
not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the
watercourse. The property owner, or such person's lessee, shall provide
protection against stream bank erosion by maintaining existing vegetation
adjacent to watercourses.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.25  TOPSOIL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No person shall place fill on a site without:



      (1)   Leveling the fill and providing for vigorous plant
growth immediately following the completion of filling operations;



      (2)   Leveling and covering the area intermittently within 30
days for filling operations that exceed 30 days in duration.



   (B)   It is an affirmative defense of this section that the Director
of Public Works, or an authorized representative, has approved substitution
of an alternative cover that is resistant to erosion.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)  Penalty, see § 52.99



STORMWATER DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY



§ 52.35  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter applies to all sites located within the city that have
stormwater discharges associated with regulated construction activity by
TPDES or NPDES permit requirements, and/or other construction activities
determined by the city to pose a hazard to the quality of water flowing
through the MS4. This includes the construction of an entry/exit location,
drill pad site, and other construction activities as required for exploration
and/or extraction of natural gas, other petroleum products, or any other
minerals within city limits.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.36  ACCESS TO FACILITIES.



   (A)   The Director, or an authorized representative, is authorized
by § 52.51 of this chapter to enter and inspect construction sites subject
to regulation under this subchapter.



   (B)   Site owners and/or operators shall allow the Director of
Public Works, or an authorized representative, ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES or
TPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional
duties as defined by state and federal law.



   (C)   The Director, or authorized representative, shall have the
right to set up on any permitted construction site such devices as are
necessary in the opinion of the Director to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the construction site's stormwater discharge.



   (D)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the site to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the Director, or authorized
representative, and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access
shall be borne by the operator.



   (E)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director, or authorized
representative, access to a permitted construction site are a violation of a
stormwater discharge permit and of this subchapter. A person who is the owner
and/or operator of a construction site with an NPDES or TPDES permit, or site
qualified to be covered by an NPDES or TPDES permit, to discharge stormwater
associated with construction activity commits an offense if the person denies
the Director reasonable access to the permitted construction site for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.



   (F)   If the city has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the Director is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter or any state or federal discharge permit, limitation, or requirement,
or that there is a need to inspect or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this
chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance
of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.37  NON-PERMITTED DISCHARGES PROHIBITED.



   A person who is the owner and/or operator of a construction site
commits an offense if the person discharges, or causes to be discharged,
stormwater associated with construction activity without first having
obtained a NPDES or TPDES permit to do so, unless a permit is not required by
a state or federal requirement.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.38  SUBMISSION OF NOTICE OF INTENT, CONSTRUCTION SITE NOTICE, AND
NOTICE OF TERMINATION TO THE CITY.



   (A)   The owner and/or operator of a large construction site,
greater than five acres or part of a common plan of development greater than
five acres, required to have an NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater
associated with construction activity shall submit a copy of the notice of
intent (NOI) to the city at least 48 hours prior to construction activity
commencing. The owner and/or operator of a small construction site, greater
than one acre but less than five acres and not part of a larger common plan
of development greater than five acres, shall submit a copy of the
construction site notice to the city a minimum of 48 hours before
construction activities begin.



   (B)   These documents may be delivered to the Director either in
person or by mailing it to:



Stormwater Manager



City of Mansfield



1200 E. Broad St.



Mansfield, Texas  76063



   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates a
construction site that is discharging stormwater associated with a regulated
construction activity without having submitted a copy of the notice of intent
to do so to the city.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.39  DAMAGE TO STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURES.



   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to damage, or allow to
be damaged, any temporary or permanent stormwater control measures, through
his or her actions or inaction without promptly restoring the control measure
to an effective and efficient state.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.40  DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.



   (A)   All operators of construction sites shall use the methodology
on best management practices from the most current North Central Texas
Council of Government best management practices for construction activities
manual, or similar approved and accepted best management practices, to
control and reduce the discharge to the MS4 of sediment, silt, earth, soil,
and other material associated with the clearing, grading, excavation, and
other construction activities to the maximum extent practicable. Such best
management practices may include, but not be limited to, the following
measures:



      (1)   Ensuring that existing vegetation is preserved where
feasible and that disturbed portions of the site are stabilized as soon as
practicable in portions of the site where construction activities have
temporarily or permanently ceased. Stabilization measures may include:
temporary seeding, permanent seeding, mulching, geotextiles, sod
stabilization, vegetative buffer strips, protection of trees, preservation of
mature vegetation, and other appropriate measures;



      (2)   Use of appropriate erosion and sediment control measures
installed according to standard or product approved details and properly
maintained and repaired to ensure effective performance at reducing
sedimentation offsite;



      (3)   Use of structural practices to divert flows from exposed
soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants
from the site to the extent feasible;



      (4)   Minimization of the tracking of sediments off-site by
vehicles, the generation of dust, and the escape of other windblown waste
from the site;



      (5)   Prevention of the discharge of building materials,
including cement, lime, concrete, and mortar, to the MS4;



      (6)   Providing general good housekeeping measures to prevent
and contain spills of paints, solvents, fuels, septic waste, and other
hazardous chemicals and pollutants associated with construction, and to
assure proper cleanup and disposal of any such spills in compliance with
state, federal, and local requirements;



      (7)   Provide a location on site, or near site, for personal
and construction waste so as to prevent littering;



      (8)   Implementation of proper waste disposal and waste
management techniques, including covering waste materials, minimizing ground
contact with hazardous chemicals and trash, and keeping trash receptacles off
of paved surfaces, or other locations that drain directly to a storm drain
system or local waterway;



      (9)   Sanitary waste facilities shall be maintained so that
they do not create a hazard to the environment. Sanitary facilities should
not be placed over any paved surfaces;



      (10)   Timely maintenance of vegetation, erosion and sediment
control measures, and other best management practices, in good and effective
operating condition. This includes applying effective stabilization measures
for disturbed areas within 14 days when construction activities have
temporarily or permanently ceased. Areas where construction activities will
begin again within 21 days are not required to install stabilization
measures; and



      (11)   Installation of structural measures during the
construction process to control pollutants in stormwater discharges that will
occur after construction operations have been completed. Structural measures
should be placed on upland soils to the degree attainable. Such installed
structural measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
stormwater detention structures (including wet ponds); stormwater retention
structures; flow attenuation by use of open vegetative swales and natural
depressions; other velocity dissipation devices; infiltration of runoff on
site; and sequential systems which combine several practices. Operators of
construction sites are responsible for the installation and maintenance of
stormwater management measures prior to final stabilization of the site, and
are not responsible for maintenance after stormwater discharges associated
with construction activity have terminated.



   (B)   It is a violation of this chapter if a discharge occurs from a
construction site containing materials other than stormwater and such
discharge and/or materials are allowed to accumulate within the MS4 and such
accumulation persists for a period beyond three days unless greater time is
allowed by the Director of Public Works for removal. This includes discharges
of sediment, to include off-site tracking be vehicles entering and exiting
the site, paints, solvents, cleaners, wind blown debris, or other materials
associated with the construction activity at the site.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.41  STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS.



   (A)   The city may require any plans and specifications that are
prepared for the construction of site improvements to illustrate and describe
the best management practices required within this section that will be
implemented at the construction site. The city may deny approval of any
building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat, site development plan, or
any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to
assume occupancy, on the grounds that the management practices described in
the plans or observed upon a site inspection by the city are determined not
to control and reduce the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other
materials associated with clearing, grading, excavation, and other
construction activities to the maximum extent practicable.



   (B)   Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the
construction site) shall inspect disturbed areas of any construction site
that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials
that are exposed to precipitation, structural control measures, and locations
where vehicles enter or exit the site, in accordance with the inspection
schedule included in the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for the
site. All erosion and sediment control measures and other identified best
management practices shall be observed in order to ensure that they are
operating correctly and are effective in preventing significant impacts to
receiving waters and the MS4. Based on the results of the inspection, best
management practices shall be maintained, repaired, or revised as
appropriate, and as soon as is practicable and maintenance, repair or
revision activities noted in the SWPPP for the site.



   (C)   The city may require changes be made to an owner and/or
operator's SWPPP if, in the best professional judgment of the Director, or
authorized representative, the SWPPP does not comply with the requirements of
the owner and/or operator's NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater
associated with construction activities.



   (D)   The deficiencies in an owner and/or operator's SWPPP will be
provided in writing, and the Director, or an authorized representative, will
give the owner and/or operator a reasonable amount time, not to exceed 14
days, to make the necessary changes in the SWPPP.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



NUISANCES, RIGHT OF ENTRY, ENFORCEMENT, AND APPEALS



§ 52.50  NUISANCES.



   (A)   An actual or threatened discharge to the MS4, that violates or
would violate this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance.



   (B)   A line conveying sewage or designed to convey sewage that is
connected to the MS4 is hereby declared to be a nuisance.



   (C)   Allowing accumulation of litter, yard waste or other solid
waste to enter the MS4 is hereby declared to be a nuisance.



   (D)   Intentional acts causing damage to a temporary or permanent
stormwater control measure is hereby declared to be a nuisance.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.51  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works, or an authorized representative,
may enter premises or vehicles regulated by this chapter at all reasonable
times, whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this chapter, to inspect permits and records required by this
chapter, to collect air, water, waste, or wastewater samples, or whenever
probable cause exists to believe that a violation of this chapter or other
environmental laws exists on such premises.



   (B)   The Director of Public Works, or an authorized representative,
shall first present credentials and demand entry if the premises are
occupied. If the premises are unoccupied, a reasonable attempt to locate the
owner or person in control of the premises and demand entry shall be made.



   (C)   Where premises have security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
person in control of the premises shall make necessary arrangements with its
security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the
Director, or authorized representative, will be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.



   (D)   If entry is denied or if a person in control cannot be
located, the Director, or authorized representative, shall have every
recourse provided by law to secure entry. Such recourse shall include the
right to obtain a search warrant under the guidelines of the Texas Code of
Criminal Procedure; and for the purposes of same, any person with enforcement
authority under this chapter is hereby declared to be a "health officer."



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.52  CITIZEN REPORTS OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   All citizens are encouraged to report to the city any spills,
releases, illicit connections, other instances of anyone discharging
pollutants into the MS4, and any other violation of this chapter of which
they become aware.



   (B)   The city will designate an individual or office within the
Division of Public Works to receive all such citizen reports by telephone, in
writing, and in person. A written record of each citizen report will be
prepared and kept on file for a period of three years, and a copy of the
city's record of the report will be furnished to the reporting citizen upon
request. Also upon request, the city will inform the reporting citizen of any
action undertaken by the city in response to the citizen's report.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.53  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.



   (A)   Notification of violation.  When the Director of Public
Works, or an authorized representative, finds that any person has violated,
or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued
hereunder, the city may serve upon that person a written notice of violation.
Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of
reoccurrence thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be
submitted by the alleged violator to the city. If the alleged violator denies
that any violation occurred or contends that no corrective action is
necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall
be submitted to the city within ten days of receipt of the notice. Submission
of an explanation or plan in no way relieves the alleged violator of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city
to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a notice of violation.



   (B)   Emergency cease and desist orders.



      (1)   When the Director of Public Works, or an authorized
representative, finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or that the
person's past violations are likely to recur, and that the person's
violation(s) have caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge
to the MS4, waters of the state, or waters of the United States which
reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the Director of Public
Works, or an authorized representative, may issue an order to the violator
directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the violator to:



         (a)   Immediately comply with all subchapter
requirements; and



         (b)   Take such appropriate preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
immediately halting operations and terminating the discharge.



      (2)   Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it
under this section shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its
endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately
comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the Director of Public Works, or
an authorized representative, may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize harm to the MS4, waters of the State of Texas, or waters
of the United States, or endangerment to persons or to the environment;
including immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer
connection, or other municipal utility services. The city may allow the
person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, or an authorized
representative, that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further
termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this
chapter. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the city within five days of receipt of the
emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be
a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
violator.



   (C)   Stop work orders.



      (1)   Whenever the Director of Public Works, or an authorized
representative, finds that any operator of a facility, to include a
construction site, has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this chapter, or any permit or order issued thereunder, the Director, or an
authorized representative, may order that a stop work order be issued to the
operator, posted at the facility, and distributed to all city departments and
divisions whose decisions affect any activity at the site.



      (2)   Unless express written exception is at issuance, the
stop work order shall prohibit any further construction activity at the
entire site and shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city
associated with a building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat approval,
site development plan approval, or any other city approval necessary to
commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the site.



      (3)   A person receiving an order under this section may file
a written notice of appeal with the Director of Public Works, no later than
the tenth day after receipt of the order. Such notice shall include an
explanation as to why the person believes the enforcement action should not
be taken.



      (4)   Issuance of a stop work order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.



   (D)   Nuisance abatement.



      (1)   Unless specifically stated otherwise, any nuisance as
defined within this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance if it exists within
the corporate limits of the city or within 5,000 feet of such limits. The
Director of Public Works, or an authorized representative, may give notice to
cease, abate, remove or otherwise remedy a nuisance immediately to:



         (a)   The owner of property upon which a nuisance is
located or from which a nuisance originated or is emanating. If the person
creating, allowing, or maintaining the nuisance is not the owner of the
property, notice shall also be given to such person.



         (b)   Any person creating, allowing, or maintaining a
nuisance.



      (2)   The notice must be given:



         (a)   Personally to the owner/person in writing; or



         (b)   By letter addressed to the owner/person at the
owner's/person's post office address and sent certified mail, return receipt
requested. However, if personal or certified mail service cannot be obtained
or the owner's/person's post office address is unknown, notice may be given:



            1.   By publication in the official newspaper of
the city at least twice within ten consecutive days;



            2.   By posting the notice on or near the front
door of each building on the property to which the nuisance relates; or



            3.   By posting the notice on a placard attached
to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the nuisance
relates, if the property contains no buildings.



      (3)   The notice may order the owner/person to undertake and
implement any appropriate action:



         (a)   To remediate and/or abate any adverse effects of
the nuisance upon the MS4, the waters of the state, the waters of the United
States, or any other aspect of the environment; and/or



         (b)   To restore any part of the MS4, the waters of the
state, the waters of the United States, or any other aspect of the
environment that has been harmed.



      (4)   Such remedial, abatement, and restoration action may
include, but not be limited to:



         (a)   Monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the
adverse effects and determination of the appropriate remedial, abatement,
and/or restoration action;



         (b)   Confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment, and
disposal of any discharged or released pollution or contamination;



         (c)   Prevention, minimization, and/or mitigation of any
damage to the public health, welfare, or the environment that may result from
the nuisance; and



         (d)   Restoration or replacement of city property or
natural resources damaged by the nuisance.



   (E)   The notice may direct that the remediation, abatement, and/or
restoration be accomplished on a specified compliance schedule and/or be
completed within a specified period of time. An order issued under this
section does not relieve the violator of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation.



   (F)   If the owner/person does not comply with the notice within ten
days of service, the Director may enter any public or private property
containing the nuisance and do any work necessary to abate the nuisance,
except the demolition of buildings.



   (G)   If the immediate abatement of the nuisance is deemed necessary
by a Director to protect the environment or the public health, safety, or
welfare from an imminent and substantial endangerment, such Director may,
without complying with the notice provisions of this section or without
waiting the ten-day period, enter the subject property and do or cause to be
done any work necessary to abate the nuisance and remediate and restore the
environment.



   (H)   After abating the nuisance, the Director may inform the
owner/person in a notice sent certified mail, return receipt requested, that
if the owner/person commits another violation of the same kind or nature that
poses a danger to the environment or to the public health and safety on or
before the first anniversary date of the original notice, the city may
without further notice correct the violation at the owner's expense and
assess the expense against the owner's property.



   (I)   All costs incurred by the city to abate a nuisance and
remediate and restore the environment, including the cost of giving notice as
required, shall be initially paid by the city and charged to the owner of the
property.



   (J)   To obtain a lien against the property, the Director causing
the abatement shall file a statement of expenses with the County Clerk for
the county in which the property is located. The lien statement shall state
the name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property.
The lien shall be security for the costs incurred and interest accruing at
the rate of 10% on the amount due from the date of payment by the city.



   (K)   The lien is inferior only to:



      (1)   Tax liens; and



      (2)   Liens for street improvements.



   (L)   A lien may not be filed against real estate protected by the
homestead provisions of the Texas Constitution.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.54  RIGHT TO RECONSIDERATION, HEARING, AND APPEAL.



   (A)   Reconsideration and hearing.



      (1)   Any person subject to an emergency cease and desist
order under § 52.53(B) above, or a stop work order under § 52.53(C) above
may petition the city to reconsider the basis for the order within ten days
of the affected person's notice of issuance of such an order.



      (2)   Failure to submit a timely written petition for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of any further right to
administrative reconsideration or review of the order.



      (3)   In its petition, the petitioning party must indicate the
provisions of the order objected to, the reasons for the objection(s), any
facts that are contested, the evidence that supports the petitioner's view of
the facts, any alternative terms of an order that the petitioner would
accept, and whether the petitioning party requests a hearing on its petition.



      (4)   The effect of any stop work order shall be stayed
pending the city's reconsideration of the petition, and any hearing thereon,
unless the city expressly makes a written determination to the contrary. The
effectiveness of any emergency cease and desist order under § 52.53(B),
shall not be stayed pending the city's reconsideration, or any hearing
thereon, unless the city expressly and in writing stays the emergency order.



      (5)   Within 15 days of the submittal of a petition for
reconsideration, the city shall either;



         (a)   Grant the petition and withdraw or modify the
order accordingly;



         (b)   Deny the petition, without hearing if no material
issue of fact is raised; or



         (c)   If a hearing has been requested and a material
issue of fact has been raised, set a hearing on the petition.



      (6)   Written notice of any hearing set by the city pursuant
to the 15-day reconsideration period above shall be served on the petitioning
party personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served
on any authorized representative of the petitioning party.



      (7)   An authorized Director of the city may conduct the
hearing and take evidence, or the Director may designate any employee of the
city or any specially-designated attorney or engineer to:



         (a)   Issue in the name of the city notices of hearing
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing;



         (b)   Take evidence; and



         (c)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing,
including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to
the city for action thereon.



      (8)   At any hearing held, testimony taken shall be under oath
and recorded. Any party is entitled to present the party's case or defense by
oral or documentary evidence and to conduct such cross-examination as may be
required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. A transcript will be
made available to any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges
thereof.



      (9)   (a)   After the Director of Public Works has reviewed
the evidence, the Director shall either



            1.   Grant the petition;



            2.   Deny the petition; or



            3.   Grant the petition in part and deny it in
part.



         (b)   The city may modify the order as is appropriate
based upon the evidence and arguments presented at the hearing and the action
of the Director on the petition. Further orders and directives as are
necessary and appropriate may be issued.



   (B)   Appeal.



      (1)   Any person whose petition for reconsideration by the
city has not been granted in its entirety and who remains adversely affected
by the city's order may appeal the action to the City Council by filing a
written appeal with the City Council within ten days of the person's notice
of the city's adverse action on the petition for reconsideration.



      (2)   Failure to submit a timely written appeal to the City
Council shall be deemed to be a waiver of further administrative review.



      (3)   In its written appeal to the City Council, the appealing
party shall indicate the particular provisions of the order objected to, the
particular determinations of the city that are contested, the reasons that
the city's order or determinations are contested, and any alternative order
that the appealing party would accept.



      (4)   The effect of the city's order, as issued or modified,
shall not be stayed pending the appeal to the City Council, unless the City
Council expressly so states.



      (5)   Within 30 days of the submittal of a written appeal to
the City Council, the City Council shall hear and consider the appeal in open
meeting. The appellant shall be notified at least 15 days in advance of the
date and time of the City Council meeting at which the appeal will be heard
and considered.



      (6)   The appellant shall have the right to public appearance
before the City Council to present oral and written statements in support of
the appeal. If the City Council wishes to consider testimony of witnesses or
other evidence beyond that in the record of any hearing before the authorized
Director, the City Council may remand the matter to that Director for the
taking of additional testimony or other evidence.



      (7)   Upon consideration of any written and oral statements
made to the City Council, as well as the record made before the city, the
City Council shall act on the appeal by affirming, vacating, or modifying the
order of the city, or by remanding the matter to the city for further action.



      (8)   Following final action by the City Council on the
appeal, any adversely affected party may challenge such action by the City
Council in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.55  REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive of any
other remedies that the city may have under state or federal law or other
city ordinances. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these
actions against a violator at any time, regardless of timelines identified in
this subchapter in an attempt to gain compliance with this chapter and any
state or federal regulations. The city is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any violator. These actions may be taken
concurrently.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Civil remedies.  Pursuant to § 54.012(5) of the Tex. Loc.
Gov't. Code, the provisions of subchapter B of Ch. 54 of the Tex. Loc. Gov't.
Code are hereby implemented for any violation of this chapter, any such
violation being classified by the Texas Penal Code as a Class C misdemeanor,
so that the city may seek civil penalties and injunctive relief under the
provisions of subchapter B of Ch. 54.



   (B)   Criminal penalties.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person
who has violated any provision of this chapter, or any order issued
hereunder, shall be strictly liable for such violation regardless of the
presence or absence of a culpable mental state and shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not more than $2,000 per violation, per day, or any
greater fine authorized by state statute. Each day, or portion of a day, for
which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.



      (2)   Any person who has knowingly made any false statement,
representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or
other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with,
or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required
under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more
than $2,000 per violation, per day, or any greater fine authorized by state
statute. Each day, or portion of a day, for which a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate violation.



      (3)   In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder,
the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but
not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation,
corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator,
the knowledge, intent, negligence, or other state of mind of the violator,
and any other factor as justice requires.



   (C)   Civil suit under the Texas Water Code.  Whenever it appears
that a violation or threat of violation of any provision of § 26.121 of the
Tex. Water Code, or any rule, permit, or order of the Texas Water Commission,
has occurred or is occurring within the jurisdiction of the city, exclusive
of its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city, in the same manner as the
Texas Water Commission, may have a suit instituted in a state district court
through its City Attorney for the injunctive relief or civil penalties or
both authorized in subsection (a) of § 26.123 of the Tex. Water Code,
against the person who committed or is committing or threatening to commit
the violation. This power is exercised pursuant to § 26.124 of the Tex.
Water Code. In any suit brought by the city under this subsection, the Texas
Water Commission is a necessary and indispensable party.



(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)



CHAPTER 53: DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM



Section



   53.01   Purpose



   53.02   Establishment



   53.03   Definitions



   53.04   Public hearing



   53.05   Drainage charges



   53.06   Drainage problems; city representation; duty of private land
owners and developers



   53.07   Rules for operation and conduct of system



   53.08   Billings, penalties, interest and collection procedures



   53.09   Appeals



   53.10   Interpretation of references to state statutes



§ 53.01  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds it to be in the public interest to protect the
public health and safety from loss of life and property caused by surface
water overflows and surface water stagnation within the boundaries of the
city and further finds that to protect such public interests:



   (A)   The city will establish a schedule of drainage charges against
all real property in the city subject to charges under Tex. Loc. Gov't Code
Ch. 402, subchapter C;



   (B)   The city will provide drainage for all real property in the
city on payment of drainage charges, except such real property which may be
exempted therefrom as authorized by law;



   (C)   The city will offer such drainage service on
non-discriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms.



(Ord. 1103, passed 10-27-95)



§ 53.02  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   The municipal drainage utility system is herewith and hereby
established and declared to be a public utility.  The city shall have full
authority to operate such system pursuant to the authority given and
contained under Texas Constitution Art. XI, § 5, the Mansfield City Charter
and Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Ch. 402, subchapter C, §§ 402.041 et seq.



   (B)   Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Ch. 402, subchapter C, §§ 402.041 et
seq., as now existing or as hereafter amended are herewith adopted.



(Ord. 1103, passed 10-27-95)



§ 53.03  DEFINITIONS.



   Drainage charges shall be levied in accordance with the following
definitions.



   BENEFITTED PROPERTY.  Any residential or commercial property within
the city to which drainage service is made available and which discharges
into a street, creek, river, slough, bayou, culvert, conduit, inlet, or other
channel that forms part of the drainage utility system.



   COMMERCIAL PROPERTY.  Benefitted property that is non-residential
parcels, including commercial, industrial, C1, C2, multi-family and
governmental property.



   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.  Any benefitted property platted, zoned or used
for residential development including single-family, duplex, manufactured
home, mobile home, camper, recreational vehicle, or other improved parcel
upon which buildings contain less than five dwelling units.



   USER.  The person or entity who owns or occupies a benefitted
property, including a commercial tenant. The city may deem the owner of
property to be an "officially-designated user" under certain circumstances.



(Ord. OR-1829-12, passed 1-9-12)



§ 53.04  PUBLIC HEARING.



   Prior to levying any drainage charges for the funding of the drainage
utility system, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on such charges
pursuant to state law.



(Ord. 1103, passed 10-27-95)



§ 53.05  DRAINAGE CHARGES.



   (A)   The following schedule of drainage charges is hereby levied
beginning January 1, 2016, against all real properties within the city,
subject to drainage charges under Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Ch. 552, subchapter
C, subject to the exceptions set forth in the divisions below.



 


Land Use Description

 

Monthly Charge



Single-family home
 
$6.50 per dwelling unit per month


Duplex
 
$6.50 per dwelling unit per month


Manufactured home, mobile home, camper and recreation vehicle
 
$5.00 per dwelling unit per month


School/Church
 
$6.50 per acre per month


All other benefitted properties
 
$53.70 per acre per month



 



   (B)   The City Council may change, adjust, and readjust the rates
and charges established herein for drainage services from time to time



   (C)   The following properties are exempted from drainage charges:



      (1)   Properties owned by the city and other governmental
entities;



      (2)   Properties with proper construction and maintenance of a
wholly sufficient and privately owned drainage system; and no potential
impact on any city-owned or maintained property;



      (3)   Properties held and maintained in its natural state,
until such time that the property is developed and all of the public
infrastructures constructed has been accepted by the city;



      (4)   Any subdivided lot, until a structure has been built on
the lot and the city has approved a final inspection for the structure;



      (5)   Vacant  or  agricultural  properties  without 
any  structures,  pavement, or improvements that create an impervious
surface: and



      (6)   The primary residences of persons who qualify for the
"Over 65 Property Tax Exemption".



   (D)   (1)   Where there is more than one user of a benefitted
property because there are multiple occupants or multiple tenants, the
officially-designated user, or party responsible for payment of the drainage
charges, shall be:



         (a)   The common owner of the subject property or
properties on a benefitted property if multiple utility accounts exist within
a single benefitted property belonging to the same owner;



         (b)   The owner of the property if a benefitted property
has changed occupants or tenants two or more times within a 12-month period.



      (2)   Such designation shall have no effect on responsibility
for payment of water, sewer or solid waste charges.



   (E)   The City Council may change, adjust, and readjust the rates
and charges established herein for drainage services from time to time.



(Ord. 1429, passed 6-9-03; Ord. OR-1799-11, passed 3-21-11; Ord. OR-1829-12,
passed 1-9-12; Ord. O-1973-15, passed 10-26-15)



§ 53.06  DRAINAGE PROBLEMS; CITY REPRESENTATION; DUTY OF PRIVATE LAND
OWNERS AND DEVELOPERS.



   By the creation of the municipal drainage utility system via Ordinance
No. 1103, the establishment and levying of drainage charges via Ordinance No.
1429, and as amended via Ordinance No. OR-1799-11, and the passage of
Ordinance No. 1829-12, the city makes no representation that all of the city
drainage problems will be immediately solved and the City Council is given
full discretion in establishing time and quantitative priorities in expending
funds as they become available to meet the drainage needs of the city on a
reasonable basis. Nor shall the passage of Ordinance Nos. 1103, 1429,
OR-11-1799-11 and OR-1829- 12 be construed to relieve private land owners,
developers, and others from providing drainage improvements pursuant to the
subdivision control ordinance, Chapter 154 of this code, as well as any other
ordinance of the city and the laws of the state which relate to drainage or
drainage improvements.



(Ord. 1429, passed 6-9-03; Ord. OR-1799-11, passed 3-21-11; Ord. OR-1829-12,
passed 1-9-12)



§ 53.07  RULES FOR OPERATION AND CONDUCT OF SYSTEM.



   The City Council may, by subsequent ordinance, adopt rules for the
operation and conduct of the drainage utility system consistent with its
authority and state law.



(Ord. 1429, passed 6-9-03; Ord. OR-1799-11, passed 3-21-11; Ord. OR-1829-12,
passed 1-9-12)



§ 53.08  BILLINGS, PENALTIES, INTEREST AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES.



   Except as may be otherwise provided herein or under a subsequent
amendment to this chapter; billing penalties, interest, and collection
procedures shall be consistent with that of the city's water and sewer
services. Drainage charges, when billed through utility bills, shall be
identified separately on such bills. Delinquent charges shall be collected in
a manner consistent with § 552.050 of the Tex. Loc. Gov't Code. A user of a
benefitted property is responsible for payment of drainage charges. For users
billed by the city for other utility charges, such as water and/or sewer
service, the city may bill the user for drainage charges in the same bill.
Otherwise, the city shall establish a new drainage billing account and the
bill shall be sent to the address provided for the new account. Failure of a
user to pay such charges may result in the discontinuance of city drainage,
water or sewer service.



(Ord. 1429, passed 6-9-03; Ord. OR-1799-11, passed 3-21-11; Ord. OR-1829-12,
passed 1-9-12)



§ 53.09  APPEALS.



   An owner of non-residential property may appeal once per year the
drainage charges by filing a written application with the city's Finance
Department. A calculation will then be made by totaling the impervious area
of the property in question. That total area will be multiplied by the charge
per acre to determine the drainage charges. Any additional improvement would
necessitate a recalculation of the drainage charge.



(Ord. 1429, passed 6-9-03; Ord. OR-1799-11, passed 3-21-11)



§ 53.10  INTERPRETATION OF REFERENCES TO STATE STATUTES.



   Any reference to Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Ch. 402 or any section of the
Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act shall be interpreted to reference Tex.
Loc. Gov't Code Ch. 552 or any section therein.



(Ord. OR-1829-12, passed 1-9-12)



CHAPTER 54: WATER DEMAND MANAGEMENT AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN



Section



General Provisions



   54.01   Introduction and objectives



   54.02   Texas Commission on Environmental Quality rules



Drought Contingency Plan



   54.15   Provisions to inform the public and opportunity for public
input



   54.16   Provisions for continuing public education and information



   54.17   Initiation and termination of drought and emergency response
stages



   54.18   Drought and emergency response stages



   54.19   Procedures for granting variances to the plan



   54.20   Procedures for enforcing mandatory water use restrictions



   54.21   Review and update of Drought Contingency Plan



Water Conservation Plan



   54.35   Introduction and objectives



   54.36   Texas Commission on Environmental Quality rules



   54.37   Water utility profile



   54.38   Specification of water conservation goals



   54.39   Metering, water use records, control of unaccounted water,
and leak detection and repair



   54.40   Continuing public education and information campaign



   54.41   Non-promotional water rate structure



   54.42   Other water conservation measures



   54.43   Implementation and enforcement of the Water Conservation Plan



 



   54.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Rules on
Municipal Water Conservation Plans



   Appendix B:   Form for water utility profile and water conservation
report



   Appendix C:   Letter to Region C Water Planning Group



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 54.01  INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES.



   (A)   This plan addresses all of the current TCEQ requirements for a
drought contingency plan.



   (B)   The purpose of this drought contingency plan is as follows:



      (1)   To protect and preserve public health, welfare, and
safety;



      (2)   To conserve the available water supply in times of
drought and emergency;



      (3)   To maintain supplies for domestic water use, sanitation,
and fire protection;



      (4)   To minimize the adverse impacts of water supply
shortages; and



      (5)   To minimize the adverse impacts of emergency water
supply conditions.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 54.02  TEXAS COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY RULES.



   The TCEQ rules governing development of drought contingency plans for
public water suppliers are contained in Tex. Admin Code Title 30, Part 1,
Chapter 288, Subchapter B, Rule 288.20. For the purpose of these rules, a
drought contingency plan is defined as “a strategy or combination of
strategies for temporary supply and demand management responses to temporary
and potentially recurring water supply shortages and other water supply
emergencies”.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN



§ 54.15  PROVISIONS TO INFORM THE PUBLIC AND OPPORTUNITY FOR PUBLIC INPUT.



   The city will provide opportunity for public input in the development
of this drought contingency plan by the following means: public hearing.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 54.16  PROVISIONS FOR CONTINUING PUBLIC EDUCATION AND INFORMATION.



   (A)   The city will inform and educate the public about the drought
contingency plan by the following means:



      (1)   Preparing a bulletin describing the plan and making it
available at city hall and other appropriate locations;



      (2)   Making the plan available to the public through the
city’s web site (if available);



      (3)   Including information about the drought contingency plan
on the city’s web site (if available); and



      (4)   Notifying local organizations, schools, and civic groups
that staff are available to make presentations on the drought contingency
plan (usually in conjunction with presentations on water conservation
programs).



   (B)   At any time that the drought contingency plan is activated or
the drought stage changes, the city will notify local media of the issues,
the drought response stage, and the specific actions required of the public.
The information will also be publicized on the city’s web site. News
letters and/or notices on bills will also be used as appropriate.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 54.17  INITIATION AND TERMINATION OF DROUGHT AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE
STAGES.



   (A)   Initiation of a drought and emergency response stage.



      (1)   The City Manager or official designee may order the
implementation of a drought response stage or water emergency when one or
more of the trigger conditions for that stage is met. The following actions
will be taken when a drought stage is initiated:



         (a)   The public will be notified through local media
and the city’s web site (if available) as described in § 54.16.



         (b)   Wholesale customers (if any) and TRWD will be
notified by telephone with a follow-up letter, e-mail, or fax that provides
details of the reasons for initiation of the drought stage.



         (c)   If any mandatory provisions of the drought
contingency plan are activated, the city will notify the Executive Director
of the TCEQ within five business days.



      (2)   Drought stages imposed by TRWD action must be initiated
by customers (including indirect customers).



      (3)   For other trigger conditions, the City Manager or
official designee may decide not to order the implementation of a drought
response stage or water emergency even though one or more of the trigger
criteria for the stage are met. Factors which could influence such a decision
include, but are not limited to, the time of the year, weather conditions,
the anticipation of replenished water supplies, or the anticipation that
additional facilities will become available to meet needs. The reason for
this decision should be documented.



   (B)   Termination of a drought stage.



      (1)   The City Manager or official designee may order the
termination of a drought response stage or water emergency when the
conditions for termination are met or at their discretion. The following
actions will be taken when a drought stage is terminated:



         (a)   The public will be notified through local media
and the city’s web site (if available) as described in § 54.16;



         (b)   Wholesale customers (if any) and TRWD will be
notified by telephone with a follow-up letter, e-mail, or fax; and



         (c)   If any mandatory provisions of the drought
contingency plan that have been activated are terminated, the city will
notify the Executive Director of the TCEQ within five business days.



      (2)   The City Manager or official designee may decide not to
order the termination of a drought response stage or water emergency even
though the conditions for termination of the stage are met. Factors which
could influence such a decision include, but are not limited to, the time of
the year, weather conditions, or the anticipation of potential changed
conditions that warrant the continuation of the drought stage. The reason for
this decision should be documented.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 54.18  DROUGHT AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE STAGES.



   (A)   Stage 1, water watch.



      (1)   Triggering and terminating conditions. TRWD has
initiated Stage 1, water watch, which may be initiated by one or more of the
following:



         (a)   Total raw water supply in TRWD western and eastern
division reservoirs drops below 75% (25% depleted) of conservation storage.



         (b)   Water demand for all or part of the TRWD delivery
system exceeds delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate.



         (c)   Water demand is projected to approach the limit of
TRWD’s permitted supply.



         (d)   TRWD’s supply source becomes contaminated.



         (e)   TRWD’s water supply system is unable to deliver
water due to the failure or damage of major water system components.



         (f)   The TRWD General Manager, with the concurrence of
the TRWD Board of Directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of
a Stage 1 drought.



         (g)   The city’s demand exceeds the amount that can be
delivered to customers.



         (h)   City’s water demand for all or part of the
delivery system approaches delivery capacity because delivery capacity is
inadequate.



         (i)   City’s water treatment or distribution system
becomes contaminated.



         (j)   City’s water supply system is unable to deliver
water due to the failure or damage of major water system components.



         (k)   City’s plan may be implemented if other criteria
dictate.



      (2)   Stage 1 may terminate when TRWD terminates its Stage 1
condition, when the circumstances that caused the initiation of Stage 1 no
longer prevail, or at the discretion of the City Manager or official designee.



      (3)   Stage 1 may be terminated when total raw water supply in
TRWD western and eastern division reservoirs reaches 85% for 90 days or lake
levels reach 95%, or at the discretion of the City Manager or official
designee.



      (4)   Goal for use reduction. The goal for water use reduction
under Stage 1, water watch, is to decrease use by 5%. If circumstances
warrant or if required by TRWD, the City Manager or his/her official designee
can set a goal for greater water use reduction.



      (5)   Actions available under Stage 1, water watch. The City
Manager or official designee may implement any action(s) requested by the
Tarrant Regional Water District. In addition, the City Manager or official
designee may order the implementation of any of the other actions listed
below, as deemed necessary. The City of Mansfield must notify TCEQ within
five business days if any mandatory measures are implemented.



         (a)   All water users.



            1.   Limit landscape watering with sprinklers or
irrigation systems at each service address to a twice per week schedule as
determined by the director of utilities.



               a.   Exceptions:



                  i.   Foundations may be watered up to
two hours on any day by handheld hose; or using a soaker hose or drip
irrigation system placed within 24-inches of the foundation that does not
produce a spray of water above the ground.



                  ii.   New plantings, (first year) of
shrubs, and trees may be watered up to two hours on any day by handheld hose,
drip irrigation, or a soaker hose. Tree watering is limited to an area not to
exceed the drip line of a tree.



                  iii.   Twice per week landscape
watering restrictions do not apply to locations using well water or treated
wastewater effluent for irrigation.



                  iv.   Outdoor watering at service
addresses with large multi-station irrigation systems may take place in
accordance with a variance granted by the director of utilities, if the
director determines that a property can not be completely irrigated with an
average of three-quarters of an inch of water in a single day, and that the
property should be divided into sections to be irrigated on different days.



            2.   Establishing new turf is discouraged. If new
hydromulch, grass sod, or grass seed is installed, there are no watering
restrictions for the first 30 days while it is being established. After that,
the watering restrictions set forth in this stage apply.



            3.   Washing of any motor vehicle, motorbike,
boat, trailer, airplane, or other vehicle shall be limited to the use of a
hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle
for quick rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the premises of
a commercial car wash or commercial service station. Further, such washing
may be exempt from these requirements if the health, safety, and welfare of
the public are contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage
trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables.



            4.   Encourage reduction in frequency of draining
and refilling swimming pools.



            5.   Encourage use of Texas native and drought
tolerant plants in landscaping.



         (b)   City and local governments. In addition to actions
listed above, the City Manager or official designee may also:



            1.   Review conditions and problems that caused
Stage 1. Take corrective action.



            2.   Increase public education efforts on ways to
reduce water use.



            3.   Intensify leak detection and repair efforts.



            4.   Audit all city and local government
irrigation systems to ensure proper condition, settings, and operation.



            5.   Identify and encourage voluntary reduction
measures by high-volume water users through water use audits.



            6.   Increase enforcement efforts.



            7.   Landscape watering of municipal parks, golf
courses, and sports fields is restricted to twice per week watering schedule,
per irrigation station.



               a.   Exceptions:



                  i.   Golf courses may water greens and
tee boxes without restrictions, however watering must be done before 10:00
a.m. and after 6:oo p.m.



                  ii.   Watering of athletic fields
(field only, does not include surrounding landscaped areas) used for
organized sports practice, competition, or exhibition events may occur as
necessary to protect the health and safety of the players, staff, or
officials present for athletic events. Encouraged to reduce water use by 5%.



                  iii.   See all water users category
above for rules that apply to facilities with large multi-station irrigation
systems.



            8.   Reduce non-essential water use. As used
herein, non-essential water uses are those that do not have any health or
safety impact and are not needed to meet the core function of the agency.



            9.   Notify wholesale customers of actions being
taken and request them to implement similar procedures.



         (c)   Commercial or industrial.



            1.   All actions listed above for all water users
apply to commercial and industrial users.



            2.   Landscape watering of parks, golf courses,
and sports fields is restricted to twice per week watering schedule, per
irrigation station.



               a.   Exceptions:



                  i.   Golf courses may water greens and
tee boxes without restrictions, however watering must be done before 10:00
a.m. and after 6:00 p.m.



                  ii.   Watering of athletic fields
(field only, does not include surrounding landscaped areas) used for
organized sports practice, competition, or exhibition events may occur as
necessary to protect the health and safety of the players, staff, or
officials present for athletic events. Encouraged to reduce water use by 5%.



                  iii.   See all water users category
above for rules that apply to facilities with large multi-station irrigation
systems.



            3.   Stock at commercial plant nurseries is exempt
from Stage 1 watering restrictions.



            4.   Hotels are encouraged to implement laundry
conservation measures by encouraging patrons to reuse linens and towels.



   (B)   Stage 2, water warning.



      (1)   Triggering and terminating conditions. The TRWD has
initiated Stage 2, water warning, which may be initiated by one or more of
the following:



         (a)   Total raw water supply in TRWD western and eastern
division reservoirs drops below 60% (40% depleted) of conservation storage.



         (b)   Water demand for all or part of the TRWD delivery
system exceeds delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate.



         (c)   Water demand is projected to approach the limit of
TRWD’s permitted supply.



         (d)   TRWD’s supply source becomes contaminated.



         (e)   TRWD’s water supply system is unable to deliver
water due to the failure or damage of major water system components.



         (f)   The TRWD General Manager, with the concurrence of
the TRWD Board of Directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of
a Stage 2 drought.



         (g)   The city’s demand exceeds production capacity of
the amount that can be delivered to customers for one day.



         (h)   City’s demand for all or part of the delivery
system equals or exceeds delivery capacity because delivery capacity is
inadequate.



         (i)   City’s water treatment or distribution system
becomes contaminated.



         (j)   City’s water supply system is unable to deliver
water due to the failure or damage of major water system components.



         (k)   City’s plan may be implemented if other criteria
dictate.



      (2)   Stage 2 may terminate when TRWD terminates its Stage 2
condition, when the circumstances that caused the initiation of Stage 2 no
longer prevail, or at the discretion of the City Manager or official designee.



      (3)   Stage 2 may be terminated when total raw water supply in
TRWD western and eastern division reservoirs reaches 70% for 30 days or lake
levels reach 75%, or at the discretion of the City Manager or official
designee.



      (4)   Goal for use reduction. The goal for water use reduction
under Stage 2, water warning, is to decrease use by 10%. If circumstances
warrant or if required by TRWD, the City Manager or official designee can set
a goal for greater water use reduction.



      (5)   Actions available under Stage 2, water warning. The City
Manager or official designee may implement any action(s) requested by the
Tarrant Regional Water District. In addition, the City Manager or official
designee may order the implementation of any of the other actions listed
below, as deemed necessary. The city must notify TCEQ within five business
days if any mandatory measures are implemented:



         (a)   All water users.



            1.   Landscape watering with sprinklers or
irrigation systems at each service address is limited to once every seven
days. Outdoor watering schedule to be determined by director of utilities.



               a.   Exceptions:



                  i.   Foundations may be watered up to
two hours on any day by handheld hose: or using a soaker hose or drip
irrigation system placed within 24-inches of the foundation that does not
produce a spray of water above the ground.



                  ii.   New plantings, (first year) of
shrubs, and trees may be watered up to two hours on any day by handheld hose,
drip irrigation, or a soaker hose. Tree watering is limited to an area not to
exceed the drip line of a tree.



                  iii.   Once per week outdoor watering
restrictions do not apply to locations using well water or treated wastewater
effluent for irrigation.



                  iv.   Outdoor watering at service
addresses with large multi-station irrigation systems may take place in
accordance with a variance granted by the director of utilities, if the
director determines that a property can not be completely irrigated with an
average of three-quarters of an inch of water in a single day, and that the
property should be divided into sections to be irrigated on different days.



            2.   Public is encouraged to wait until the
current drought or emergency situation has passed before establishing new
landscaping. If new hydromulch, grass sod, or grass seed is installed, there
are no watering restrictions for the first 30 days while it is being
established. After that, the watering restrictions set forth in this stage
apply.



            3.   Prohibit use of water for dust control,
except as required to protect public health.



            4.   Prohibit the operation of ornamental
fountains or ponds that use potable water except where necessary to support
aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a
recirculation system.



            5.   Discourage filling of swimming pools with
automatic valves.



         (b)   City and local governments. In addition to actions
listed above:



            1.   Continue or initiate any actions available
under Stage 1.



            2.   Review conditions or problems that caused
Stage 2. Take corrective action.



            3.   Increase frequency of media releases on water
supply conditions.



            4.   Further accelerate public education efforts
on ways to reduce water use.



            5.   Landscape watering at municipal parks, golf
courses, and sports fields is limited to once every seven days, per
irrigation station.



               a.   Exceptions:



                  i.   Golf courses may water greens and
tee boxes as needed to keep them alive, however watering must be done before
10:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m.



                  ii.   Watering of athletic fields
(field only, does not include surrounding landscaped areas) used for
organized sports practice, competition, or exhibition events may occur as
necessary to protect the health and safety of the players, staff, or
officials present for athletic events. Encouraged to reduce water use by 10%.



                  iii.   See all water users category
above for rules that apply to facilities with large multi-station irrigation
systems.



            6.   Halt non-essential water use. As used herein,
non-essential water uses are those that do not have any health or safety
impact and are not needed to meet the core function of the agency.



            7.   Notify wholesale customers of actions being
taken and request them to implement similar procedures.



         (c)   Commercial or industrial.



            1.   All actions listed above for all water users
apply to commercial and industrial users.



            2.   Landscape watering at parks, golf courses,
and sports fields is limited to once every seven days, per irrigation station.



               a.   Exceptions:



                  i.   Golf courses may water greens and
tee boxes as needed to keep them alive, however watering must be done before
10:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m.



                  ii.   Watering of athletic fields
(field only, does not include surrounding landscaped areas) used for
organized sports practice, competition, or exhibition events may occur as
necessary to protect the health and safety of the players, staff, or
officials present for athletic events. Encouraged to reduce water use by 10%.



                  iii.   See all water users category
above for rules that apply to facilities with large multi-station irrigation
systems.



   (C)   Stage 3, water emergency.



      (1)   Triggering and terminating conditions. The TRWD has
initiated Stage 3, water emergency, which may be initiated by one or more of
the following:



         (a)   Total raw water supply in TRWD western and eastern
division reservoirs drops below 45% (55% depleted) of conservation storage.



         (b)   Water demand for all or part of the TRWD delivery
system exceeds delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate.



         (c)   Water demand is projected to approach or exceed
the limit of TRWD’s permitted supply.



         (d)   TRWD’s supply source becomes contaminated.



         (e)   TRWD’s water supply system is unable to deliver
water due to the failure or damage of major water system components.



         (f)   The TRWD General Manager, with the concurrence of
the TRWD Board of Directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of
a Stage 3 drought.



         (g)   The city’s demand exceeds production capacity of
the amount that can be delivered to customers for two consecutive days.



         (h)   City’s demand for all or part of the delivery
system exceeds delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate.



         (i)   Natural or man-made contamination of the water
supplier’s treatment or distribution system.



         (j)   City’s water supply system is unable to deliver
water due to the failure or damage of major water system components.



         (k)   City’s plan may be implemented if other criteria
dictate.



      (2)   Stage 3 may terminate when TRWD terminates its Stage 3
condition, when the circumstances that caused the initiation of Stage 3 no
longer prevail, or at the discretion of the City Manager or official designee.



      (3)   Stage 3 may be terminated when total raw water supply in
TRWD western and eastern division reservoirs reaches 55% for 30 days or lake
levels reach 60%, or at the discretion of the City Manager or official
designee.



      (4)   Goals for use reduction. The goal for water use
reduction under Stage 3, emergency water use, is to decrease use by 20%. If
circumstances warrant or if required by TRWD, the City Manager or official
designee can set a goal for a greater water use reduction.



      (5)   Actions available under Stage 3, water emergency. The
City Manager or official designee must implement any action(s) required by
the Tarrant Regional Water District. In addition, the City Manager or
official designee may order the implementation of any of the other actions
listed below, as deemed necessary. The City of Mansfield must notify TCEQ
within five business days if any mandatory measures are implemented:



         (a)   All water users.



            1.   Prohibit landscape watering.



               a.   Exceptions:



                  i.   Foundations may be watered up to
two hours on any day by handheld hose; or using a soaker hose or drip
irrigation system placed within 24-inches of the foundation that does not
produce a spray of water above the ground.



                  ii.   Trees may be watered up to two
hours on any day by handheld hose, drip irrigation, or a soaker hose. Tree
watering is limited to an area not to exceed the drip line of a tree.



            2.   Establishment of new landscaping shall be
done in accordance with § 54.19 (Procedures for Granting Variances to the
Plan) ONLY.



            3.   Vehicle washing restricted to commercial car
wash or commercial service station and can only be done as necessary for
health, sanitation, or safety reasons, including but not limited to the
washing of garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and other
perishables. All other vehicle washing is prohibited.



         (b)   City and local governments. In addition to actions
listed above:



            1.   Continue or initiate any actions available
under Stages 1 and 2.



            2.   Review conditions or problems that caused
Stage 3. Take corrective action.



            3.   Implement viable alternative water supply
strategies.



            4.   Increase frequency of media releases
explaining emergency situation.



            5.   Reduce city and local government water use to
maximum extent possible.



            6.   Landscape watering at municipal parks, golf
courses, and sports fields is prohibited.



               a.   Exceptions:



                  i.   Golf course greens may be watered
by hand as needed to keep them alive, however watering must be done before
10:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m.



                  ii.   Watering of athletic fields
(field only, does not include surrounding landscaped areas) used for
organized sports practice, competition, or exhibition events may occur as
necessary to protect the health and safety of the players, staff, or
officials present for athletic events. Encouraged to reduce water use by 20%.



            7.   Institute a mandated reduction in deliveries
to all customers. Such a reduction will be distributed as required by Tex.
Water Code § 11.039.



            8.   If TRWD has imposed a reduction in water
available to customers, impose the same percent reduction on wholesale
customers.



            9.   Notify wholesale customers of actions being
taken and request them to implement similar procedures.



         (c)   Commercial or Industrial.



            1.   All actions listed above for all water users
apply to commercial and industrial users.



            2.   Landscape watering at parks, golf courses,
and sports fields is prohibited.



               a.   Exceptions:



                  i.   Golf course greens may be watered
by hand as needed to keep them alive, however watering must be done before
10:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m.



                  ii.   Watering of athletic fields
(field only, does not include surrounding landscaped areas) used for
organized sports practice, competition, or exhibition events may occur as
necessary to protect the health and safety of the players, staff, or
officials present for athletic events. Encouraged to reduce water use by 20%.



            3.   Hotels required to implement laundry
conservation measures by encouraging patrons to reuse linens and towels.



            4.   Stock at commercial plant nursery may be
watered only with a hand-held hose, handheld watering can, or drip irrigation
system.



            5.   Commercial and industrial water users
required to reduce water use by a set percentage (20% is the goal for stage
3).



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 54.19  PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING VARIANCES TO THE PLAN.



   (A)   The City Manager or official designee may grant temporary
variances for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this drought
contingency plan if one or more of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   Failure to grant such a variance would cause an
emergency condition adversely affecting health, sanitation, or fire safety
for the public or the person requesting the variance.



      (2)   Compliance with this plan cannot be accomplished due to
technical or other limitations.



      (3)   Alternative methods that achieve the same level of
reduction in water use can be implemented.



   (B)   Variances shall be granted or denied at the discretion of the
City Manager or official designee. All petitions for variances should be in
writing and should include the following information:



      (1)   Name and address of the petitioner(s);



      (2)   Purpose of water use;



      (3)   Specific provisions from which relief is requested;



      (4)   Detailed statement of the adverse effect of the
provision from which relief is requested;



      (5)   Description of the relief requested;



      (6)   Period of time for which the variance is sought



      (7)   Alternative measures that will be taken to reduce water
use; and



      (8)   Other pertinent information.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 54.20  PROCEDURES FOR ENFORCING MANDATORY WATER USE RESTRICTIONS.



   Mandatory water use restrictions may be imposed in Stages 1, 2, and 3
drought stages. These mandatory water use restrictions will be enforced by
warnings and penalties as follows:



   (A)   On the first violation, customers will be given a written
warning that they have violated the mandatory water use restriction.



   (B)   On the second and subsequent violations, citations may be
issued to customers, with minimum and maximum fines established by ordinance.



   (C)   After two violations have occurred, utility may install a flow
restrictor in the line to limit the amount of water that may pass through the
meter in a 24-hour period.



   (D)   After three violations have occurred, the utility may cut off
water service to the customer.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 54.21  REVIEW AND UPDATE OF DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN.



   As required by TCEQ rules, customers will review this drought
contingency plan in 2014 and at least every five years thereafter. The plan
will be updated as appropriate based on new or updated information.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



WATER CONSERVATION PLAN



§ 54.35  INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES.



   (A)   Having a dependable water supply has always been a key issue
in the development of Texas. The growing population and economic expansion
occurring in North Central Texas are placing increased demands on our water
supplies. In order to meet the challenge of providing for our current and
future needs we must learn to use the water we already have more efficiently.
By stretching our existing supplies we can delay the need for new supplies,
minimize the environmental impacts associated with developing new water
resources, and postpone the high cost of building the infrastructure (dams,
treatment facilities, and pipelines) necessary to capture, treat, and
transport the additional water into our homes and businesses.



   (B)   Recognizing the need for efficient use of existing water
supplies, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) has developed
guidelines and requirements governing the development of water conservation
plans for public water suppliers. TCEQ guidelines and requirements are
included in Appendix A. The City of Mansfield has developed this water
conservation plan in response to TCEQ guidelines and requirements.



   (C)   The objectives of this water conservation plan are as follows:



      (1)   To reduce water consumption from the levels that would
prevail without conservation efforts.



      (2)   To reduce the loss and waste of water.



      (3)   To improve efficiency in the use of water.



      (4)   To extend the life of current water supplies by reducing
the rate of growth in demand.



      (5)   To educate the citizens of Mansfield about the need for
water conservation and the benefits of conserving our most valued natural
resource.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 54.36  TEXAS COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY RULES.



   (A)   The TCEQ rules governing development of water conservation
plans for public water suppliers are contained in Tex. Admin. Code Title 30,
Part 1, Chapter 288, Subchapter A, Rule 288.2, which is included in Appendix
B. For the purpose of these rules, a WATER CONSERVATION PLAN is defined as a
strategy or combination of strategies for reducing the volume of water
withdrawn from a water supply source, for reducing the loss or waste of
water, for maintaining or improving the efficiency in the use of water, for
increasing the recycling and reuse of water, and for preventing the pollution
of water. The elements in the TCEQ water conservation rules covered in this
conservation plan are listed below.



   (B)   Minimum conservation plan requirements. The minimum
requirements in the Texas Administrative Code for Water Conservation Plans
for Public Water Suppliers are covered in this report as follows:



 



288.2(a)(1)(A)
 
Utility profile - § 54.37 and Appendix B


288.2(a)(1)(C)
 
Specification of goals - § 54.38


288.2(a)(1)(D)
 
Accurate metering - § 54.39(A) and (B)


288.2(a)(1)(E)
 
Universal metering - § 54.39(B)


288.2(a)(1)(F)
 
Determination and control of unaccounted water - § 54.39(D)


288.2(a)(1)(G)
 
Public education and information program - § 54.40


288.2(a)(1)(H)
 
Non-promotional water rate structure - § 54.41


288.2(a)(l )(I)
 
Reservoir system operation plan - § 54.42(A)


288.2(a)(l)(J)
 
Means of implementation and enforcement - § 54.43


288.2(a)(l )(K)
 
Coordination with regional water planning group - § 54.42(F) and Appendix C




 



   (C)   Conservation additional requirements (Population over 5,000).
The Texas Administrative Code includes additional requirements for water
conservation plans for cities with a population over 5,000:



 

288.2(a)(2)(A)
 
Leak detection, repair, and water loss accounting - § 54.39 (D), (E), and (F)


288.2(a)(2)(B)
 
Record management system - § 54.39(C)


288.2(a)(2)(C)
 
Requirement for water conservation plans by wholesale customers - § 54.42(E)



 



   (D)   Additional conservation strategies. TCEQ rules also list
additional optional but not required conservation strategies, which may be
adopted by suppliers. The following optional strategies are included in this
plan:



 


288.2(a)(3)(A)

 

Conservation oriented water rates - § 54.41




288.2(a)(3)(B)

 

Ordinances, plumbing codes or rules on water-conserving fixtures - § 54.42(C)




288.2(a)(3)(D)

 

Reuse and recycling of wastewater - § 54.42(B)




288.2(a)(3)(F)

 

Considerations for landscape water management regulations - § 54.42(D)




288.2(a)(3)(G)

 

Monitoring method - § 54.39(F)




 



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 54.37  WATER UTILITY PROFILE.



   Appendix B to this water conservation plan is a modified water utility
profile based on the format recommended by the TCEQ. Some additional sections
were added in order to gather the information necessary to assess the
effectiveness of the water conservation plan.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 54.38  SPECIFICATION OF WATER CONSERVATION GOALS.



   Current TCEQ rules require the adoption of specific water conservation
goals for a water conservation plan. As part of plan adoption, each customer
will develop five-year and ten-year goals for per capita municipal use,
following TCEQ procedures described in the water utility profile (Appendix
B). The goals for this water conservation plan include the following:



   (A)   Keep the per capita municipal water use below 158 gallons per
capita per day in 2018 (five-year goal) and 155 gallons per capita per day in
2023 (ten-year goal);



   (B)   Keep the level of unaccounted water in the system below 10%
annually in 2014 and subsequent years, as discussed in § 54.39(D);



   (C)   Implement and maintain a program of universal metering and
meter replacement and repair, as discussed in § 54.39 (B);



   (D)   Decrease waste in lawn irrigation by implementation and
enforcement of landscape water management regulations, as discussed in §
54.42(D); and



   (E)   Raise public awareness of water conservation and encourage
responsible public behavior by a public education and information program, as
discussed in § 54.40.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 54.39  METERING, WATER USE RECORDS, CONTROL OF UNACCOUNTED WATER, AND
LEAK DETECTION AND REPAIR.



   One of the key elements in water conservation is careful tracking of
water use and control of losses through illegal diversions and leaks. Careful
metering of water deliveries and water use, detection and repair of leaks in
the distribution system, and regular monitoring of unaccounted water are
important in controlling losses.



   (A)   Accurate metering of treated water deliveries. The metering
devices that measure raw water delivered to the City of Mansfield, Texas will
be maintained within a minimum of +/- 5% accuracy. The largest raw water
meter is located at the water treatment plant. This meter is an Endress
Hauser, Pro-Mag W, which has an accuracy range of +/- 0.5%.



   (B)   Metering of customer and public uses and meter testing,
repair, and replacement. All connections to the water system are metered
connections. All meters will be maintained within an acceptable operating
accuracy range as defined by the manufacturer or AWWA Standard for meter
accuracy, which ever is more stringent. Dead meters and meters that indicate
reduced usage will be flagged during the computerized billing process. These
meters will be checked, field tested, and replaced when found to be out of
manufacturer specifications or not meeting AWWA Standards.



   (C)   Record management system.



      (1)   As required by Tex. Admin. Code Title 30, Part 1,
Chapter 288, Subchapter A, Rule 288.2(a)(2)(B), the record management system
allows for the separation of water sales and uses into residential,
commercial, public/institutional, and industrial categories. This information
will be included in an annual water conservation report, as described in
division (F) of this section.



      (2)   The City of Mansfield will continue to maintain a record
management system that accounts for; raw water received, drinking water
treated, drinking water pumped, water delivered, water sold, and water system
loss. This record management system will continue to separate and account for
monthly usage in the following customer categories; residential domestic,
residential irrigation, commercial usage, commercial/industrial irrigation,
builders/construction, institutional, and industrial.



   (D)   Determination and control of unaccounted water.



      (1)   Unaccounted water is the difference between raw water
purchased from TRWD and metered deliveries to customers. Authorized but
unmetered uses would include use for fire fighting, releases for flushing of
lines, and uses associated with new construction. Unaccounted water can
include several categories:



         (a)   Inaccuracies in customer meters. (Customer meters
tend to run more slowly as they age and under-report actual use);



         (b)   Losses due to water main breaks and leaks in the
water distribution system;



         (c)   Losses due to illegal connections and theft; and



         (d)   Other.



      (2)   The city will continue to monitor and minimize
unaccounted water use by; periodic visual field inspection of all water
facilities, use of fire hydrant meters to quantify the volume of water lost
during flushing, review of property occupancy, and monthly comparisons of
historical metered usage. Additional measures will be taken at the water
treatment plant to quantify process water.



      (3)   As shown in the water utility profile, unaccounted water
has varied from 7.5% to 13.9% in the last five years. With the measures
described in this plan, the city intends to maintain the unaccounted water
below 10% in 2014 and subsequent years.



   (E)   Leak detection and repair.



      (1)   The city will continue to vigilantly monitor the water
distribution system and customer service connections for water leaks, and
address the repair of any leaks found in a manner that expeditiously stops
water loss. All leaks will be isolated and repaired as soon as possible.



      (2)   Meter readers watch for and report signs of illegal
connections so they can be addressed quickly. Crews and personnel look for
and report evidence of leaks in the water distribution system. Maintenance
crews respond quickly to repair leaks reported by the public and city
personnel. The city uses two three-man distribution line crews. Areas of the
water distribution system in which numerous leaks and line breaks occur are
targeted for replacement as funds are available.



   (F)   Monitoring of effectiveness and efficiency - annual water
conservation report. Appendix B is a modified water utility profile form that
will be used in the development of an annual water conservation report for
the city. This form will be completed by May 1 of the following year and will
be used to monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of the water conservation
program and to plan conservation-related activities for the next year. The
form records the water use by category, per capita municipal use, and
unaccounted water for the current year and compares them to historical
values. The modified water utility profile and annual water conservation
report will also be sent to TRWD, which will monitor regional water
conservation trends.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 54.40  CONTINUING PUBLIC EDUCATION AND INFORMATION CAMPAIGN.



   The city will continue to promote conservation through public education
by:



   (A)   Participating in various conservation programs with the
Tarrant Regional Water District;



   (B)   Promoting a consistent, regional message of conservation
awareness in public and private schools;



   (C)   Making conservation information available at the public
library and on the City of Mansfield website;



   (D)   Including a conservation message in the city’s e-newsletter;



   (E)   Ensuring that the annual consumer confidence report will
continue to contain a conservation message for the entire service area;



   (F)   Encouraging local media coverage of water conservation issues
and the importance of water conservation;



   (G)   Making the Texas Smartscape CD, water conservation brochures,
and other water conservation materials available to the public at the City of
Mansfield Utility Department and other public places; and



   (H)   Water Department staff will participate in the Texas
Smartscape workshops, teaching attendees how to develop water management
strategies and proper irrigation scheduling.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 54.41  NON-PROMOTIONAL WATER RATE STRUCTURE.



   With the intent of encouraging water conservation and discouraging
waste and excessive use of water, the city has adopted an increasing block
rate structure. The unit price for water increases with increasing water
usage. Current water rates are shown in tables 7.1 and 7.2.



Table 7.1  Monthly Meter Charges



 


Meter Size (inches)

 

Total Charge

 

Meter Size (inches)

 

Total



Charge

 

Meter Size (inches)

 

Total



Charge




5/8 or 3/4

 

$21.65

 

2

 

$173.20

 

6

 

$1,212.40




1

 

$54.13

 

3

 

$346.40

 


 





1 1/2

 

$108.25

 

4

 

$595.38

 


 





 



Table 7.2  Volume Unit Charges



 


Water User

 

Type/



Volume

 

Volume Unit Charge



($ per 1,000 gal.)




Residential and Commercial Customers

 

0 to 2,000 gallons

 

Included in base




2,000 to 32,000 gallons

 

$2.98




32,000 gallons or above

 

$3.73




Industrial Customers

 

0 to 2,000 gallons

 

Included in base




2,000 to 32,000 gallons

 

$2.30




32,000 gallons or above

 

$2.88




 



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 54.42  OTHER WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES.



   (A)   Reservoir system operation plan. Tarrant Regional Water
District is responsible for all reservoir operation. The City of Mansfield
will continue to provide elected official representation on the Advisory
Board and staff representation on the Technical Advisory Committee of the
Tarrant Regional Water District.



   (B)   Reuse and recycling of wastewater. The City of Mansfield does
not own and operate its own wastewater treatment plant. The city’s
wastewater is treated by the Trinity River Authority.



   (C)   Ordinances, plumbing codes, or rules on water-conserving
fixtures. The State of Texas has required water-conserving fixtures in new
construction and renovations since 1992. The state standards call for flows
of no more than 2.5 gallons per minute (gpm) for faucets, 3.0 gpm for
showerheads, and 1.6 gallons per flush for toilets. Similar standards are now
required nationally under federal law. These state and federal standards
assure that all new construction and renovations will use water-conserving
fixtures.



   (D)   Water waste prohibition.



      (1)   Landscape irrigation and outdoor watering are
responsible for a large portion of the water wasted in the state of Texas.
The city will adopt tire following conservation measures in an effort to
reduce the amount of waster water:



         (a)   Prohibition of outdoor watering with sprinklers
from 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. every day, year-round. Watering with hand-held
hoses (provided that they are equipped with positive shut-off devices),
soaker hoses, or hand-held dispensers is allowed.



         (b)   Requirement that all irrigation systems installed
or receiving major repair work on or after May 1, 2008, be equipped with
operational rain and freeze sensors. Existing residential irrigation systems
are encouraged to be retrofitted with similar rain and freeze sensors.



         (c)   Requirement that all commercial and home owners’
association (HOA) irrigation systems be equipped with operational rain and
freeze sensors.



         (d)   Requirement that all irrigation systems installed
or receiving major repair work on or after May 1,2008, be equipped with
controllers capable of multiple programs.



         (e)   Requirement that all irrigation systems installed
or receiving major repair work on or after May 1, 2008, be equipped with an
approved manual shut-off valve with lockout capabilities. City personnel must
be able to lock-out the valve with a standard padlock.



         (f)   Requirement that all irrigation systems be in
compliance with current state design and installation regulations (Tex.
Admin. Code Tit. 30, Part 1, Ch. 344).



         (g)   Prohibition of designs and installations that
spray directly onto impervious surfaces such as sidewalks and roads or onto
other non-irrigated areas.



         (h)   Prohibition of poorly maintained sprinkler systems
that waste water.



         (i)   Prohibition of outdoor watering during any form of
precipitation.



         (j)   Prohibition of outdoor watering during a freeze or
when the temperature has the potential of reaching 32°F.



      (2)   Failure to comply with any portion of this section will
constitute a violation and may be subject to enforcement.



      (3)   Any of the following shall constitute major repair work:



         (a)   Any repair or maintenance that exposes the main
line to the atmosphere.



         (b)   Any repair or maintenance that has an associated
cost equal to or greater than $500.



   (E)   Requirement for water conservation plans by wholesale
customers. The city is a wholesale water supplier. Every contract for the
wholesale sale of water that is entered into, renewed, or extended after the
adoption of this water conservation plan will include a requirement that the
wholesale customer and any wholesale customers of that wholesale customer
develop and implement a water conservation plan meeting the requirements of
Tex. Admin. Code Title 30, Part 3, Chapter 288, Subchapter A, Rule 288.2. The
requirement will also extend to each successive wholesale customer in the
resale of the water.



   (F)   Coordination with Regional Water Planning Group and TRWD.
Appendix C includes a letter sent to the Chair of the Region C Water Planning
Group with this water conservation plan. A copy of this plan has also been
sent to TRWD.



   (G)   Requests for variance.



      (1)   The Director of Utility Operations or his/her designee
may grant temporary variance tor water use prohibited by this plan if it is
determined that an emergency condition resulting in an adverse affect to
health, sanitation, or fire protection of a customer, person, or entity would
result if a variance is not granted. Temporary variance may also be granted
if it is determined that a customer, person, or entity is caused undue
hardship or financial burden if a variance is not granted.



      (2)   Outdoor watering at a service address with large
multi-station irrigation systems may take place in accordance with a variance
granted by the Director of Utility Operations or his/her designee if it is
determined that the property can not be adequately irrigated in a single day.



      (3)   Temporary variance may also be granted to playing fields
which require watering to maintain league standards.



      (4)   Skinned areas of sports fields may be watered as needed
for dust control without applying for temporary variance.



      (5)   In order to receive a written variance from the Director
of Utility Operation or his/her designee the customer, person, or entity must
provide a written request including:



         (a)   Name and address of the person requesting the
variance;



         (b)   Location of the proposed water use;



         (c)   Detailed statement of potential damage and reason
for the variance;



         (d)   The volume of water needed and specific purpose of
water use;



         (e)   Period of time the variance is needed;



         (f)   Detailed statement of water conservation measures
that are being used; and



         (g)   Any diagram or other explanation that demonstrates
the need for a variance. Variances not retroactive and do not justify
violations of the plan.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.43  IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF THE WATER CONSERVATION PLAN.



   (A)   Mandatory water conservation measures will be enforced by
warnings and penalties as follows:



      (1)   On the first violation, customers will be given a verbal
warning that they have violated the mandatory water conservation measures.
City staff will provide the customer with the information and educational
materials needed to comply with the plan.



      (2)   On the second violation, customers will be issued a
written warning that they have violated the mandatory water conservation
measures.



      (3)   On the third and subsequent violations, a violation
notice will be issued to customers, with minimum and maximum fines
established by ordinance.



      (4)   After four violations have occurred, in a 12 month time
frame, the utility may cut off water service to the customer. In order to
restore water service, a customer must sign a statement of intent to comply
with all applicable water conservation measures established or adopted by
ordinance and pay a restore service fee.



   (B)   The Director of Utility Operations or his/her designee may
assess an administrative fee approved by the City Manager in addition to any
criminal penalty assessed for a violation of this plan as described below.
Administrative fees will not be assessed for verbal or written warnings. The
administrative fee shall be assessed on the third and subsequent violations
in order to recover costs associated with enforcement. Each day that a
violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.



      (1)   Violations involving irrigation systems with lock-out
capabilities.



         (a)   The Director of Utility Operations or his/her
designee may install a lock on an irrigation system found to be operating in
violation of this plan on more than three occasions and shall assess an
administrative fee as approved by the City Manager (if applicable).



         (b)   Notice shall be left on the premise to advise the
owner/operator that the irrigation system has been locked; and



         (c)   Notice shall be sent by United States Postal
Service to the person recorded as the city’s water customer notifying that
person that a violation has been found and that the irrigation system has
been locked. The notice shall also state the amount of the assessed
administrative fee and shall advise the person of the procedures for payment
of the fees and the procedure to request removal of the lock.



      (2)   Violations involving irrigation systems without lock-out
capabilities.



         (a)   The Director of Utility Operations or his/her
designee shall leave notice on the premise to advise the owner/operator that
the person was in violation of this plan and has been assessed an
a6tiinistrative fee as approved by the City Manager (if applicable).



         (b)   Notice shall be sent by United States Postal
Service to the person recorded as the city’s water customer notifying that
person that a violation has been found. The notice shall also state the
amount of the assessed administrative fee and shall advise the person of the
procedures for payment of the fees.



      (3)   Violations of mandatory water conservation measures not
involving an underground irrigation system.



         (a)   The Director of Utility Operations or his/her
designee shah leave notice on the premise to advise the owner/operator that
the person was in violation of this plan and has been assessed an
administrative fee as approved by the City Manager (if applicable).



         (b)   Notice shall be sent by United States Postal
Service to the person recorded as the city’s water customer notifying that
person that a violation has been found. The notice shall also state the
amount of the assessed administrative fee and shall advise the person of the
procedures for payment of the fees.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with,
cause damage to, or remove a locking device placed on an irrigation system by
the Director of Utility Operations or his/her designee.



      (5)   The locking device will be removed from the irrigation
system by the Director of Utility Operations or his/her designee within three
working days after payment is received from the customer.



      (6)   The Director of Utility Operations or his/her designee
may require that an irrigation system comply with all current regulations and
ordinances if:



         (a)   The customer or irrigation system is found to be
in violation of this plan on four separate occasions;



         (b)   In the opinion of the Director of Utility
Operations or his/her designee, the violation warrants immediate compliance;
or



         (c)   The design, installation, or operation of the
irrigation system prohibits the efficient use of water.



      (7)   Failure to pay assessed administrative fees within the
indicated time frame will constitute a separate violation of this plan.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   Any customer, defined pursuant to Tex. Admin. Code Title 30, Chapter
291, failing to comply with the provisions of the Plan shall be subject to a
fine of up to $2,000 and/or discontinuance of water service by the city.
Proof of a culpable mental state is not required for a conviction of an
offense under this section. Each day a customer fails to comply with the Plan
is a separate violation. The city’s authority to seek injunctive or other
civil relief available under the law is not limited by this section.



(Ord. OR-1909-14, passed 4-29-14)



Appendix A
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Rules on Municipal Water
Conservation Plans



Texas Administrative Code



         Title 30         Environmental Quality



         Part 1         Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality



         Chapter 288   Water Conservation plans, Drought
Contingency Plans, Guidelines and Requirements



         Subchapter A   Water Conservation Plans



         Rule § 288.1   Definitions



   The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have
the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.



   AGRICULTURAL or AGRICULTURE.   Any of the following activities:



      (1)   Cultivating the soil to produce crops for human food,
animal feed, or planting seed or for the production of fibers;



      (2)   The practice of floriculture, viticulture, silviculture,
and horticulture, including the cultivation of plants in containers or
non-soil media by a nursery grower;



      (3)   Raising, feeding, or keeping animals for breeding
purposes or for the production of food or fiber, leather, pelts, or other
tangible products having a commercial value;



      (4)   Raising or keeping equine animals;



      (5)   Wildlife management; and



      (6)   Planting cover crops, including cover crops cultivated
for transplantation, or leaving land idle for the purpose of participating in
any governmental program or normal crop or livestock rotation procedure.



   AGRICULTURAL USE.  Any use or activity involving agriculture,
including irrigation.



   CONSERVATION.  Those practices, techniques, and technologies that
reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve
the efficiency in the use of water, or increase the recycling and reuse of
water so that a water supply is made available for future or alternative uses.



   DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN.  A strategy or combination of strategies for
temporary supply and demand management responses to temporary and potentially
recurring water supply shortages and other water supply emergencies. A
DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN may be a separate document identified as such or may
be contained within another water management document(s).



   INDUSTRIAL USE.  The use of water in processes designed to convert
materials of a lower order of value into forms having greater usability and
commercial value, commercial fish production, and the development of power by
means other than hydroelectric, but does not include agricultural use.



   IRRIGATION.  The agricultural use of water for the irrigation of
crops, trees, and pastureland, including, but not limited to, golf courses
and parks which do not receive water through a municipal distribution system.



   IRRIGATION WATER USE EFFICIENCY.  The percentage of that amount of
irrigation water which is beneficially used by agriculture crops or other
vegetation relative to the amount of water diverted from the source(s) of
supply. Beneficial uses of water for irrigation purposes include, but are not
limited to, evapotranspiration needs for vegetative maintenance and growth,
salinity management, and leaching requirements associated with irrigation.



   MINING USE.  The use of water for mining processes including hydraulic
use, drilling, washing sand and gravel, and oil field repressuring.



   MUNICIPAL PER CAPITA WATER USE.  The sum total of water diverted into
a water supply system for residential, commercial, and public and
institutional uses divided by actual population served.



   MUNICIPAL USE.  The use of potable water within or outside a
municipality and its environs whether supplied by a person, privately owned
utility, political subdivision, or other entity as well as the use of sewage
effluent for certain purposes, including the use of treated water for
domestic purposes, fighting fires, sprinkling streets, flushing sewers and
drains, watering parks and parkways, and recreational purposes, including
public and private swimming pools, the use of potable water in industrial and
commercial enterprises supplied by a municipal distribution system without
special construction to meet its demands, and for the watering of lawns and
family gardens.



   MUNICIPAL USE IN GALLONS PER CAPITA PER DAY.  The total average daily
amount of water diverted or pumped for treatment for potable use by a public
water supply system. The calculation is made by dividing the water diverted
or pumped for treatment for potable use by population served. Indirect reuse
volumes shall be credited against total diversion volumes for the purpose of
calculating gallons per capita per day for targets and goals.



   NURSERY GROWER.  A person engaged in the practice of floriculture,
viticulture, silviculture, and horticulture, including the cultivation of
plants in containers or nonsoil media, who grows more than 50% of the
products that the person either sells or leases, regardless of the variety
sold, leased, or grown. For the purpose of this definition, grow means the
actual cultivation or propagation of the product beyond the mere holding or
maintaining of the item prior to sale or lease, and typically includes
activities associated with the production or multiplying of stock such as the
development of new plants from cuttings, grafts, plugs, or seedlings.



   POLLUTION.  The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or
biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water in the state that
renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life,
vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or
impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or
reasonable purpose.



   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER.  An individual or entity that supplies water to
the public for human consumption.



   REGIONAL WATER PLANNING GROUP.  A group established by the Texas Water
Development Board to prepare a regional water plan under Tex. Water Code, §
16.053.



   RETAIL PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER.  An individual or entity that for
compensation supplies water to the public for human consumption. The term
does not include an individual or entity that supplies water to itself or its
employees or tenants when that water is not resold to or used by others.



   REUSE.  The authorized use for one or more beneficial purposes of use
of water that remains unconsumed after the water is used for the original
purpose of use and before that water is either disposed of or discharged or
otherwise allowed to flow into a watercourse, lake, or other body of
state-owned water.



   WATER CONSERVATION PLAN.  A strategy or combination of strategies for
reducing the volume of water withdrawn from a water supply source, for
reducing the loss or waste of water, for maintaining or improving the
efficiency in the use of water, for increasing the recycling and reuse of
water, and for preventing the pollution of water. A WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
may be a separate document identified as such or may be contained within
another water management document(s).



   WHOLESALE PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER.  An individual or entity that for
compensation supplies water to another for resale to the public for human
consumption. The term does not include an individual or entity that supplies
water to itself or its employees or tenants as an incident of that employee
service or tenancy when that water is not resold to or used by others, or an
individual or entity that conveys water to another individual or entity, but
does not own the right to the water which is conveyed, whether or not for a
delivery fee.



Source Note: The provisions of this § 288.1 adopted to be effective May 3,
1993, 18 TexReg 2558; amended to be effective February 21,1999, 24 TexReg
949; amended to be effective April 27,2000, 25 TexReg 3544; amended to be
effective August 15, 2002, 27 TexReg 7146; amended to be effective October 7,
2004, 29 TexReg 9384.



Texas Administrative Code



         Title 30         Environmental Quality



         Part 1         Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality



         Chapter 288   Water Conservation Plans, Drought
Contingency Plans, Guidelines and Requirements



         Subchapter A   Water Conservation Plans



         Rule § 288.2   Water Conservation Plans for Municipal
Uses by Public Water Suppliers



   (A)   A water conservation plan for municipal water use by public
water suppliers must provide information in response to the following. If the
plan does not provide information for each requirement, the public water
supplier shall include in the plan an explanation of why the requirement is
not applicable.



      (1)   Minimum requirements. All water conservation plans for
municipal uses by public drinking water suppliers must include the following
elements:



         (a)   A utility profile including, but not limited to,
information regarding population and customer data, water use data, water
supply system data, and wastewater system data;   



         (b)   Until May 1, 2005, specification of conservation
goals including, but not limited to, municipal per capita water use goals,
the basis for the development of such goals, and a time frame for achieving
the specified goals;



         (c)   Beginning May 1, 2005, specific, quantified
five-year and ten-year targets for water savings to include goals for water
loss programs and goals for municipal use, in gallons per capita per day. The
goals established by a public water supplier under this subparagraph are not
enforceable;



         (d)   Metering device(s), within an accuracy of plus or
minus 5.0% in order to measure and account for the amount of water diverted
from the source of supply;



         (e)   A program for universal metering of both customer
and public uses of water, for meter testing and repair, and for periodic
meter replacement;



         (f)   Measures to determine and control unaccounted-for
uses of water (for example, periodic visual inspections along distribution
lines; annual or monthly audit of the water system to determine illegal
connections, abandoned services, and the like);



         (g)   A program of continuing public education and
information regarding water conservation;



         (h)   A water rate structure which is not
“promotional”, i.e., a rate structure which is cost-based and which does
not encourage the excessive use of water;



         (i)   A reservoir systems operations plan, if
applicable, providing for the coordinated operation of reservoirs owned by
the applicant within a common watershed or river basin in order to optimize
available water supplies; and



         (j)   A means of implementation and enforcement which
shall be evidenced by:



            1.   A copy of the ordinance, resolution, or
tariff, indicating official adoption of the water conservation plan by the
water supplier; and



            2.   A description of the authority by which the
water supplier will implement and enforce the conservation plan; and



         (k)   Documentation of coordination with the regional
water planning groups for the service area of the public water supplier in
order to ensure consistency with the appropriate approved regional water
plans.



      (2)   Additional content requirements. Water conservation
plans for municipal uses by public drinking water suppliers serving a current
population of 5,000 or more and/or a projected population of 5,000 or more
within the next ten years subsequent to the effective date of the plan must
include the following elements:



         (a)   A program of leak detection, repair, and water
loss accounting for the water transmission, delivery, and distribution system
in order to control unaccounted-for uses of water;



         (b)   A record management system to record water pumped,
water deliveries, water sales, and water losses which allows for the
desegregation of water sales and uses into the following user classes:   



            1.   Residential;   



            2.   Commercial;   



            3.   Public and institutional; and   



            4.   Industrial; and   



         (c)   A requirement in every wholesale water supply
contract entered into or renewed after official adoption of the plan (by
either ordinance, resolution, or tariff), and including any contract
extension, that each successive wholesale customer develop and implement a
water conservation plan or water conservation measures using the applicable
elements in this chapter; if the customer intends to resell the water, then
the contract between the initial supplier and customer must provide that the
contract for the resale of the water must have water conservation
requirements so that each successive customer in the resale of the water will
be required to implement water conservation measures in accordance with
applicable provisions of this chapter.



      (3)   Additional conservation strategies. Any combination of
the following strategies shall be selected by the water supplier, in addition
to the minimum requirements in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection, if
they are necessary to achieve the stated water conservation goals of the
plan. The commission may require that any of the following strategies be
implemented by the water supplier if the commission determines that the
strategy is necessary to achieve the goals of the water conservation plan:



         (a)   Conservation-oriented water rates and water rate
structures such as uniform or increasing block rate schedules, and/or
seasonal rates, but not flat rate or decreasing block rates;



         (b)   Adoption of ordinances, plumbing codes, and/or
rules requiring water-conserving plumbing fixtures to be installed in new
structures and existing structures undergoing substantial modification or
addition;



         (c)   A program for the replacement or retrofit of
water-conserving plumbing fixtures in existing structures;



         (d)   Reuse and/or recycling of wastewater and/or
greywater;



         (e)   A program for pressure control and/or reduction in
the distribution system and/or for customer connections;



         (f)   A program and/or ordinance(s) for landscape water
management;



         (g)   A method for monitoring the effectiveness and
efficiency of the water conservation plan; and



         (h)   Any other water conservation practice, method, or
technique which the water supplier shows to be appropriate for achieving the
stated goal or goals of the water conservation plan.



   (B)   A water conservation plan prepared in accordance with Tex.
Admin. Code Title 31, § 363.15 (relating to Required Water Conservation
Plan) of the Texas Water Development Board and substantially meeting the
requirements of this section and other applicable commission rules maybe
submitted to meet application requirements in accordance with a memorandum of
understanding between the commission and the Texas Water Development Board.



   (C)   Beginning May 1, 2005, a public water supplier for municipal
use shall review and update its water conservation plan, as appropriate,
based on an assessment of previous five-year and ten-year targets and any
other new or updated information. The public water supplier for municipal use
shall review and update the next revision of its water conservation plan not
later than May 1, 2009, and every five years after that date to coincide with
the regional water planning group.



Source Note: The provisions of this § 288.2 adopted to be effective May 3,
1993,18 TexReg 2558; amended to be effective February 21, 1999, 24 TexReg
949; amended to be effective April 27,2000, 25 TexReg 3544; amended to be
effective October 7, 2004, 29 TexReg 9384.



Appendix B
Form for Water Utility Profile and Water Conservation Report



Customer Water Conservation Report



Due May 1 of Every Year



Name of Utility:                                      
                                                   
                       



Address & Zip:                                      
                                                   
                             



Telephone Number:                                       
                      Fax:                        
                                       



Form Completed By:                                     
                                                   
                           



Title:                                         
                                                   
                                 



Signature:                                        
                        Date:                      
                                       



Name and Phone Number of Person/Department responsible for implementing a
water conservation program:



 

UTILITY PROFILE



 



I.      POPULATION CUSTOMER DATA



   A.   Population and Service Area Data



      1.   Service area size (square miles):             
                               



   



      2.   Current population of service area:             
                             



      3.   Current population served by utility:   



         a: water                               
                 



         b: wastewater                            
                 



 




4.   Population served by water utility service area for the previous five
years:

 

5.   Projected  population for in the following decades:




Year         

 

Population

 

Year

 

Population





 


 

2010

 






 


 

2020

 






 


 

2030

 






 


 

2040

 






 


 

2050

 






 


 

2060

 






 



      6.   List specific source(s)/method(s) for the calculation of
current and projected population:



 



   B.   Active Connections



      1.   Current number of active connections by user type. Check
whether multi-family service is counted as Residential           or
Commercial           .



 


Treated water users

 

Metered

 

Not-metered

 

Total




Residential

 


 


 





Commercial

 


 


 





Industrial

 


 


 





Public

 


 


 





Other

 


 


 





 



      2.   List the net number of new connections per year for most
recent three years:



         Year      20XX      20XX      20XX



         Total                               
               



   C.   High Volume Customers



      List annual water use for the ten highest volume customers
(indicate if treated or raw water delivery). Provide date of most recent
water use audit - if never audited, please indicate so.



 





 

Customer

 

Use (1,000



gallons / year)

 

Treated /



Raw Water

 

Date of Last



Water Use Audit




(1)

 


 


 


 





(2)

 


 


 


 





(3)

 


 


 


 





(4)

 


 


 


 





(5)

 


 


 


 





(6)

 


 


 


 





(7)

 


 


 


 





(8)

 


 


 


 





(9)

 


 


 


 





(10)

 


 


 


 






 



II.   WATER USE DATA FOR SERVICE AREA



   A.   Water Accounting Data



      1.   Amount of water use for previous five years (in 1,000
gal):



 



Total Diverted and Treated Water Deliveries and Sales by Month


Month
 

Year




20XX

 

20XX

 

20XX

 

20XX

 

20XX



January
 
 
 
 
 


February
 
 
 
 
 


March
 
 
 
 
 


April
 
 
 
 
 


May
 
 
 
 
 


June
 
 
 
 
 


July
 
 
 
 
 


August
 
 
 
 
 


September
 
 
 
 
 


October
 
 
 
 
 


November
 
 
 
 
 


December
 
 
 
 
 


Total
 
 
 
 
 




 



Indicate how the above figures were determined (e.g., from a master meter
located at the point of a diversion from the source or located at a point
where raw water enters the treatment plant, or from water sales).



      2.   Indicate whether water is supplied from:



         a.   Untreated surface water sources:            



         b.   Another utility as treated water:          
 



      2a.   For entities that treat their own water:



         Does utility operate a raw water intake? If so, indicate
intake location and minimum elevations of safe operation.



         Location of raw water
intake                     Elevation



                                                
                                                 
                               



                                                
                                                 
                               



                                                
                                                 
                               



      2b.   For entities that purchase treated water from another
utility, list water supply sources and quantity purchased from each source:



         Treated water sources
purchased                  Quantity



                                                
                                                 
                               



                                                
                                                 
                               



                                                
                                                 
                               



      3.   Amount of water (in 1,000 gallons) delivered (sold) as
recorded by the following account types for the past five years.



 




Account Type

 

Year




20XX

 

20XX

 

20XX

 

20XX

 

20XX




Residential

 


 


 


 


 





Commercial

 


 


 


 


 





Public / Institutional

 


 


 


 


 





Industrial

 


 


 


 


 





Wholesale

 


 


 


 


 





Other

 


 


 


 


 





Total Sold

 


 


 


 


 






 



      Residential:            Single + multifamily
residences



      Commercial:         Restaurants, retail, office



      Public / Institutional:      Municipal, airports, schools,
hospitals



      Industrial:            Large manufacturing



      Wholesale:            Deliveries to successive
customers



      Other:               Uses not included in above
categories.



                        Please describe:      
                                                   
             



      4.   Calculate gallons per capita per day by account types for
the past five years.



 




Account Type

 

Gallons per capita per day by Account Type



(Total water diverted (or treated / population / 365)




20XX

 

20XX

 

20XX

 

20XX

 

20XX




Residential

 


 


 


 


 





Commercial

 


 


 


 


 





Public / Institutional

 


 


 


 


 





Industrial

 


 


 


 


 





Wholesale

 


 


 


 


 





Other

 


 


 


 


 





Total

 


 


 


 


 






 



      5.   List previous five years records for water loss (the
difference between water diverted (or treated) and water delivered (or
sold)). The goal for percent of unaccounted for water is 12%.



         Year      Amount (gal.)         % of Total
Water Diverted or Treated



                                              
                                      



                                              
                                      



                                              
                                      



                                              
                                      



                                              
                                      



      6   List previous five years records for water reuse. Reuse is
the authorized use for one or more beneficial purposes of use of water that
remains unconsumed after the water is used for the original purpose of use
and before that water is either disposed of or discharged or otherwise
allowed to flow into a watercourse, lake or other body of state-owned water.



         Year      Amount (gal.)         % of Total
Water Diverted or Treated



                                              
                                      



                                              
                                      



                                              
                                      



                                              
                                      



                                              
                                      



      7.   Municipal per capita water use (in gallons per day) for
previous five years. Municipal per capita water use is the sum total of water
diverted into a water supply system for residential, commercial, and public
and institutional uses divided by total population served. GPCD includes
water losses.



                              Total Water
Diverted            Municipal Per



         Year      Population      (or treated) (1,000
gal.)         Capita Use (GPCD)



                                            
                                             
             



                                            
                                             
             



                                            
                                             
             



                                            
                                             
             



                                            
                                             
             



      8.   Previously stated per capita goals:    5-year:     
         10-year:             



                                       
(by 200X)            (by 200X)



      9.   Did water use (GPCD) increase or decrease from previous
year?                        



         Percent increase or decrease from previous year?      
                                       



      10.   Briefly discuss reasons for the increase or decrease in
municipal water use.



Appendix C
Letter to Region C



Water Planning Group



Date



Mr. Jim Parks



Chair, Region C Water Planning Group



North Texas Municipal Water District



P.O. Box 2408 Wylie, TX 75098



Dear Mr. Parks:



Enclosed please find a copy of the water conservation plan for customers of
the City of Mansfield. I am submitting a copy of this plan to the Region C
Water Planning Group in accordance with the Texas Water Development Board and
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality rules.



Sincerely,



Joe Smolinski Pretreatment Coordinator



City of Mansfield



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS





         72.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING





         73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES




CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   Short title; adoption of Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on
Highways



   70.02   Accident reports



Traffic-Control Devices



   70.15   Conformance with state manual



   70.16   Obedience to devices



   70.17   Applicability of provisions to authorized emergency vehicles



   70.18   Erection of signs, markings and the like resembling
traffic-control devices



   70.19   Interfering with official traffic-control devices



   70.20   Erection, installation of devices; filing of report



 



   70.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  SHORT TITLE; ADOPTION OF UNIFORM ACT REGULATING TRAFFIC ON
HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   This title may be known and cited as the Traffic Code.



   (B)   All provisions of the Tex. Transp. Code are hereby adopted by
reference as a part of this title and are supplemented by the regulations set
forth in this title.



('78 Code, § 16-1) (Ord. 464, passed 5-10-82)



§ 70.02  ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident resulting in
injuries or death to any person or property damage to an apparent extent of
$250 or more shall make a written report of such accident to the police
headquarters in this city, regardless of who may be at fault or negligent.



('78 Code, § 16-3) (Ord. 21, passed 6-10-47) Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Accident reports by operator, see Tex. Transp. Code §§ 550.026 and
550.067



TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.15  CONFORMANCE WITH STATE MANUAL.



   All traffic-control devices including signs, signals and markings
(pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the purpose of directing and
controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the Texas Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways (hereinafter called
the "Manual"). All signs, signals and markings erected or used by the City of
Mansfield shall be uniform and be located so far as practicable according to
the directions shown in the Manual. All existing traffic-control devices and
those erected in the future by the city that are consistent with the Manual,
state law and this subchapter shall be designated as official traffic-control
devices.



('78 Code, § 16-56) (Ord. 408, passed 4-28-80)



§ 70.16  OBEDIENCE TO DEVICES.



   The driver of any vehicle, motor vehicle or animal shall obey the
instructions of any official traffic-control device, sign, signal or marking
applicable thereto placed in accordance with this subchapter, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle permitted by this subchapter.



('78 Code, § 16-57) (Ord. 408, passed 4-28-80) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.17  APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, as the term
"authorized emergency vehicle" is defined by state law, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of
the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.



   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may do the
following.



      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this
title or any ordinance.



      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only
after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.



      (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he/she
does not endanger life or property.



      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specific directions.



   (C)   The exemption herein granted to an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any said vehicle in motion sounds
audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably
necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp
displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a
distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicles, except that an authorized
emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or
display a red light from in front of the vehicle.



   (D)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his/her reckless disregard for the safety of others.



('78 Code, § 16-58) (Ord. 408, passed 4-28-80)



§ 70.18  ERECTION OF SIGNS, MARKINGS AND THE LIKE RESEMBLING
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any highway, street or alley any unauthorized signs, signals, marking or
device which purports to be, or is an imitation of, or resembles an official
traffic-control device or railroad signal or sign, or which attempts to
direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with
the effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or
signal.



   (B)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public
authority permit upon any highway, street or alley any traffic sign or signal
bearing thereon any commercial advertising.



   (C)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon
private property adjacent to highways, streets or alleys of signs giving
useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for
official signs.



   (D)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and the Chief of Police is hereby empowered
to remove the same or cause it to be moved without notice.



('78 Code, § 16-59) (Ord. 408, passed 4-28-80) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.19  INTERFERING WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device,
sign, signal or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or
insignia thereon, or any part thereof.



('78 Code, § 16-60) (Ord. 408, passed 4-28-80) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.20  ERECTION, INSTALLATION OF DEVICES; FILING OF REPORT.



   (A)   (1)   The City Manager shall have the duty of and is hereby
authorized to erect or install upon, over, along or beside any highway,
street or alley signs, signals and markings, or cause the same to be erected,
installed or placed in accordance with this subchapter and consistent with
the manual. The traffic-control devices shall be installed immediately, or as
soon as the specific device, sign or signal can be produced.



      (2)   Whenever the City Manager has erected and installed any
official traffic-control device, signal or sign at any location in the city,
or has caused the same to be done under his/her direction in obedience to
this subchapter and the manual, he/she shall thereafter file a report with
the City Secretary in writing and signed officially by the City Manager,
stating the type of traffic-control device, sign or signal, and when and
where the same was erected and installed. The City Secretary shall file and
maintain the report of the City Manager among the official papers of the
office of the City Secretary.



('78 Code, § 16-61)



   (B)   It being unlawful for any person other than the Street
Superintendent, acting pursuant to an ordinance of the city, to install or
cause to be installed any signal, sign or device purporting to direct the use
of the streets or the activities on those streets of pedestrians, vehicles,
motor vehicles or animals, proof, in any prosecution for a violation of this
subchapter or any traffic ordinance of the city, that any traffic-control
device, sign, signal or marking was actually in place on any street shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed by the Street
Superintendent pursuant to the authority of this subchapter and of the
ordinance directing the installation of the device, signal or marking.



('78 Code, § 16-62)



(Ord. 408, passed 4-28-80) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Wherever in this title an act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in this
title the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is otherwise provided in
this code of ordinances, the violation shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500, provided, however, that no penalty shall be  greater or less
than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense of the laws of
the state.



   (B)   Each day a violation of this code or any ordinance continues
shall constitute a separate offense.



CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   71.01   Abandoned vehicles



   71.02   Go-carts



   71.03   Riding motorcycles on private property



   71.04   General speed regulations



Commercial Motor Vehicles



   71.20   Definitions



   71.21   Use of truck routes and commercial delivery routes by
inter-city vehicles



   71.22   Use of truck routes and hazardous material truck routes
required; exceptions



   71.23   Signs to designate truck routes



   71.24   Alternate truck routes



   71.25   Oversize and overweight vehicles



   71.26   Size limitations



   71.27   Weight limitations



   71.28   Permit required for oversize and overweight vehicles



   71.29   Spillage



   71.30   Light weight vehicles excepted



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 71.01  ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly leave parked
or standing any motor vehicle for a period of more than 48 hours on public
property, on private property without the consent of the owner or person in
control of the property or on the right-of-way of a designated county, state
or federal highway. It shall also be unlawful for any person to knowingly
leave parked or standing any motor vehicle for more than 12 hours on a
turnpike project constructed and maintained by the Texas Turnpike Authority.
Any vehicle left parked or standing in violation of this section shall be
presumed to be an abandoned vehicle.



   (B)   Any vehicle left parked or standing in violation of this
section is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and the fact that any
person in whose name the vehicle is registered allows, permits or suffers the
vehicle to be left unattended shall be prima facie evidence that the
registered owner unlawfully and knowingly parked or left the vehicle.



   (C)   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to direct the
removal, impoundment and/or disposal of vehicles in violation of this section
in accordance with the procedures set forth by state law on abandoned
vehicles and/or traffic on highways.



('78 Code, § 16-2) (Ord. 464, passed 5-10-82) Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Offense of placing obstructions in streets, see Tex. Penal Code, §
42.03



§ 71.02  GO-CARTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a go-cart on the public
streets or sidewalks within the city.



('78 Code, § 16-7) (Ord. 134, passed 5-9-61) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.03  RIDING MOTORCYCLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   No person shall ride or drive any motorcycle on any private property
within the city, other than in parking areas at commercial establishments,
without having in his/her possession written permission from the owner of
such property to ride or drive a motorcycle thereon.



('78 Code, § 16-9) (Ord. 444, passed 7-13-81) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.04  GENERAL SPEED REGULATIONS.



   Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation heretofore
made on the designated streets within the corporate limits of the city as set
forth in Ch. 73, Sch. I, authorized by the provisions of Tex. Transp. Code §
545.356, the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, the speed limits
indicated in Ch. 73, Sch. I for vehicles are hereby determined and declared
to be the lawful maximum prima facie reasonable and prudent speed limits
during the hours specifically indicated; and the speed limits being the
lawful maximum prima facie reasonable and prudent speed limits for vehicles
traveling at any time or during the specific hours upon the named streets and
highways, or parts thereof, described in Ch. 73, Sch. I.



('78 Code, § 16-4 (part)) (Ord. 142, passed 6-26-62; Ord. 219, passed
4-14-70; Ord. 248, passed 9-12-72; Ord. 303, passed 5-27-75; Ord. 304, passed
7-8-75; Ord. 311, passed 10-28-75; Ord. 446, passed 8-12-81; Ord. 617, passed
7-8-85; Ord. 627, passed 8-26-85; Ord. 680, passed 6-9-86; Ord. 832, passed
5-8-89; Ord. 844, passed 8-28-89; Ord. 856, passed 11-27-89; Ord. 858, passed
3-12-92; Ord. 903, passed 9-4-91; Ord. 981, passed 9-27-93; Ord. 997, passed
3-28-94; Ord. 1023, passed 9-26-94; Ord. 1063, passed 1-23-95; Ord. 1098,
passed 10-23-95) Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross reference:



   Traffic schedules, see Ch. 73



COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES



§ 71.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle (other than a motorcycle
or passenger car) designed or used primarily for the transportation of
property, including any passenger car which has been reconstructed so as to
be used, and which is being used, primarily for delivery purposes, with the
exception of passenger cars used in the delivery of the United States mails.



   DESIGNATED CITY OFFICIAL.  Any city employee designated as such by the
City Manager or his designee.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.  Any materials designated as hazardous under the
hazardous materials regulations contained within the Code of Federal
Regulations, as amended.



   MOBILE HOME.  A living quarters unit equipped and used for sleeping
and eating which may be moved from one location to another over a public
street by being pulled behind a motor vehicle.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle, as herein defined, that is
self-propelled.



   POLE TRAILER.  A vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by
another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or
pole, or by being boomed, or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and
ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as
poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.



   SEMITRAILER.  A vehicle of the trailer type so designed or used in
conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of
its own load rests upon or is carried by such motor vehicle.



   TRAILER.  Every vehicle designed or used to carry its load wholly or
on its own structure and to be drawn by a motor vehicle.



   TRUCK-TRACTOR.  A motor vehicle designed or used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.



   VEHICLE.  Every device in or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved only by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



(‘78 Code, § 16-20) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65; Ord. 498, passed 7-11-83;
Ord. 896, passed 4-22-91; Am. Ord. 1600, passed 11-27-06; Am. Ord.
OR-1918-14, passed 9-8-14)



§ 71.21  USE OF TRUCK ROUTES AND COMMERCIAL DELIVERY ROUTES BY INTER-CITY
VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any
truck-tractor, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or any combination thereof
through the city in inter-city travel, without a local destination or point
or origin, except upon such streets as are designated as truck routes by this
title.



   (B)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any commercial
motor vehicle through the city in inter-city travel without a local
destination or point of origin, except upon such streets as are designated as
truck routes or commercial delivery routes by this title.



   (C)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any truck,
truck-tractor, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, commercial motor vehicle
or any other type of motor vehicle or combination thereof through the city in
inter-city travel, without a local destination or point of origin, while
bearing hazardous materials, except upon such street or streets as are
designated as hazardous materials truck routes by this title.



('78 Code, § 16-21) (Ord. 498, passed 7-11-83; Ord. 896, passed 4-22-91)
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.22  USE OF TRUCK ROUTES AND HAZARDOUS MATERIAL TRUCK ROUTES REQUIRED;
EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Required.  The use of truck and hazardous materials truck
routes are required except as provided in this section.



   (B)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this section shall not apply
to the following.



      (1)   To a vehicle traveling to or from a truck terminal,
garage, place of repair, place of performing a service or a place of loading
or unloading, providing it is traveling over the shortest practicable route
to a point on a truck route; any such vehicle shall be permitted to proceed
from one such point not on a truck route to another such point without
returning to a truck route if to so return would unreasonably increase the
distance to be traveled between such points; the operator of any such vehicle
shall carry evidence of the location of its last stop and of its immediate
destination in order for this exception to apply.



      (2)   To a vehicle carrying hazardous materials in inter-city
travel, which may travel to or from the hazardous materials truck route by
using the shortest practical route to or from the duly licensed place of
loading or unloading such hazardous materials. The operator of any vehicle
carrying hazardous materials shall carry evidence of the location of its last
stop and of its immediate destination, and shall provide such evidence to any
officer authorized to enforce this subchapter upon request of the officer.



      (3)   To emergency vehicles operating in response to any
emergency call.



      (4)   To vehicles operated by a public utility while cruising
in an assigned area for the purpose of inspecting the facilities of the
public utility and/or providing maintenance service to the facilities.



('78 Code, § 16-22) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65; Ord. 896, passed 4-22-91)
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.23  SIGNS TO DESIGNATE TRUCK ROUTES.



   (A)   The following streets and parts of streets are designated
truck routes under this subchapter:



      US 287 through the city



      SH 360 through the city



      FM 157 through the city



      BU 287 through the city



      FM 1187 from the west city limits to BU 287



      FM 917/Heritage Parkway from the west city limits to SH 360



   (B)   The following streets and parts of streets are designated
commercial delivery routes under this subchapter:



      Debbie Lane from BU 287 to the east city limits



      Broad Street through the city



      Walnut Creek Drive from East Broad Street to the north city limits



      County Club Drive from Walnut Creek Drive to Matlock Road



      Matlock Road from the north city limits to East Broad Street



      South Wisteria Street from Union Pacific Railroad to Heritage
Parkway



      Heritage parkway from US 287 to SH 360



(‘78 Code, § 16-23(d)) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65; Ord. 498, passed
7-11-83; Ord. 896, passed 4-22-91; Am. Ord. 1600, passed 11-27-06; Am. Ord.
OR-1918-14, passed 9–8-14)



§ 71.24  ALTERNATE TRUCK ROUTES.



   Whenever any street designated as a truck route, commercial delivery
route or hazardous material truck route is being repaired or is otherwise
temporarily out of use, the Chief of Police is hereby authorized to designate
alternate truck routes, commercial delivery routes or hazardous materials
truck routes for such period as may be necessary.



('78 Code, § 16-23(e)) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65; Ord. 498, passed 7-11-83;
Ord. 896, passed 4-22-91)



§ 71.25  OVERSIZE AND OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive, operate or move, and/or to cause or permit to be driven,
operated or moved, on any public street within the city any commercial motor
vehicle with or without load, contrary to any of the regulations contained in
§§ 71.26 through 71.28.



('78 Code, § 16-24) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65) Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Municipal authority, see Tex. Transp. Code § 621.303



§ 71.26  SIZE LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   The limitations as to size of a vehicle stated in this section
shall not apply to implements of husbandry, machinery used solely for the
purpose of drilling water wells or to highway or street building or
maintenance machinery owned or operated by or on behalf of the state or any
of its political subdivisions or the city.



   (B)   No commercial motor vehicle shall exceed a total outside
width, including any load thereon, of 96 inches.



   (C)   No commercial motor vehicle unladen or with load shall exceed
a height of 13 feet, six inches including load.



   (D)   No commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer or
semitrailer, except pole trailers, shall exceed a length of 35 feet except
when the vehicle is operated in combination and coupled to another such
vehicle, and when operated in combination no such combination of vehicles
coupled together shall exceed a total length of 50 feet; provided, however,
the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any disabled vehicle
being towed by another vehicle to an intake place for repairs; and provided,
further, the above limitations shall not apply to any mobile home or to any
combination of a mobile home and a motor vehicle, but no mobile home and
motor vehicle combination shall exceed a total length of 55 feet.



   (E)   No vehicle or combination of vehicles, except pole trailers,
shall carry any load extending more than three feet beyond the front thereof,
nor more than four feet beyond the rear thereof.



('78 Code, § 16-25) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.27  WEIGHT LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful and
in violation of this Code for any person to drive, operate or move, or to
cause or permit to be driven, operated or moved on public property, public
sidewalks or a public street other than a state or federal highway within the
corporate limits of the city, any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor,
trailer or semi-trailer or combination of such vehicles having a weight in
excess of one or more of the following limitations.



      (1)   No such vehicle or combination of vehicles shall have a
greater weight than 20,000 pounds carried on any one axle; or with a
tandem-axle weight in excess of 34,000 pounds; or with an overall gross
weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles calculated by application
of the following formula.



      W = 500 (LN + 12N + 36)
            N-1



Where:



   W   =   Overall gross weight on any group of two or more
consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds.



   L   =   Distance in feet between the extreme of any group of two
or more consecutive axles.



   N   =   Number of axles in group under consideration, except that
two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross load of 34,000 pounds
each, providing the overall distance between the first and last axles of such
consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more; provided, that such
overall gross weight may not exceed 80,000 pounds.



   (B)   Vehicles used exclusively to transport ready-mixed concrete
shall be operated in accordance with the following rules and regulations
governing the operation of vehicles to transport ready-mixed concrete over
public highways maintained by the city.



      (1)   No single axle load shall exceed 20,000 pounds.



      (2)   No tandem-axle load shall exceed 36,000 pounds.



      (3)   No gross load shall exceed 48,000 pounds.



      (4)   No such vehicle shall be operated unless it shall be
equipped with a functioning device attached to the concrete chute which is
designed to trap concrete and which is in proper position to trap concrete at
all times when the vehicle is operated on a public street within the city.



   (C)   Vehicles used exclusively to transport milk may be operated if
the distance between the front wheel of the forward tandem axle and the rear
wheel of the rear tandem axle, measured longitudinally, is at least 28 feet,
and the maximum load carried on any group of axles does not exceed 68,000
pounds.



   (D)   Vehicles used exclusively to transport solid waste (except
hazardous waste), as defined in the Solid Waste Disposal Act, Tex. Health &
Safety Code §§ 361.001 et seq., may be operated upon the public streets of
the city with a tandem-axle gross load not to exceed 44,000 pounds, a
single-axle gross load not to exceed 20,000 pounds and a gross load for the
vehicle not to exceed 64,000 pounds, provided that where the vehicle is to be
operated with a tandem-axle load in excess of 34,000 pounds, the owner shall
have first filed with the State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation a surety bond as required by Tex. Transp. Code § 623.163.



   (E)   No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall have a greater
weight than 600 pounds per inch width of tire upon any wheel concentrated
upon the surface of the highway and using high-pressure tires, and a greater
weight than 650 pounds per inch width of tire upon any wheel concentrated
upon the surface of the highway and using low-pressure tires, and no wheel
shall carry a load in excess of 8,000 pounds on high-pressure tires and
10,000 pounds on low-pressure tires, nor any axle load in excess of 16,000
pounds on high-pressure tires and 20,000 pounds on low-pressure tires.



   (F)   In this section, an axle load is defined as the total load
transmitted to the road by all wheels whose centers may be included between
two parallel transverse vertical planes 40 inches apart, extending across the
full width of the vehicle. Tandem-axle group is defined as two or more axles
spaced 40 inches or more apart from center to center having at least one
common point of weight suspension.



('78 Code, § 16-26) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65; Ord. 498, passed 7-11-83;
Ord. 709, passed 11-24-86) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.28  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OVERSIZE AND OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES.



   (A)   Upon written application timely made by any person who desires
to operate or cause to be operated on the public streets within the
overweight or oversize equipment for the transportation of such commodities
as cannot be reasonably dismantled, where the total gross weight or size of
the vehicle and its load exceed the limits allowed by this subchapter, the
Police Department, after consulting with the office of the City Manager,
shall issue a permit for the operation of such equipment or fleets of
equipment for a specified period of time, over a route or routes to be
designated by the designated city official if such routes can be determined
at the time application for the permit is made.



   (B)   The application for the permit provided for in this section
shall be in writing and contain the following.



      (1)   The kind of equipment to be operated, with a complete
description of same and a statement as to its weight.



      (2)   The kind of commodity to be transported and a
certificate as to its weight.



      (3)   The street or streets over which the equipment is to be
operated and the dates and the approximate time of the operation, and the
number of trips to be made, except when the nature, route, time or frequency
of operation cannot be determined at the time the permit is issued.



      (4)   The application shall be dated and signed by the
applicant.



   (C)   Before a permit is issued under this section, the applicant
for same shall file with the office of the City Secretary a bond in an amount
to be set and approved by the City Manager. The amount of the bond shall not
exceed the product of the number of vehicles for which a permit is sought
multiplied by $10,000; the bond shall be payable to the city and conditioned
that the applicant will pay to the city the sum of money necessary to repair
any damage which might be occasioned to any public street or publicly-owned
fixture appurtenant to such street by virtue of operation of any commercial
vehicle under the permit. Venue of any suit for recovery upon the bond shall
be in this county, and any bond issued hereunder shall contain an unambiguous
contractual provision to that effect.



   (D)   A fee shall be charged for each permit as follows.



      Single trip permits         -   $10 



      Periods not exceeding 30 days   -   $15



      Periods not exceeding 60 days   -   $20



      Periods not exceeding 90 days   -   $25



      Periods not exceeding one year   -   $50



   (E)   Any permit issued hereunder shall include at least the
following.



      (1)   The name of the applicant, the date, a description of
the equipment to be operated and a description of the commodity to be
transported.



      (2)   The signature of an authorized member of the Police
Department and any other designated city office.



      (3)   The time for which the permit is issued.



      (4)   The specified streets over which the equipment is to be
operated, insofar as it can be determined at the time the permit is issued.



(‘78 Code, § 16-27) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65; Am. Ord. 1600, passed
11-27-06; Am. Ord. OR-1918-14, passed 9-8-14)



§ 71.29  SPILLAGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated
any commercial motor vehicle on a public street of the city in such manner as
to permit any portion of its cargo, either liquid or solid, to fall out of,
spill from or blow out of such vehicle.



('78 Code, § 16-28) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.30  LIGHT WEIGHT VEHICLES EXCEPTED.



   The provisions of this subchapter, except § 71.29, shall not be
applicable to any vehicle which has a gross weight not exceeding 10,000
pounds.



('78 Code, § 16-29) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65)



CHAPTER 72: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



Section



General Provisions



   72.01   Parking certain vehicles in residential area



   72.02   Double parking



Parking Zones



   72.15   Authority to designate



   72.16   Maximum parking time



   72.17   Presumptive evidence of overtime parking



   72.18   Manner of parking



   72.19   Marking spaces; parking within lines



   72.20   Presumption of lawful designation of restricted space



   72.21   Liability of owner committing parking violation



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  PARKING CERTAIN VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL AREA.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle rated in excess
of one ton capacity, or any vehicle incapable of operating under its own
power or any trailer, to cause or to permit such vehicle to be parked on a
public street in the residential area of the city.



('78 Code, § 16-5) (Ord. 21, passed 6-10-47; Ord. 168, passed 6-22-64; Ord.
168A, passed 5-24-66; Am. Ord. 1456, passed 10-27-03) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.02  DOUBLE PARKING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to double park, as that
term is defined in division (B) of this section, on any street in the city,
except that commercial vehicles may double park to load or unload merchandise
within such area.



   (B)   "Double parking" means the parallel parking of a vehicle
within two feet of another vehicle already parked parallel with the curb, or
adjacent to, or not entirely within an empty parking space.



('78 Code, § 16-6) (Ord. 146, passed 9-11-62; Ord. 153, passed 4-23-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99



PARKING ZONES



§ 72.15  AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE.



   The City Manager, and/or his/her designee, is hereby authorized to
designate parking zones upon any street or portion of any street where it is
determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that
the installation of parking zones shall be necessary to aid in the
regulation, control or operation of the parking of vehicles in the exercise
of police power of regulating, operating or controlling the operation of
vehicles using the public streets.



('78 Code, § 16-40) (Ord. 342, passed 12-12-77; Ord. 480, passed 12-13-82)



§ 72.16  MAXIMUM PARKING TIME.



   (A)   The maximum parking time for each space within the restricted
parking zones shall be two hours unless otherwise designated by the City
Manager or the City Council.



('78 Code, § 16-41)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle to be
parked, to remain or to be placed in any parking space within the restricted
parking zone for a period of time in excess of two hours or that time which
is designated by the City Manager or the City Council.



('78 Code, § 16-42)



(Ord. 342, passed 12-12-77; Ord. 343, passed 12-12-77)) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.17  PRESUMPTIVE EVIDENCE OF OVERTIME PARKING.



   If any car is parked, remains or is placed within a restricted parking
zone for a period in excess of two hours or that time designated by the City
Manager or the City Council, it shall be prima facie evidence that the
vehicle has been parked overtime and beyond the period of time established by
this subchapter by the City Manager or the City Council.



('78 Code, § 16-43) (Ord. 342, passed 12-12-77) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.18  MANNER OF PARKING.



   Any vehicle parked in any parking space in any restricted parking zone
shall be parked with the hood of the vehicle alongside of or next to the curb
or shoulder alongside of such parking space in parallel parking spaces, and
with the front of the vehicle at the curb or shoulder in diagonal parking
spaces, and in either event shall be parked within the lines marked on the
street for such parking spaces as provided hereinafter.



('78 Code, § 16-44) (Ord. 342, passed 12-12-77) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.19  MARKING SPACES; PARKING WITHIN LINES.



   The City Manager, or such other officers or employees as he/she shall
select, shall place lines or marks on the curb or shoulder or on the street
to designate the parking space. Each vehicle shall park within the lines or
markings so established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any
such line or mark or to park the vehicle in a way that the same shall not be
within the area so designated by the line or mark.



('78 Code, § 16-45) (Ord. 342, passed 12-12-77; Ord. 480, passed 12-13-82)
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.20  PRESUMPTION OF LAWFUL DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED SPACE.



   When any person is charged with having committed an offense under this
subchapter, proof that the parking space was within a restricted parking zone
in connection with which the offense was committed shall constitute prima
facie evidence that the restricted parking zone was established and the space
laid out by order of the City Manager and that the location and regulation of
parking time of the space were lawfully designated by the City Manager.



('78 Code, § 16-46) (Ord. 342, passed 12-12-77) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.21  LIABILITY OF OWNER COMMITTING PARKING VIOLATION.



   When any person is charged with having parked or left standing a
vehicle on any street or highway in the city at a place on the street or
highway where parking of that type of vehicle is prohibited, or with parking
the vehicle on the street or highway in a manner which violated state law or
a city ordinance, or with parking the vehicle for a length of time which
violated state law or city ordinance, proof that the vehicle was, on the date
of the offense alleged, owned by the person charged with the offense shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the vehicle was parked or left standing
by the owner.



('78 Code, § 16-47) (Ord. 467, passed 6-14-82) Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Speed limits



Cross reference:



   Commercial motor vehicles, see §§ 71.20 et seq.



   General speed regulations, see § 71.04



SCHEDULE I.  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   General. 



 


Prefix

 

Street

 

Location

 

Speed Limit(mph)





 
 
Airport Drive
 
South Second Avenue to South Sixth Avenue
 

40



East
 
Broad Street
 
U.S. Highway 287 to Business U.S. Highway 287 (Main Street)
 

40



East
 
Broad Street
 
U.S. Highway 287 to east city limits
 

45



West
 
Broad Street
 
Business U.S. Hwy 287 (Main Street) to 400 feet west of N. 4th Avenue
 

35



West
 
Broad Street
 
400 feet west of N. 4th Avenue to west city limits
 

40



 
 
Business U.S. 287

(Main Street)
 
Mile post 14.962 (north city limits) south 2.638 miles to mile post 17.600
(approx. 200 feet south of Turtle Hill Trail)
 

50



 
 
Business U.S. 287

(Main Street)
 
Mile post 17.600 (approx. 200 feet south of Turtle Hill Trail) south 1.425
miles to mile post 19.025 (UP RR bridge)
 

45



 
 
Business U.S. 287

(Main Street)
 
Mile post 19.025 (UP RR bridge) south 0.475 miles to mile post 19.500 (Hunt
Street)
 

35



 
 
Business U.S. 287 (Main Street)
 
Mile post 19.500 (Hunt Street) south 0.982 miles to mile post 20.482 (Johnson
County Line)
 

50



 
 
Business U.S. 287 (Main Street)
 
Mile post 0.000 (Johnson County line) south 1.900 miles to mile post 1.900
(U.S. 287)
 

50



 
 
Cannon Drive
 
In its entirety
 

40



 
 
Cardinal Road
 
In its entirety
 

35



 
 
Commerce Drive
 
In its entirety
 

35



 
 
Country Club Drive
 
In its entirety
 

40



North
 
Day Miar Road
 
East Broad Street to Seeton Road
 

45



 
 
Debbie Lane
 
In its entirety
 

45



 
 
F.M. 1187
 
Mile post 28.292 (Mansfield west city limits) east 0.181 miles to mile post
28.473 (eastbound lane only in city limits)
 

45



 
 
F.M. 1187
 
Mile post 28.473 east 1.169 miles to mile post 29.642 (Business Highway 287)
 

45



 
 
F.M. 157
 
Mile post 23.811 (north city limits) south 0.812 miles to mile post 24.623
(approx. 550 feet south of Hogpen Branch)
 

50



 
 
F.M. 157
 
From mile post 24.623  (approx. 550 feet south of Hogpen Branch) south 1.718
miles to mile post 26.341 (Business Highway 287 intersection)
 

45



 
 
F.M. 917
 
Business U.S. Highway 287 (Main Street) south to southern city limits
 

55



 
 
Gertie Barrett Road
 
F.M. 1187 to Turner Warnell
 

35



 
 
Grand Meadow Boulevard
 
From North Holland Road to North Day Miar Road
 

35



 
 
Heritage Parkway
 
Business U.S. Highway 287 (Main Street) to SH 360
 

45



South
 
Heritage Parkway
 
SH 360 to National Parkway
 

45



North
 
Holland Road
 
SH 360 to Yellow Rose Trail
 

45



South
 
Holland Road
 
Yellow Rose Trail to National Parkway
 

45



South
 
Holland Road
 
National Parkway to Britton Road
 

40



 
 
Hummingbird Lane
 
In its entirety
 

20



 
 
Justice Lane
 
In its entirety
 

35



 
 
Live Oak Drive
 
In its entirety
 

20



 
 
Mansfield Webb Road
 
Matlock Road to east city limits
 

40



 
 
Matlock Road
 
In its entirety
 

45



 
 
Meadowlark Drive
 
In its entirety
 

20



 
 
Mockingbird Court
 
In its entirety
 

20



 
 
Mockingbird Drive
 
In its entirety
 

20



 
 
National Parkway
 
In its entirety
 

40



 
 
Oriole Drive
 
In its entirety
 

20



 
 
Ragland Road
 
Matlock Road to east city limits
 

40



East
 
Seeton Road
 
Seeton Road (Grand Prairie) to National Parkway
 

45



 
 
Seeton Road
 
National Parkway to Ashbury Lane
 

45



 
 
Seeton Road
 
Ashbury Lane to South Holland Road
 

40



 
 
SH 360 Frontage Roads
 
Mile post 23.284 (north city limits) south 2.894 miles to mile post 26.178
(county line)
 

50



 
 
SH 360 Frontage Roads
 
Mile Post 0.000 (county line) south 1.819 miles to mile post 1.819 (US 287)
 

50



 
 
Skylark Drive
 
In its entirety
 

20



   
 
U.S. Hwy 287
 
North city limits to Johnson County line
 

70



 
 
U.S. Hwy 287
 
Johnson County line to south city limits
 

65



 
 
U.S. Hwy 287 Frontage Roads
 
North city limits to south city limits
 

40



North
 
Walnut Creek Drive
 
East Broad Street to north city limits
 

40



South
 
Walnut Creek Drive
 
East Broad Street to East Dallas Street
 

35



South
 
Wisteria Street
 
East Dallas Street to Heritage Parkway
 

40



South
 
6th Avenue
 
West Broad Street to Easy Drive
 

40



   For all other streets within the corporate limits of the city, the
lawful maximum prima facie reasonable and prudent speed limit on the streets
shall be 30 m.p.h.




 



(‘78 Code, § 16-4(b))  (Am. Ord. 1623, passed 6-11-07; Am. Ord. 1640,
passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 1642, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. OR-1706-08, passed
8-25-08; Am. Ord. OR-1750-09, passed 9-1-09; Am. Ord. OR-1786-10, passed
10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-1810-11, passed 8-1-11; Am. Ord. OR-1838-12, passed
7-23-12; Am. Ord. OR-1923-14, passed 11-10-14; Am. Ord. OR-1956-15, passed
8-10-15; Am. Ord. OR-1960-15, passed 9-8-15; Am. Ord. OR- 1970-15, passed
10-12-15; Am. Ord. OR-1988-15, passed 12-16-15; Am. Ord. OR-2034-17, passed
2-13-17; Am. Ord. OR-2057-17, passed 8-28-17)



   (B)   School zones.



 


Prefix

 

Street

 

Location

 

Times

 

Speed Limit (m.p.h.)





East
 
Broad Street
 
A point 152 feet west of its intersection with Hillcrest Street to a point
362 feet west of its intersection with Willow Street
 

When flashing

 

20



East
 
Broad Street
 
A point 904 feet east of its intersection with Miller Road to a point 2180
feet east of its intersection with Miller Road
 

When flashing

 

20



East
 
Broad Street
 
A point 90 feet east of its intersection with Miller Road to a point 850 feet
east of its intersection with Miller Road
 

When flashing

 

20



East
 
Broad Street
 
A point 420 feet east of Volk Lane to a point 200 feet west of Day Miar Road
 

When flashing

 

20



 
 
Business U.S. 287 (Main Street)
 
Mile post 16.727 south 0.190 miles to mile post 16.917
 

When flashing

 

35



 
 
Business U.S. 287 (Main Street)
 
Mile post 0.437 south 0.400 miles to mile post 0.837
 

When flashing

 

35



 
 
Cannon Drive
 
A point 55 feet west of its intersection with Walnut Bend Drive to a point
440 feet east of its intersection with Carlin Road
 

When flashing

 

20



 
 
Cardinal Road
 
A point 150 feet south of Hidden Oaks Drive to a point 200 feet north of
Hidden Oaks Drive
 

When flashing

 

20



 
 
Cardinal Road
 
A point 300 feet south of Legacy Way to a point 175 feet north of Legacy Way
 

When flashing

 

20



 
 
Clover Hill Road
 
A point 200 feet north of its intersection with Almond Drive to a point 740
feet north of its intersection with Almond Drive
 

8:00 a.m. - 9:00 a.m. and 3:45 p.m. - 4:30 p.m.

 

20



 
 
Concord Drive
 
Intersection with Country Club Drive to a point 750 feet north
 

7:15 a.m.- 8:15 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m.

 

20



 
 
Country Club Drive
 
A point 585 feet west of its intersection with Highland Drive to a point 165
feet east of its intersection with Hilton Drive
 

When flashing

 

20



 
 
Cutting Horse Drive
 
A point 110 feet south of its intersection with Remington Ranch Road to a
point 130 feet north of Star Grass Drive
 

7:15 a.m.-8:15 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.-4:00 p.m.

 

20



North
 
Day Miar Road
 
A point 200 feet south of its intersection with E. Broad Street to a point
250 feet south of its intersection with Meseta Drive
 

When flashing

 

20



North
 
Day Miar Road
 
A point 460 feet north of the northern Lake Ridge High School driveway to a
point 100 feet north of Seeton Road
 

When flashing

 

20



East
 
Debbie Lane
 
A point 350 feet east of Walnut Creek Drive to a point 310 feet west of
Walnut Creek Drive
 

When flashing

 

20



West
 
Debbie Lane
 
A point 250 feet west of the west Ben Barber Drive approach to a point 540
feet east of the east Ben Barber Drive approach
 

When flashing

 

35



 
 
F.M. 1187
 
Mile post 28.922 east 0.320 miles to mile post 29.242
 

When flashing

 

35



 
 
F.M. 1187
 
Mile post 29.349 east 0.234 miles to mile post 29.583
 

When flashing

 

35



 
 
Gertie Barrett Road
 
A point 50 feet south of its intersection with Nelson Wyatt Road to a point
1,150 north of its intersection with Nelson Wyatt Road
 

When flashing

 

20



       
 
Highland Drive
 
Intersection with Country Club Drive to a point 800 feet north
 

7:15 a.m.- 8:15 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m.

 

20



 
 
Hillcrest Street
 
A point 145 feet north of its intersection with East Dallas Street to its
intersection with East Broad Street
 

6:45 a.m.- 7:15 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.- 3:00 p.m.

 

20



North
 
Holland Road
 
A point 100 feet north of Waterford Glen Drive to a point 800 feet south of
Waterford Glen Drive
 

When flashing

 

20



South
 
Holland Road
 
A point 376 feet south of National Parkway to a point 258 feet south of Fox
Meadows
 

When flashing

 

20



 
 
Killian Drive
 
A point 150 feet east of Wood River Parkway to a point 150 feet north of
Nelson Wyatt Road
 

When flashing

 

20



 
 
Legacy Way
 
A point 68 feet east of Cardinal Road to a point 65 feet west of North Main
Street (Business 287)
 

When flashing

 

20



 
 
Magnolia Street
 
A point 123 feet east of its intersection with Laurel Street to a point 929
feet east of its intersection with Walnut Creek Drive
 

When flashing

 

20



North
 
Main Street
 
A point 470 feet south of its intersection with Pleasant Ridge Drive to a
point 530 feet north of its intersection with Pleasant Ridge Drive
 

When flashing

 

35



North
 
Miller Road
 
A point 460 feet north of its intersection with East Broad Street to a point
1,015 feet north of its intersection with East Broad Street
 

When flashing

 

20



North
 
Miller Road
 
A point 86 feet south of its intersection with East Broad Street to a point
100 feet north of Scenic Glen Drive
 

When flashing

 

20



 
 
Pleasant Ridge Drive
 
A point 95 feet east of its intersection with U.S. Business 287 (Main Street)
to a point of 200 feet east of its intersection with Nightingale Circle
 

When flashing

 

20



North
 
Walnut Creek Drive
 
A point 190 feet north of Rocky Creek Drive to a point 920 feet south of
Rocky Creek Drive and from a point 190 feet north of Misty Mesa Trail to a
point 920 feet south of Misty Mesa Trail
 

When flashing

 

20



North
 
Walnut Creek Drive
 
A point 105 feet south of its intersection with Aspen Lane to a point 660
feet south of its intersection with Debbie Lane
 

When flashing

 

20



 
 
Waterford Glen Drive
 
Intersection with North Holland Road to a point 200 feet east of its
intersection with High Point Lane
 

7:15 a.m.- 8:15 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m.

 

20



 
 
Wood River Parkway
 
A point 350 feet south of Meriwether Street to a point 100 feet south of
Killian Drive
 

When flashing

 

20





 



   (C)   Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter 73 , as amended hereby, shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon the conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of
Mansfield, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $200 for each
offense, and each and every day any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed to constitute a separate offense.



(‘78 Code, § 16-4 (a))  (Ord. 142, passed 6-26-62; Ord. 219, passed
4-14-70; Ord. 248, passed 9-12-72; Ord. 303, passed 5-27-75; Ord. 304, passed
7-8-75; Ord. 311, passed 10-28-75; Ord. 446, passed 8-12-81; Ord. 617, passed
7-8-85; Ord. 627, passed 8-26-85: Ord. 680, passed 6-9-86; Ord. 832, passed
5-8-89; Ord. 844, passed 8-28-89; Ord. 856, passed 11-27-89; Ord. 858, passed
3-12-90; Ord. 903, passed 9-4-91; Ord. 981, passed 9-27-93; Ord. 997, passed
3-28-94; Ord. 1023, passed 9-26-94; Ord. 1063, passed 1-23-95; Ord. 1098,
passed 10-23-95; Am. Ord. 1186, passed 1-12-98; Am. Ord. 1223, passed
9-14-98; Am. Ord. 1390, passed 6-24-02; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 6-24-02; Am.
Ord. 1394, passed 8-12-02; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 9-9-02; Am. Ord. 1452,
passed 10-13-03; Am. Ord. 1465, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. 1492, passed 8-9-04;
Am. Ord. 1502, passed 10-25-04; Am. Ord. 1524, passed 3-14-05; Am. Ord. 1515,
passed 3-14-05; Am. Ord. 1492, passed 8-9-04; Am. Ord. 1636, passed 8-27-07;
Am. Ord. 1641, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 1658, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord.
OR-1750-09, passed 9-1-09; Am. Ord. OR-1779-10, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord.
1810-11, passed 8-1-11; Am. Ord. OR-1838-12, passed 7-23-12; Am. Ord.
OR-1881-13, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. OR-1923-14, passed 11-10-14; Am. Ord.
OR-1960-15, passed 9-8-15; Am. Ord. OR-1970-15, passed 10-12-15; Am. Ord.
OR-1970-15, passed 10-12-15; Am. Ord. OR-2057-17, passed 8-28-17)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   ANIMAL CONTROL





         91.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION





         92.   HEALTH AND SANITATION





         93.   JUNKED VEHICLES





         94.   FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND FOOD HANDLERS





         95.   LIBRARY





         96.   PARKS AND RECREATION





         97.   ALARM SYSTEMS





         98.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         99.   NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT




CHAPTER 90: ANIMAL CONTROL



Section



General Provisions



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Establishment of Office of Animal Control Manager



Animal Control



   90.03   Number of dogs and cats at residences; multiple pet permit



   90.04   Animal establishments



   90.05   Adoption of cats or dogs



   90.06   Livestock and livestock permits



   90.07   Swine prohibited



   90.08   Keeping of fowl



   90.09   Animals at-large



   90.10   Dangerous wild animals



   90.11   Dangerous animals



   90.12   Nuisances



   90.20   Appealing ACO determinations, orders, and permit denials and
revocations



   90.21   Promotional displays; dyeing prohibited



   90.22   License, vaccination and microchip requirements



   90.23   Impoundment; fees



   90.23.1   Fee schedule



   90.24   Enforcement



   90.25   Care and humane treatment of animals



Rabies Control and Bite Procedures



   90.35   Definitions



   90.36   Report of rabies



   90.37   Quarantine procedures for animals



   90.38   Disposition or release of quarantined animal



   90.39   Animal exposed to rabies



Animal Advisory Committee



   90.50   Animal Advisory Committee



 



   90.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  Any person designated by the city to perform
animal control duties and who otherwise enforces the provisions of state and
local laws as they pertain to animals within the city.



   ANIMAL CONTROL MANAGER.  A person designated by the Chief of Police to
supervise the daily operations of the Animal Control Division



   ANIMAL.  Includes dogs, cats, rabbits, rodents, birds, reptiles, and
any other species of animal which is sold or retained as a household pet, but
shall not include skunks, nonhuman primates and any other species of wild
exotic or carnivorous animal that may be further restricted by law.



   AT-LARGE.  Not completely confined by a building, wall, or fence of
sufficient strength or construction to restrain the animal, except when such
animal is either on a leash or held in the hands of the owner.  An animal
within an automobile or other vehicle under the control of its owner shall
not be deemed at-large, unless such confinement fails to reasonably prevent
access to the public.



   ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any pet shop, kennel, grooming shop, auction,
performing animal exhibition, or other facility engaged in the handling of
domestic animals, excluding veterinary clinics, hospitals, animal shelters
and individuals caring for animals in their private residence in compliance
with the terms of this chapter.



   CARETAKER.  Any individual who has responsibility for feeding,
watering, or otherwise providing for any animal whether they are the actual
owner of the animal or not.



   CAT.  Any live or dead cat (felis catus).



   DANGEROUS ANIMAL.



      (1)   An animal, including a dog, that makes an unprovoked
attack on a human, which causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other
than an enclosure in which the animal was kept and that was reasonably
certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own;



      (2)   An animal, including a dog, that commits unprovoked acts
in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and
that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure
on its own, and those acts cause a person reasonably to believe that the
animal will attack and cause bodily injury to that person; or



      (3)   An animal, including a dog, that makes an unprovoked
attack on a domestic animal or domestic fowl which occurs when the attacking
dog is at-large. For purposes of this subsection only, the Animal Control
Manager or court may take under consideration any or all of the following
circumstances to determine whether or not the attacking animal is dangerous:



         (a)   The seriousness and/or extent of the injury to the
attacked animal or fowl;



         (b)   Territorial issues associated with the location of
the attack; and



         (c)   Restraints of the attacking dog which were in
place at the time of, or immediately prior to, the attack.



   DANGEROUS WILD ANIMAL.  Any lion, tiger, ocelot, cougar, leopard,
cheetah, jaguar, poisonous reptiles, giant reptiles (any non-indigenous
reptile that commonly reaches six feet or more in total length), bobcat,
lynx, serval, caracal, hyena, bear, coyote, wolf, jackal, baboon, chimpanzee,
orangutan, gorilla, or any hybrid of any animal listed in this definition.



   DOG.  Any live or dead dog (canis familirais).



   EUTHANIZE.  To cause the death of an animal by a method which:



      (1)   Rapidly produces unconsciousness and death without
visible evidence of pain or distress; or



      (2)   Utilizes anesthesia produced by an agent which causes
painless loss of consciousness, and death following such loss of
consciousness.



   FERAL.  Any organism that has escaped from domestication and returned,
partly or wholly, to a wild state.



   FOWL.  Any bird.



   HARBORING.  The act of keeping and caring for an animal or of
providing a premise to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care.



   LIVESTOCK -LARGE.  Any animal, such as horses, mules, cattle, ponies
and animals of the same approximate size and weight.



   LIVESTOCK -SMALL.  Any animal, such as goats, sheep, lambs and animals
of the same approximate size and weight.



   LOCAL RABIES CONTROL AUTHORITY.  The officer designated by the
municipal or county governing body under the Tex. Health & Safety Code §
826.017.



   MICROCHIP IMPLANT.  A passive electronic device that is injected into
an animal, under the skin, by means of a hypodermic type syringe device. Each
microchip shall contain a unique and original number that is read by an
electronic scanning device for purposes of animal identification and recovery
by the animal's owner. The microchip implant shall be supplied with an
exterior collar type tag for purposes of an external means of recognition
that the animal has been implanted with a microchip.



   NUISANCE.  An act that threatens the health, morals, safety, comfort,
convenience, or welfare of a community.



   OWNER.  Any person, firm, or corporation who has the right of property
in an animal or who harbors an animal or allows an animal to remain about his
or her premises.



   QUARANTINE.  To take into custody and place in confinement, isolated
from human beings and other animals in such a way as to preclude the
possibility of disease transmission. The quarantine period for a dog, cat, or
a domestic ferret in rabies quarantine is ten days from the date of the bite,
scratch or other exposure, or as recommended by the regional veterinarian
from the Texas Department of Health.



   SWINE.  Any of various omnivorous, even-toed ungulates of the family
Suidae, including pigs, hogs, and boars, having a stout body with thick skin,
a short neck, and a movable snout.



   VACCINATED.  Properly injected with a rabies vaccine licensed for use
in that species by the United States Department of Agriculture and
administered by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state.



   VACCINATED, CURRENTLY.  Vaccinated and satisfying the following
criteria:



      (1)   The animal must have been at least 16 weeks of age at
the time of vaccination;



      (2)   At least 30 days must have elapsed since the initial
vaccination; and



      (3)   The time elapsed since the most recent vaccination has
not exceeded the recommended interval for booster vaccination as established
by the manufacturer.



      (4)   This definition applies only to bite cases in
determining cause of action in dealing with the animal.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF ANIMAL CONTROL MANAGER.



   (A)   There shall be and is hereby created the office of Animal
Control Manager for the City of Mansfield.



   (B)   The Animal Control Manager shall act as the Local Rabies
Control Authority for the purposes of Tex. Health & Safety Code Chapter 826.



   (C)   The Animal Control Manager shall employ animal control
officers to assist him in the carrying out of his duties.



   (D)   The Animal Control Manager and animal control officers shall
be assigned to the Public Safety Department.



   (E)   The responsibilities of the Animal Control Manager shall be as
follows:



      (1)   To enforce and see to the enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter and other ordinances of the city and state law as they
pertain to animals, their management and maintenance; and



      (2)   Supervise the animal control operation of the city.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



ANIMAL CONTROL



§ 90.03  NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS AT RESIDENCES; MULTIPLE PET PERMIT.



   For purposes of this section only, pet shall mean dogs or cats.



   (A)   Except as provided by this section, no residence in the city
shall house more than four dogs or four cats or exceed the combined total of
six such animals over the age of eight weeks.



   (B)   Any person desiring to keep more than four dogs or four cats
or exceed the combined total of six such animals over the age of eight weeks
at a residence may apply with the Animal Control Manager for a multi-pet
permit. The applicant shall pay an annual permit fee of $25, as set by City
Council, at the time of filing.



      (1)   The Animal Control Manager is authorized to issue such a
permit if the following conditions are met:



         (a)   An applicant provides the Animal Control Manager
with information concerning the maximum number of animals to be kept at any
one time at such premises and a record search indicates that no enforcement
action for violations of this chapter has been necessary within the preceding
12 months; and



         (b)   The Animal Control Manager inspects the property;
inspection to include interviews with occupants of all immediately adjacent
properties, and deems it appropriate for housing multiple pets based on
criteria including, but not limited to:



            1.   Facilities shall be of sufficient size as to
allow each animal to move about freely. Size of the facility shall be in
proportion to the size of the individual animal's height and weight.



            2.   Adequate food, water, and shelter must be
provided so that each and all animals kept shall be maintained in good health
and free of malnutrition and/or dehydration and protected from the elements.



            3.   The said premises shall be kept in a sanitary
condition and reasonably free of animal waste, parasites, insects, and flies
that could be harmful to the animal's health and/or to the health of the
general public.



            4.   The animals must be maintained in a manner
which does not pose a danger to the health of the animals themselves or
adjacent animals.



            5.   The animals must not cause noise which is
offensive or disturbing to a person of ordinary sensibilities on adjacent
premises.



            6.   All animals must be vaccinated and must wear
current tags at all times in accordance with this chapter.



      (2)   Fees for the issuance of a multi-pet permit shall be set
by City Council.



      (3)   The Animal Control Manager may revoke the permit prior
to its expiration if:



         (a)   The conditions at the premises are no longer
reasonably adequate to maintain the number of animals allowed by the permit;



         (b)   The owner fails to comply with conditions,
limitations, and restrictions specified in the permit; or



         (c)   A persistent nuisance occurs.



      (4)   Multi-pet permits must be renewed annually and each
renewal will require inspection and approval by the Animal Control Manager.



      (5)   Any person either denied a multi-pet permit, or who has
had their permit revoked, may file an appeal as outlined in § 90.20.



      (6)   Multi-pet permits are issued for specific owners of a
specific property. Application for a new multi-pet permit will be required if:



         (a)   The original permit holder moves to a new
residence within the city limits and wishes to keep more than four dogs or
four cats or exceed a combined total of six such animals over the age of
eight weeks on the new property; or if



         (b)   Ownership of the property for which a permit was
originally issued changes and the new owners desire to keep more than four
dogs or four cats or exceed a combined total of six such animals over the age
of eight weeks.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.04  ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an animal establishment to sell,
trade, or give away any dog or cat, over 16 weeks of age, unless the dog or
cat has been vaccinated as required by this chapter.



   (B)   The Animal Control Manager shall be permitted to inspect any
animal establishment and all animals and the premises where such animals are
kept at any reasonable time during normal business hours to ensure compliance
with all provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, animal
establishments shall comply with the following minimum standards:



      (1)   Remove manure and droppings from pens, yards, cages, and
other enclosures daily and handle or dispose of the excretions in such manner
as to keep the premises free of any nuisance.



      (2)   Place food in impervious containers on impervious
surfaces.



      (3)   Remove all refuse on the premises and dispose of same by
a means approved by the City Health Officer.



      (4)   Such standards of sanitation shall be administered by
the Animal Control Manager.



      (5)   Such establishments will comply with all laws and city
ordinances.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.05  ADOPTION OF CATS OR DOGS.



   The Animal Control Manager shall be authorized to place for adoption
dogs or cats impounded by the city under the following conditions:



   (A)   The Animal Control Manager shall determine whether a dog or
cat is healthy enough for adoption and its health and age adequate for
vaccination.  However, such decision by the Animal Control Manager shall not
constitute a warranty of the health or age of the animal.



   (B)   There will be an adoption fee for all dogs and cats at an
amount set by the City Council.



   (C)   Requirements for adoption of dog or cat age 16 weeks or older.



      (1)   Vaccination fee.



         (a)   In the event said adopted dog or cat age 16 weeks
or older is not vaccinated, a fee in an amount set by the City Council shall
be paid for the issuance of a rabies vaccination voucher which the adopting
person is to present to any veterinarian within one week for vaccination
against rabies of the adopted dog or cat. The veterinarian shall present the
voucher with a statement verifying the vaccination to the Animal Control
Manager for receipt of the prepaid fee or the veterinarian's fee for
administering the vaccination, whichever is less.



         (b)   A person commits an offense if after adopting a
dog or cat 16 weeks of age or older he knowingly fails to obtain a rabies
vaccination for such animal within one week of the adoption date.



         (c)   It shall be presumed that the person failed to
have the animal vaccinated if within ten days of the adoption date he has not
presented the Animal Control Manager with proof of the vaccination. Such
proof shall be in the form of a receipt from the veterinarian administering
the vaccination.



         (d)   The Animal Control Manager shall be authorized to
reimpound any dog or cat adopted under this division (C) if the vaccination
is not obtained within the required time. In such case there shall be no
refund of the adoption fee, and ownership of the animal shall revert to the
city.



      (2)   License fee.  In the event the adopted dog or cat age
16 weeks or older is not licensed, the adopting person shall present to the
Animal Control Manager the license fee as set forth in § 90.23.1.



   (D)   Requirements for adoption of a dog or cat under 16 weeks of
age.



      (1)   Vaccination fee.



         (a)   In the event the dog or cat to be adopted is under
16 weeks of age, the vaccination will not be required until the animal is 16
weeks of age. A fee in an amount set by the City Council shall be paid for
the issuance of a rabies vaccination voucher which the adopting person is to
present to any veterinarian. The veterinarian shall present the certificate
with a statement verifying the vaccination to the Animal Control Manager for
receipt of the prepaid fee or the veterinarian's fee for administering the
vaccination, whichever is less.



         (b)   A person who adopts a dog or cat under this
division (D) commits an offense if he knowingly fails to obtain a rabies
vaccination for such animal within the age limits required in this division
(D).



         (c)   It shall be presumed that the person failed to
have the animal vaccinated when it turned 16 weeks of age, if within seven
business days of the animal turning 16 weeks of age, the owner has not
presented proof of vaccination to the Animal Control Manager. Proof shall be
in the form of a receipt from the veterinarian administering the vaccine.



         (d)   The Animal Control Manager shall be authorized to
reimpound the adopted dog or cat under this division (D) if the vaccination
is not obtained within the required age limits. In such case there shall be
no refund of the adoption fee, and ownership of the animal shall revert to
the city.



      (2)   License fee.



         (a)   Within one week after a dog or cat, which was
under 16 weeks old when adopted, is vaccinated against rabies, the adopting
person shall furnish to the Animal Control Manager the original adoption
receipt and proof of vaccination to receive the city license.



         (b)   The adopting person shall pay the Animal Control
Manager the license fee as set out in § 90.23.1 if the animal is to remain
within the corporate city limits of Mansfield.



      (3)   Core vaccine fee.



         (a)   In the event an adopted dog or cat age six weeks
or older is not vaccinated against Canine Distemper (CDV), Infectious Canine
Hepatitis (ICH), Canine Parvovirus (CPV), Canine Parainfluenza Virus, Feline
Viral Rhinotracheitis (FVR), Feline Calicivirus (FCV), or Feline
Panleukopenia (FPL) there will be a core vaccination fee at an amount set by
the City Council.



         (b)   Upon payment of the core vaccination fee, the dog
or cat will be provided such service by the Animal Control Manager.



         (c)   In the event the adopted dog or cat is under six
weeks of age, a voucher will be presented to the adopting person which the
person may present to Animal Control, for rendering such service, upon the
adopted dog or cat reaching six weeks of age.



      (4)   Microchip fee.



         (a)   In the event an adopted dog or cat does not have
microchip identification there will be a microchip implantation at a fee at
an amount set by the City Council.



         (b)   Upon payment of the microchip fee, the dog or cat
will be provided microchip implantation by the Animal Control Manager.



   (E)   Sterilization.



      (1)   Written agreement. A person adopting a dog or cat that
has not been sterilized shall sign a written agreement that they will have
the animal sterilized:



         (a)   Within 30 days after adoption if the dog or cat is
an adult; or



         (b)   Within 30 days after a specified date estimated by
the Animal Control Manager to be the date an adopted infant female dog or cat
becomes six months old or an adopted infant male dog or cat becomes eight
months old.



      (2)   Fee.



         (a)   A person adopting an unsterilized animal shall pay
the Animal Control Manager a sterilization fee in an amount set by the City
Council, and shall receive a spaying or neutering voucher.



         (b)   Within the sterilization date, the adopting person
shall present the voucher to the licensed veterinarian who performed the
sterilization of the adopted animal.



         (c)   The veterinarian shall present the certificate to
the Animal Control Manager, along with a statement verifying that the animal
was sterilized, for receipt of the prepaid fee or the veterinarian's fee,
whichever is less.



      (3)   Offense.



         (a)   A person who signs a sterilization agreement
commits an offense if he fails to have the animal sterilized on or before the
sterilization completion date stated in the agreement.



         (b)   If the sterilization date falls on a Saturday,
Sunday or legal holiday, the deadline is extended to the first day that is
not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.



         (c)   The Animal Control Manager may extend the
sterilization deadline for 30 days upon presentation by the adopting person
of a written report by a licensed veterinarian stating that the life or
health of the adopted animal may be jeopardized by surgery. There is no limit
to the number of extensions that may be granted under this division (E).



      (4)   Confirmation of sterilization.



         (a)   A person who signs a sterilization agreement shall
deliver to the Animal Control Manager a letter signed by the veterinarian who
performed the surgery. The letter shall be delivered in person or by mail not
later than the seventh day after the date on which the animal was sterilized.
The letter shall state that the animal has been sterilized, briefly describe
the animal and provide the date of sterilization.



         (b)   If an adopted animal dies on or before the
sterilization completion date, the adopting person shall deliver to the
Animal Control Manager a signed letter stating that the animal is dead. The
letter shall be delivered not later than seven days after the date of the
animal's death, and shall describe the cause of death if known and provide
the date of death. This letter shall be in lieu of the letter required in
division (E)(4)(a) of this section.



         (c)   If an adopted animal is lost or stolen before the
sterilization date, the adopting person shall deliver to the Animal Control
Manager a signed letter stating that the animal is lost or stolen. The letter
shall be delivered not later than seven days after the date of the animal's
disappearance and shall describe the circumstances surrounding the
disappearance and the approximate date of disappearance. This letter shall be
in lieu of the letter required in division (E)(4)(a) of this section.



      (5)   Prosecution.



         (a)   If the Animal Control Manager does not receive a
letter under division (E)(4) of this section before the expiration of the
seventh day after the sterilization completion date, he shall file a
complaint against the adopting person in the Mansfield Municipal Court.



         (b)   In a prosecution of a person for failing to
sterilize an adopted animal by the sterilization completion date, it shall be
presumed that the failure of such person to deliver to the Animal Control
Manager a letter required by division (E)(4) of this section is the result of
the person's refusal to have the adopted animal sterilized. The person may
rebut this presumption at trial with the proof required by division (E)(4) of
this section.



      (6)   Reclamation of animal.  The Animal Control Manager may
reclaim an adopted animal after the expiration of the seventh day after the
sterilization completion date, if the Animal Control Manager has not received
a letter as outlined in division (E)(4) of this section. In such case there
shall be no refund of the adoption fee, and ownership of the animal shall
revert to the city.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.06  LIVESTOCK AND LIVESTOCK PERMITS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful and illegal for any person owning or
having control over any livestock to knowingly allow the same to be at-large
unattended on any public property, or on the property of another without the
consent of such other person.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful and illegal for any person owning or
having control over any livestock to keep said livestock, regardless of
whether livestock are kept for personal use or for commercial purposes,
unless a livestock permit has been obtained from the Animal Control Manager.



   (C)   In order to obtain a livestock permit, an owner of livestock
shall complete an application and be required to pay a one-time permit fee
established by City Council to register his/her property and to describe the
type and number of livestock thereon.



   (D)   Any person obtaining a livestock permit will be issued a
permit sign and will be required to post and maintain prominently said sign
at the main entrance to the property where the livestock is kept.



   (E)   All livestock permits will be required to be renewed on an
annual basis (12 months from date of issuance).  Livestock owners will not
be required to pay a permit renewal fee.  The Animal Control Manager shall
send a form annually to each registered owner, at the designated (last known)
mailing or email address, seeking updated registration information for permit
renewal.



   (F)   Livestock permits may be denied or revoked for any of the
following reasons:



      (1)   Health or safety issues.



      (2)   Animal cruelty or neglect as defined in Tex. Penal Code
§ 42.09.



      (3)   More than three violations of livestock at-large within
a permit year.



      (4)   Failure to obtain a livestock permit within ten business
days of placing livestock on property within the city.



      (5)   Failure to maintain or post the issued permit sign.



   (G)   If a livestock permit is denied or revoked, the applicant or
permit holder will have 30 calendar days from the date of denial or
revocation to remove any and all livestock from the city limits or said
livestock may be impounded by the Animal Control Manager. Failure to renew a
permit, in accordance with this chapter, shall presumptively be considered a
revocation.



   (H)   A person denied or having a permit revoked may appeal the
denial or revocation as set out in § 90.20.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-1805-11, passed 6-27-11)



§ 90.07  SWINE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any swine in any house,
shed, pen, lot, or pasture within the city.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.08  KEEPING OF FOWL.



   A person commits an offense if he/she:



   (A)   Keeps or maintains more than four fowl on one-half acre or
less or at a distance closer than 50 feet from any habitation located on
another's property;



   (B)   Keeps or maintains more than ten fowl on more than one-half
acre but less than one acre at a distance closer than 50 feet from any
habitation located on another's property;



   (C)   Keeps or maintains 25 fowl or more on one acre or more at a
distance closer than 50 feet from any habitation located on another's
property;



   (D)   Fails to keep any duck, goose, or swan from being at-large
however, all ducks, geese, or swans found within the parks of the city are
hereby exempted;



   (E)   Fails to keep any chicken, pea-fowl, turkey, or guinea fowl
contained within a coop or pen;



   (F)   Keeps or maintains roosters except with written permission of
the Animal Control Manager; and



   (G)   No fowl shall be kept within 100 feet of any private water
well.



   (H)   In connection with all of the above, the premises and
facilities used for the keeping of fowl authorized to be kept under any of
the provisions of this section must be kept in such a manner as to prevent
the emission of odor or noise offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities
in the neighborhood or the existence of any nuisance dangerous to the public
health.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.09  ANIMALS AT-LARGE.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he fails to keep an animal he
owns from being at-large.



   (B)   It is an exception to division (A) of this section that the
animal was a police service animal under the supervision of a peace officer
in the performance of his official duties.



   (C)   Each animal in violation of this section constitutes a
separate offense.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.10  DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to keep any dangerous wild animal inside
the city.



   (B)   It shall be an exception that a dangerous wild animal may be
kept within the city only during the time a circus is performing or a maximum
of 30 days, and the dangerous wild animal must be under the care and control
of a bona fide circus.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.11  DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   (A)   A person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous
animal when:



      (1)   The owner knows of an attack as described in § 90.01,
definition of DANGEROUS ANIMAL; or



      (2)   The owner is informed by the Animal Control Manager that
the animal is a dangerous animal.



   (B)   If a person reports an incident described in § 90.01,
definition of DANGEROUS ANIMAL, the Animal Control Manager shall investigate
the incident. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the
Animal Control Manager determines that the animal is a dangerous animal, he
shall notify the owner of that fact.



   (C)   An owner, not later than the tenth business day after the date
the owner is notified that an animal owned by the owner is a dangerous
animal, may appeal the determination of the Animal Control Manager to
Municipal Court.



   (D)   The owner of the animal shall be required to remand custody of
the dangerous animal to Animal Control pending the outcome of any appeal. The
owner shall be required to pay fees associated with the care and boarding of
the animal while the appeal is pending. If such animal is not surrendered to
the city, the Animal Control Manager and/or staff may obtain a warrant to
seize such animal.



   (E)   If the court upholds the dangerous animal determination on
appeal, the Animal Control Manager shall maintain custody of the dangerous
animal until the owner arranges for the dangerous animal to be removed from
the city or until the owner relinquishes ownership of the dangerous animal to
the city for humane euthanasia. If the dangerous animal is removed from the
city, the owner will be required to provide an exact address that the
dangerous animal will be relocated to, and the proper authorities for the
jurisdiction will be notified by the Animal Control Manager.



   (F)   If any dangerous animal found in violation of any provision of
this section cannot be taken up and impounded with reasonable safety for the
person attempting the same, such animal may be slain by any peace officer or
animal control officer.



   (G)   The animal control officer or any peace officer shall be
authorized to obtain a search and seizure warrant if there is reason to
believe that a dangerous animal ordered removed from the city has not been so
removed or has been returned to the city. Any person within the city limits
of Mansfield found to be in possession of any animal that has been determined
"dangerous" by the Animal Control Manager shall be in violation of the
dangerous animal order.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.12  NUISANCES.



   (A)   The following actions are considered to be a nuisance and
shall be unlawful:



      (1)   No female animal in heat shall be allowed upon any
street, avenue, highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, park or other public place
within the city, unless such animal is under the control of the owner or any
other person, either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise, and only for the
minimal amount of time necessary for female animal to defecate or urinate.
Should female animal create or cause a nuisance as described in any other
division of this section, the person in control of the female animal shall be
found to be in violation of division (B) of this section.



      (2)   The keeping of any animal, which, by causing frequent or
long continued barking, crying or noise that shall disturb any person of
ordinary sensibilities in the vicinity is prohibited.



      (3)   The keeping of any animal or insect in such a manner so
to endanger the public health; to annoy neighbors by the accumulation of
animal wastes which cause foul and offensive odors, or are considered to be a
hazard to any other animal or human being; or by continued presence on the
premises of another is prohibited.



      (4)   All animal pens, stables or enclosures in which any
animal may be kept or confined which, from use, have become offensive to a
person of ordinary sensibilities are prohibited.



      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to cause
to be placed or place on the premises of any other person, or in any of the
streets or other public ways, a dead animal, either wild or domesticated, or
any dead fowl, either wild or domesticated, or allow to remain on his or her
premises a dead animal, either wild or domesticated.



      (6)   The owner of any animal who permits, takes, or causes
such animal to be on any sidewalk, park, or other public place shall clean up
any waste created by such animal and remove it to an appropriate trash
disposal location.



   (B)   It is unlawful to create or allow a nuisance as defined
herein. Any person who creates or allows a nuisance is deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is subject to a fine, as authorized by
other sections of this chapter and references to the Code of Ordinances of
the city.



   (C)   A continuing public nuisance in this section is defined as an
irresponsible action of ownership or control of an animal(s) that endangers
the public health, public safety or public welfare; an action that offends
the public morals; or an action that endangers life or health, gives
unreasonable offense to the senses, or obstructs the reasonable and
comfortable use of another's property. If the Animal Control Manager
determines that a continuing public nuisance exists, one which is detrimental
to the public health, safety, and welfare and one which continues unabated
despite enforcement efforts, he may take action to abate such nuisance.



      (1)   If the Animal Control Manager determines that such
public nuisance exists unabated, the Animal Control Manager may determine
that a continuing public nuisance exists. He may investigate any report of
perceived nuisance, and may interview witnesses as he may determine
necessary. He shall make a disposition determination based on the necessity
to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. This
determination shall be one of the following:



         (a)   Impoundment of the animal(s) that is the source of
the continuing public nuisance and the adoption of the animal(s), except that
the owner, his/her agents or representatives, or family members may not adopt
the animals adjudged a continuing public nuisance.



         (b)   Impoundment and humane destruction of the
animal(s) that is the source of the continuing public nuisance.



         (c)   Removal of an animal(s) determined to be a
continuing public nuisance from the city.



      (2)   Upon determination, the Animal Control Manager shall
notify the animal owner or the person in control of the animal(s). This
notice shall be in writing and shall contain a statement that such person has
a right to appeal.



      (3)   Notice shall be mailed certified mail, return receipt
requested, to last known mailing address of the owner or person in control of
the animal(s), or delivered in person.



      (4)   An owner or person in control of the animal(s), not
later than ten business days after the date such person is notified that an
animal(s) is a continuing public nuisance, may appeal the determination of
the Animal Control Manager to the Municipal Court.



      (5)   The owner or person in control of the animal(s)
determined to be a continuing public nuisance shall remove such animal(s)
from the city within ten business days of such notification by the Animal
Control Manager, or within 48 hours of an unsuccessful appeal. The failure to
remove such animal(s) shall be an offense and each day thereafter that such
person fails to remove such animal(s) shall constitute a separate offense.



      (6)   If the owner or person in control of such animal(s)
fails to remove such animal(s) as provided for by the order of the Animal
Control Manager or the court, such animals may be impounded and put up for
adoption or humanely destroyed.



      (7)   The owner or person in control of such animal(s) must
report the disposition and exact address or relocation of such animal(s) to
the Animal Control Manager in writing within ten business days after the
expiration date for removal of such animal(s) from the city. Each day
thereafter that such information is not provided shall constitute a separate
offense.



      (8)   The Animal Control Manager shall be authorized, after
due process, to obtain a search and seizure warrant for the purpose of
enforcing this section.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.20  APPEALING ACO DETERMINATIONS, ORDERS, AND PERMIT DENIALS AND
REVOCATIONS.



   Upon written request for appeal by an owner or caretaker whose animal
has been seized, ordered removed from the city, been denied a permit, had a
permit revoked, or had restrictions placed upon the keeping of an animal, the
Municipal Court shall set a time for an appeal hearing to determine the
appropriateness of any decision. The hearing must be held not later than ten
business days after the date on which the appeal of the seizure or the order
to remove the animal from the city was issued, unless agreed to by all
parties.



   (A)   All appeals must be filed in writing not later than ten
business days after the animal was seized or ordered removed from the city.



   (B)   The appeal must be filed with the Animal Control Manager.



   (C)   The Municipal Court shall give written notice of the time and
place of the hearing to:



      (1)   The owner of the animal, or the person from whom the
animal was seized or received the order to remove said animal from the city;
and



      (2)   The person who made the complaint.



   (D)   Any interested party, including the City Attorney, is entitled
to present evidence at the hearing.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.21  PROMOTIONAL DISPLAYS; DYEING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale,
barter, or give away as toys, premiums or novelties, baby chickens,
ducklings, or other fowl under three weeks old, or rabbits under eight weeks
old, unless the manner or method of display is first approved by the Animal
Control Manager.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to color, dye, stain, or otherwise change
the natural color of any chickens, ducklings, other fowl, or rabbits, or to
possess for the purpose of sale or to be given away, any of the above
mentioned animals which have been so colored.



   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell,
exchange, trade, barter, lease, give away, or display for a commercial
purpose, any live animal on any roadside, public right-of-way, parkway,
median, park, playground, swimming pool, other recreation area, flea market,
or commercial or retail parking lot that is generally accessible by the
public, regardless of whether such access is authorized, or any property to
which the public has access that does not have a valid business license
allowing the sale of animals on the property.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to receive any live
animal through sale, exchange, trade, barter, lease, rent, or give away from
any roadside, public right-of-way, parkway, median, park, playground,
swimming pool, other recreation area, flea market, or commercial or retail
parking lot that is generally accessible by the public, regardless of whether
such access is authorized, or any property to which the public has access
that does not have a valid business license allowing the sale of animals on
the property.



      (3)   Officers in the city's Public Health, Code Compliance,
and Public Safety Departments are authorized to investigate alleged
violations of this section and to issue citations for such violations.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.22  LICENSE, VACCINATION AND MICROCHIP REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he owns any dog or cat over 16
weeks of age without having such dog or cat currently vaccinated against
rabies.



      (1)   The same animal must receive a booster within the 12
month interval following the animal's initial vaccination.



      (2)   The same animal must be revaccinated against rabies at
the recommended interval for booster vaccination as established by the
vaccine manufacturer.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if he owns any dog or cat over 16
weeks of age without having such dog or cat currently licensed with the city.



   (C)   A person who owns a dog or cat commits an offense if he fails
to display on such dog or cat both a current rabies vaccination tag furnished
by a veterinarian and a current license tag furnished by the city.



   (D)   A person who owns a dog or cat commits an offense if he
displays on such dog or cat a rabies or license tag issued to another animal.



   (E)   A person who owns any dog or cat over 16 weeks of age having
such dog or cat micro-chipped, or any existing micro-chip verified by the
Animal Control Manager, and micro-chip registered with a national micro-chip
data base shall receive a $5 discount from the annual license fee.



   (F)   The Animal Control Manager may revoke or deny the license of a
cat or dog issued to any person who has been convicted in any duly authorized
court of jurisdiction in the state, or resides with any person so convicted
of any of the following:



      (1)   Cruelty to animals as defined in the Tex. Penal Code §
42.09, inhumane treatment, or negligence to an animal; or



      (2)   Conviction of four or more separate and distinct
violations of an animal control ordinance of a municipality in the state
within any 12 month period.



   (G)   A person denied such a registration may appeal the refusal as
set out in § 90.20.



   (H)   Each animal in violation of this section constitutes a
separate offense.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.23  IMPOUNDMENT; FEES.



   (A)   The City Manager shall select and establish a place for
impounding all animals impounded under any provision of this chapter.



   (B)   Animals that may be impounded are as follows:



      (1)   Cats and dogs not exhibiting evidence of being
vaccinated as described in § 90.22 or licensed as described in § 90.22.



      (2)   Any animal kept under conditions that could endanger the
public health or public safety.



      (3)   Any animal that creates a nuisance, as defined in §
90.12.



      (4)   Any animal running at-large, as stipulated in § 90.09.



      (5)   A dog or cat that has rabies or symptoms thereof, or
that a person could suspect as having rabies, or that bites, scratches or
otherwise creates a condition which may have exposed or transmitted the
rabies virus to any human being.



      (6)   A dog or cat that is suspected of having inflicted
bodily injury on any human being or animal, or poses a threat to public
safety.



      (7)   Any dog or cat whose license has been revoked, or
livestock that has had its permit revoked.



      (8)   Any animal in violation of any provisions of this
chapter.



   (C)   Reasonable effort shall be made by the animal control officer
to contact the owner of any animal impounded which is wearing a current
vaccination tag or city license tag; however, final responsibility for
location of an impounded animal is that of the owner.



   (D)   (1)   The owner can resume possession of any impounded
animal upon payment of impoundment fees, handling fees, and any veterinary
bills incurred by animal control for the welfare of the animal, and upon
compliance with the vaccination and licensing provisions of this code except
where prohibited in divisions (D)(2) and (D)(3) below and all other
provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   Disposition of animals impounded on the grounds of cruel
or inhumane treatment shall be determined by the court of jurisdiction.



      (3)   If any animal is being held under quarantine or
observation for rabies, the owner shall not be entitled to possession until
it has been released from quarantine.



   (E)   (1)   Any animal not reclaimed by the owner may be humanely
euthanized after being impounded for 72 hours, except that any animal wearing
a current rabies vaccination tag and any animal that is microchipped shall be
impounded for not less than six days and any animal wearing a city license
tag shall be impounded for not less than 15 days.



      (2)   Any impounded feral or unmanageable animals, unless
there is reason to believe that it has an owner, may be immediately disposed
of as may be deemed appropriate by the Animal Control Manager for the safety
of staff caring for the animal during the impoundment period.



      (3)   Any nursing baby animal impounded without the mother, or
where the mother cannot or refuses to provide nutritious milk, may be
immediately euthanized to prevent further suffering.



      (4)   An owner who no longer wishes responsibility of an
animal, or believes the animal to be in an ill or injured condition, may sign
a written waiver allowing the animal to be immediately euthanized in a humane
manner, provided that no dog or cat that has bitten a human being shall be
euthanized before expiration of the ten day quarantine period.



      (5)   Any impounded animal that appears to be suffering from
extreme injury or illness may be euthanized or given to a non-profit humane
organization for the purpose of veterinary medical care, as determined by the
Animal Control Manager.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.23.1  FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   A fee schedule for animal control related matters shall be
established by the City Council to be incorporated in the policies and
procedures associated with this chapter.



 


Adoptions

 
Spay/Neuter
 
$25 (voucher)/animal


 
Rabies
 
$10 (voucher)/animal


 
Microchip
 
$20/animal


 
Core Vaccine
 
$5/animal



 



 




City License

 
Spay/Neuter
 
$10


 
Non-Spay/Neuter
 
$15


Impoundment Fees
 
Dogs/Cats 1st
 
$20


 
Dogs/Cats 2nd
 
$30


 
Dogs/Cats 3rd
 
$45


 
Boarding
 
$5/day/animal


Livestock
 
Large 1st
 
$100


 
Large 2nd
 
$150


 
Large 3rd
 
$200


 
Boarding
 
$20/day/animal


 
Small 1st
 
$20


 
Small 2nd
 
$30


 
Small 3rd
 
$45


 
Boarding
 
$10/day/animal


Livestock Permit
 
Large/Small
 
$25 only, regardless of the number of species, initial permit application; no
cost for renewal


Livestock
 
 



   Deceased Removal

 
Large
 
$100/animal


 
Small
 
$50/animal


Owner Relinquish
 
 



   Pickup Fee

 
Licensed
 
$30/animal


 
Non-Licensed
 
$40/animal



   Owner Drop Off

 
Licensed
 
$20/animal


 
Non-Licensed
 
$30/animal



   Quarantine

 
Boarding
 
$10/day/animal


 
Testing
 
$60/animal



   Microchip

 
Implant
 
$20/animal




 



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-1805-11, passed 6-27-11)



§ 90.24  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Primary enforcement of this subchapter shall be the
responsibility of the Animal Control Department.  In the absence of an
animal control officer, any department or official designated by the City
Manager shall have enforcement responsibilities and authority.



   (B)   Animal control officers shall have the authority to issue
citations for any violations of this subchapter.



   (C)   If the person being cited is not present, they may be summoned
to court in accordance with applicable law.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the
animal control officer in the performance of duties. A person interferes with
an animal control officer if he/she:



      (1)   Releases or causes an animal to be released after an
animal control officer has impounded the animal; or



      (2)   Physically constrains the movement of an animal control
officer or his/her vehicle or equipment by:



         (a)   Placing any part of the person or person's
property in the way of the animal control officer's progress in the
performance of the officer's duties; or



         (b)   Taking or moving an officer's equipment which
causes a time delay in the officer's ability to use the equipment.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.25  CARE AND HUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS.



   (A)   Every owner or person having care and control of any animal
shall provide the following for each animal under his or her care:



      (1)   Sufficient nutritious and wholesome food, served in
clean containers, to maintain the animal in good health.



      (2)   Clean and wholesome water, served to the animal in a
clean container, such water to be available to the animal at all times.



      (3)   Adequate shelter which shall allow the animal to remain
dry and protected from the elements at all times and which shall provide
either natural or artificial shade for the animal to avoid direct sunlight.
If the shelter is provided by enclosure, the enclosure shall allow for
adequate ventilation.



      (4)   Veterinary care shall be provided as needed to prevent
suffering and maintain the animal in a healthy state.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if he beats, torments, overloads,
overworks, maims, disfigures, burns or scalds, mutilates or needlessly kills
an animal, or if he carries or transports an animal in any vehicle or other
conveyance in a cruel or inhumane manner, or if he permits any animal to
remain in its own filth or if he causes any of these acts to be done.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person to crop a dog's ears, dock a
tail, remove dew claws or perform other surgical procedures on a dog or a cat
except as provided by the veterinary licensing act.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person to use steel jaw or leg-hold
traps.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or other person having care
and control of any animal to abandon said animal.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for a person to confine an animal in a
parked or standing vehicle in such a way as to endanger the animal's health,
safety, or welfare. It is presumed that an animal's health, safety, or
welfare is endangered when the animal is confined in a parked or standing
vehicle for a period of five or more minutes when the ambient outside air
temperature measures above 85 degrees Fahrenheit or below 35 degrees
Fahrenheit.  It shall be prima facia proof that temperature at time of
violation when such temperature is verified at the Animal Control Office at
407 Industrial, Mansfield, Texas.



   (G)   It shall be unlawful for a person to use a chain, rope,
tether, leash, cable, or other device to attach a dog to a stationary object
or trolley system and such animal can become entangled or otherwise
immobilized in such a way as to prevent access to food, water, or shelter.
Restraint under such conditions is presumed to be cruel confinement for
purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



RABIES CONTROL AND BITE PROCEDURES



§ 90.35  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words and terms when used in this section shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:



   ANIMAL.  Any live or dead mammal, domesticated or wild, excluding Homo
sapiens.



   BITE OR SCRATCH.  A bite or scratch that breaks the skin and is
capable of transmitting rabies.



   HIGH RISK ANIMAL.  Any animal that has a high probability of
transmitting rabies (including foxes, bats, skunks, coyotes, and raccoons).



   LOW RISK ANIMAL.  Any animal that has a low probability of
transmitting rabies as determined by the Animal Control Manager.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.36  REPORT OF RABIES.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he has knowledge of an animal
bite or scratch of a human and fails to report said bite or scratch to the
Animal Control Manager within 24 hours from the time of the incident.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if he knows of an animal that he
suspects is rabid and fails to report such animal to the Animal Control
Manager.



   (C)   A report shall be written or oral and include if known, the
name and address of the victim and of the animal's owner, and any information
which could lead to locating the victim, the animal, and the animal's owner.



   (D)   The Animal Control Manager shall investigate all reports made
under this section.



   (E)   The owner of the biting animal will place that animal in
quarantine as prescribed in § 90.37 under the supervision of the Animal
Control Manager.



   (F)   Humans bitten by rodents, birds and reptiles are excluded from
the reporting requirements of this section.



   (G)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to dogs trained
and used by police departments, corrections departments or other government
service.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.37  QUARANTINE PROCEDURES FOR ANIMALS.



   (A)   The owner of an animal that has bitten or scratched a human
commits an offense if he fails to submit the animal to the Animal Control
Manager for quarantine immediately upon notification by the Animal Control
Manager of a biting or scratching incident.



   (B)   The owner of an animal that is suspected of being rabid
commits an offense if he fails to submit the animal to the Animal Control
Manager for quarantine immediately when ordered by the Animal Control Manager
to do so.



   (C)   The Animal Control Manager shall follow these procedures for
quarantining and testing:



      (1)   When a dog or cat has bitten or scratched a human, the
dog or cat shall be placed in quarantine, in a facility specified by the
Animal Control Manager and approved by the Texas Department of State Health
Services.



      (2)   When an animal that has not bitten or scratched a human
is suspected of having rabies, it shall be placed in quarantine for ten days,
in a facility specified by the Animal Control Manager and approved by the
Texas Department of State Health Services.



      (3)   Upon the request of the owner of a dog or cat which has
bitten or scratched a human, and at the sole discretion of the Animal Control
Manager, the Animal Control Manager may permit home quarantine for the animal
if the following criteria can be met:



         (a)   The animal was currently vaccinated against rabies
at the time of the bite or scratch;



         (b)   The animal was not at-large at the time of the
bite or scratch;



         (c)   The animal's owner has secure facilities at his
home for the animal which have been approved by the Animal Control Manager;



         (d)   The Animal Control Manager or a licensed
veterinarian must observe the animal on at least the first and eighth days of
the quarantine period;



         (e)   If the animal becomes ill during the observation
period, the person with possession of the animal must notify the Animal
Control Manager;



         (f)   The owner must sign an agreement to abide by the
quarantine rules; and



         (g)   At the end of the quarantine period, the animal
shall be observed by a licensed veterinarian and the veterinarian will
generate a letter authorizing the release of the animal from quarantine.



      (4)   If the Animal Control Manager is in possession of a dog
or cat which has bitten or scratched a human, and such animal is designated
as unowned, the Animal Control Manager may cause such animal to be
euthanized, and shall submit the animal's brain to a Texas Department of
State Health Services certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis.



      (5)   If the animal which has bitten or scratched a human is a
high risk animal, the Animal Control Manager shall cause such animal to be
euthanized, and shall submit the animal's brain to a Texas Department of
State Health Services certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis.



      (6)   If the animal which has bitten or scratched a human is a
low risk animal, the Animal Control Manager shall cause the animal to be
euthanized, and shall submit its brain for rabies diagnosis by a Texas
Department of State Health Services certified laboratory if the Animal
Control Manager has cause to believe the animal is rabid. If the Animal
Control Manager has no cause to believe the animal is rabid, then neither
quarantining nor testing will be required.



      (7)   If the animal, including a dog or cat, which has bitten
or scratched a human, inflicted multiple bite wounds, lacerations or
punctures to a person, the Animal Control Manager may cause the animal to be
euthanized, and shall submit the animal's brain to a Texas Department of
State Health Services certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis.



      (8)   If the animal which has bitten or scratched a human is
not included in division (C)(1), (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(4), (C)(5), (C)(6) or
(C)(7) of this section, the Animal Control Manager shall cause the animal to
be euthanized, and shall submit the animal's brain to a Texas Department of
State Health Services certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis.



      (9)   The Animal Control Manager shall cause to be euthanized
any animal required to be quarantined under this division (C) which cannot be
maintained in a secure quarantine, and shall submit the animal's brain to a
Texas Department of State Health Services certified laboratory for rabies
diagnosis.



      (10)   The Animal Control Manager shall follow the rules
promulgated by the Texas Department of State Health Services when submitting
an animal brain for testing.



      (11)   The Animal Control Manager may euthanize an unowned
animal prior to the end of the quarantine, and have the brain tested for
rabies.



      (12)   All quarantined animals shall be separated from all
other animals in such a manner that there is no possibility of physical
contact between animals.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.38  DISPOSITION OR RELEASE OF QUARANTINED ANIMAL.



   (A)   At the conclusion of the quarantine, the Animal Services
Control shall release the quarantined animal to its owner if the quarantined
animal shows no clinical signs of rabies, and



      (1)   If the owner presents an unexpired rabies vaccination
certificate for the animal to the Animal Control Manager; or



      (2)   If the animal is vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian at the owner's expense, and the owner presents a rabies
vaccination certificate for the animal to the Animal Control Manager.



   (B)   The Animal Control Manager shall euthanize any animal which at
the end of the quarantine period is determined by a veterinarian to show
clinical signs of rabies.



   (C)   If an animal dies, is killed, or euthanized while in
quarantine, the Animal Control Manager shall submit the animal's brain to a
Texas Department of State Health Services certified laboratory for rabies
diagnosis.



   (D)   The owner of a quarantined animal shall pay to the Animal
Control Manager all costs of quarantine and disposition of the animal, by fee
set by the Council. No quarantined animal shall be released until all fees
have been paid.



   (E)   If the owner of an animal fails to take possession of the
animal before the fourth day following the final day of the quarantine
period, the Animal Control Manager shall at his option place the animal for
adoption or cause it to be euthanized.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.39  ANIMAL EXPOSED TO RABIES.



   (A)   The owner of an animal which has been bitten by a rabid animal
or exposed by physical contact to its fresh tissues commits an offense if he
fails to report such bite or exposure to the Animal Control Manager within 24
hours of the incident.



   (B)   The owner of an animal which has been bitten by a rabid animal
or exposed by physical contact to its fresh tissues commits an offense if he
fails to submit his animal to the Animal Control Manager for quarantine or to
be euthanized immediately when requested to do so by the Animal Control
Manager.



   (C)   If the animal which has been bitten or exposed has not been
vaccinated against rabies and is an animal for which an approved vaccine
exists, the Animal Control Manager:



      (1)   May cause such animal to be euthanized; or



      (2)   May, if sufficient justification for preserving the
animal exists, cause the animal to be immediately vaccinated against rabies,
placed in strict isolation for 90 days, and given booster vaccinations during
the third and eighth weeks of isolation. If the animal is under 16 weeks of
age at the time of the second vaccination, an additional booster shall be
given when the animal reaches 16 weeks of age.



   (D)   If the animal which has been bitten or exposed was currently
vaccinated against rabies at the time of the bite or exposure, and is an
animal for which an approved vaccine exists, the Animal Control Manager:



      (1)   May cause such animal to be euthanized; or



      (2)   May, if sufficient justification for preserving the
animal exists, cause the animal to be given an immediate booster rabies
vaccination and be placed in strict isolation for 45 days.



   (E)   If the animal which has been bitten or exposed is an animal
for which no approved rabies vaccine exists, the Animal Control Manager shall
cause such animal to be euthanized.



   (F)   The procedures for disposition or release of the animal
following isolation shall be the same as those for disposition of an animal
following quarantine set forth in § 90.38.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



ANIMAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE



§ 90.50  ANIMAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE.



   (A)   The governing body of a county or municipality in which an
animal shelter is located shall appoint an Animal Advisory Committee to
assist in complying with the requirements of Tex. Health & Safety Code
Chapter 823.



   (B)   The Advisory Committee must be composed of at least one
licensed veterinarian, one municipal official, one person whose duties
include the daily operation of an animal shelter, and one representative from
an animal welfare organization.



   (C)   Members shall serve for three years and may be reappointed.



   (D)   The Advisory Committee shall meet at least three times a year.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter,
for which no other penalty has been set, shall be deemed guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense
for each day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, for which no other penalty has been set, is
committed, continued or permitted, and each violation shall be punishable by
a fine not to exceed $500.



   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 90.35
through 90.38 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and each such person
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof
during which any violation of any of the provisions of §§ 90.35 through
90.38 is committed, continued or permitted, and each violation shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.



(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-1805-11, passed 6-27-11)



CHAPTER 91: FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Hazardous conditions; abatement; reports to State Fire
Marshal



   91.02   Maintaining hazardous conditions



   91.03   Dangerous arrangement of stoves and the like



   91.04   Notice prerequisite to prosecution



   91.05   Permit fees



International Fire Code



   91.15   Adoption of the International Fire Code



   91.16   Establishment and duties of the fire prevention division



   91.17   Definitions



   91.18   Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of
flammable or combustible liquids in outside, aboveground tanks is prohibited



   91.19   Establishment of safety rules for the storage of liquified
petroleum gas



   91.20   Establishment of limits of districts in which the storage of
explosives and blasting agents is to be prohibited



   91.21   Establishment of limits of districts in which the storage of
compressed natural gas is to be prohibited



   91.22   Establishment of limits of districts in which the storage of
stationary tanks of flammable cryogenic fluids are to be prohibited



   91.23   Establishment of limits of districts in which the storage of
hazardous materials is to be prohibited or limited



   91.24   Amendments to the International Fire Code



   91.25   Appeals



   91.26   New materials, processes or occupancies which may require
permits



 



   91.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS; ABATEMENT; REPORTS TO STATE FIRE MARSHAL.



   (A)   The Fire Marshal, upon complaint of any person having an
interest in any building or property adjacent and without any complaint,
shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination,
to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it
shall be his or her duty, as the Fire Marshal deems necessary, to enter upon
and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all
mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises
belonging thereto. Whenever he or she shall find any building or other
structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated
condition, or for any cause is especially liable to fire, and which is so
situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire
would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he or she shall find
an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other
heating appliances or any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and
pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of
lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of
explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals,
vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials or
other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or
promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firefighters or occupants,
he or she shall by written order direct the same to be removed or remedied,
and such order shall within five days from the date of the order be complied
with by the owner or occupant of the building or premises. Provided, however,
if the owner or occupant deems himself or herself aggrieved by the order, he
or she may, within five days from the date of the order, appeal to the City
Manager specifying in writing the grounds upon which the appeal is based. The
City Manager shall investigate the cause of the complaint and the grounds of
the appeal and, unless by his or her authority the order is revoked, the
order shall remain in force and be complied with by the owner or occupant as
originally entered by the Fire Marshal or as amended or revised by the City
Manager, the compliance to be within five days of the date of the action
thereon by the City Manager.



   (B)   At the end of each month, the Fire Marshal shall report to the
State Fire Marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a
separate report on each fire in the city during the month.



(‘78 Code, § 8-27) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71; Am. Ord. 1430, passed
6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09)



§ 91.02  MAINTAINING HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS.



   Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises
who shall keep or maintain the same when, for want of repair, or by reason of
age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to
fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of
others, or is especially liable to fire and which is so occupied that fire
would endanger other persons or their property therein shall be punished by a
fine as provided in § 91.99.



(‘78 Code, § 8-28) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71; Am. Ord. 1430, passed
6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.03  DANGEROUS ARRANGEMENT OF STOVES AND THE LIKE.



   Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises
who shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a stove,
range, furnace or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including
chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be
dangerous in the matter of fire or health or safety of persons or property of
others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or
premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with
a storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable
products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse or with any
other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health
or property of others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of
promoting, augmenting or causing fires; or which shall create conditions
dangerous to firefighters, or occupants of the buildings, structure or
premises other than the maintainer thereof, shall be punished by a fine as
provided in § 91.99.



(‘78 Code, § 8-29) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71; Am. Ord. 1430, passed
6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  NOTICE PREREQUISITE TO PROSECUTION.



   No prosecution shall be brought under § 91.02 or § 91.03 until the
written order provided for in § 91.01 be given, and the party notified shall
fail or refuse to comply with the same as therein provided. For the purpose
of this section notice shall be deemed received if sent via U.S. mail to the
last known address on file with Mansfield Fire Department.



(‘78 Code, § 8-31) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71; Am. Ord. 1430, passed
6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   The following fees are established for permits and other
activities of the City Fire Department, Fire Prevention Bureau:



 




Above ground storage tank installation

 
$100 per tank


Automatic sprinkler system installation
 



1 - 20 heads

 

$50




21 - 150 heads

 

$100




151 - 500 heads

 

$200




501 - 1,000 heads

 

$300




Cost per head over 1,000

 

$1




Chemical extinguishing system

 

$75 per system




Day care permit

 

$75 annually*





 



 




Elevator installations

 
$50 per elevator


Fire alarm installation
 


1 - 10 devices
 
$50


11 - 25 devices
 
$75


26 - 99 devices
 
$150


100 - 199 devices
 
$200


200 - 400 devices
 
$300


Cost per device over 400
 
$1


Fireworks, blasting and pyrotechnics
 
$125


Gate installation permit
 
$50 per gate location


(Required for gates across private streets or electric gates across fire
lanes.)
 


LP gas installation - over 2,000 gallon single or 4,000 gallon aggregate
 
$100 per tank


Open burning:
 


Single day
 
$50 per location**


Multiple day (7-day maximum)
 
$200 per location


Private fire lines and hydrant installations
 
$50


Smoke control system installation
 
$100


Special egress control device installation (Mag locks or other
non-conventional security locks on required exit doors)
 


1 - 10 devices per location
 
$100


Each additional 10 devices or portion thereof
 
$50


Spray booth installation
 
$75 per booth


Standpipe systems
 
$50 per system


Underground storage tank installation/removal/abatement
 
$100 per tank*


Underground storage tank miscellaneous equipment or system
 
$50 per location




 



   (B)   No permit penalty. The fee is doubled if work is begun without
a permit and is tripled for subsequent violations by the same contractor
within three years. This penalty does not preclude additional penalties in
the form of citations or other legal remedies available.



   (C)   Other fees.



 

After hours inspection fee (6:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m., Monday - Friday or
weekends)
 
$45 per hour with two hour minimum paid in advance


Site assessment fee
 
$100 per site/request**


Re-inspection fees
 
$30 per occurrence


 
After two inspections


Photograph/video copy fees
 
Actual cost of duplication for photographs or $5 for video tape, plus $5
handling fee and $2.50 mailing fee



 



   *   These fees are referenced by other ordinances. The fee may be
collected under either ordinance, but are not to be duplicated.



   **   Permit fees are waived for these permits for governmental and
for non-profit organizations or groups.



(Ord. 1247, passed 2-22-99; Am. Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord.
OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09)



INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE



§ 91.15  ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.



   The City of Mansfield hereby adopts the International Fire Code,
published by the International Code Council, the 2006 Edition, save and
except such portions as are hereafter amended. The same are hereby adopted
and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and from and after
the passage of the ordinance adopting this section, the provisions thereof
shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Mansfield. The adoption
of the International Fire Code does not extend to the appendices thereto
unless specifically adopted elsewhere in this subchapter. Not less than three
copies of the International Fire Code, 2006 edition will be kept on file or
available in the office of the City Secretary.



(‘78 Code, § 8-40) (Ord. 401, passed 12-17-79; Ord. 487, passed 4-11-83;
Ord. 862, passed 4-23-90; Ord. 933, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 1430, passed
6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09)



§ 91.16  ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF THE FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION.



   (A)   The City of Mansfield hereby establishes a fire prevention
division as described in Section 103 of the International Fire Code, 2006
Edition. The fire prevention division is charged with enforcement of the
International Fire Code, as amended, as well as other ordinances and laws
over which the fire prevention division has responsibility. The fire
prevention division has the authority to enforce any provision of the current
adopted Building Code, Plumbing Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code or
Electrical Code related to fire or life safety features of the referenced
codes. Any interpretation of the Building, Plumbing. Mechanical or Electrical
Codes are the sole responsibility of the authority having jurisdiction over
the code in question. Corrective notices, citations or other corrective
actions as allowed by law may be issued for violations of the referenced
codes. The fire prevention division shall be operated under the supervision
of the Fire Chief.



   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall be appointed by the
City Manager, or his or her designee.



   (C)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall appoint a Fire Marshal,
who shall be responsible for the provisions of the International Fire Code
and related duties and functions as described by law or policy. The Fire
Marshal is designated as the authority having jurisdiction over the Fire Code
as amended, and is the "code official" for the International Fire Code. The
Chief may detail such members of the department to the fire prevention
division as may be necessary. All members of the Mansfield Fire Department
are authorized to request compliance with any provision of the codes as
described in division (A), except that only those members of the division who
have been specifically granted authority by the Chief and Fire Marshal, and
who have completed formal training and have a certification as an inspector
or peace officer may issue a citation, or take enforcement action. The Fire
Marshal, inspectors, investigators and any peace officer employed by or
working under the direction of the Mansfield Police Department, Mansfield
Fire Department, or the Mansfield Independent School District Police
Department (for those M.I.S.D. facilities located within the corporate limits
of the City of Mansfield) may issue citations for any violations of the
International Fire Code as amended. Personnel assigned to the fire prevention
bureau may take any action as allowed by law to remedy a violation of the
code.



(‘78 Code, § 8-41) (Ord. 401, passed 12-17-79; Ord. 487, passed 4-11-83;
Ord. 862, passed 4-23-90; Ord. 933, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 1430, passed
6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09)



§ 91.17  DEFINITIONS.



   It is the specific intent that these definitions be considered as a
part of Section 202 of the International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, without
being duplicated as an amendment to that specific section elsewhere in this
subchapter.



   (A)   Wherever the word JURISDICTION is used in the International
Fire Code or amendments thereto, it shall mean the City of Mansfield and the
Extra Territorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) where specific sections of this code as
amended are applicable in the ETJ.



   (B)   The terms FIRE MARSHAL, CODE OFFICIAL, FIRE CODE OFFICIAL,
FIRE CODE AUTHORITY and CODE AUTHORITY are interchangeable in this code and
shall mean the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.



   (C)   Whenever the term INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE is used, it shall
mean the 2006 International Fire Code and all supplements, attachments and
amendments as adopted herein.



   (D)   FALSE ALARM is the reporting, signaling or activation by any
means of an alarm for which no such fire or emergency actually exists. This
includes communicating or circulating a report of a present, past or future
bombing, fire, offense, or other emergency that is known to be false or
baseless and that would: (1) ordinarily cause action by any official or
volunteer agency organized to deal with emergencies; (2) place a person in
fear of imminent serious bodily injury or death; or (3) prevent or interrupt
the occupation of a building, room, place of assembly, place to which the
public has access or any mode of conveyance.



   (E)   FIREWORKS. A combustible or explosive composition, substance,
or combination of substances, or a device prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration
or detonation. FIREWORKS include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons,
toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used; firecrackers, torpedoes,
sky rockets, roman candles, sparklers or other devices of like construction;
any device containing an explosive or flammable compound; and any tablet or
other device containing an explosive substance. FIREWORKS do not include auto
flares, paper caps containing an average of twenty-five hundredths of a grain
of explosive content per cap or less: and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or
other devices for use of such caps. This definition supplements the
definition found in Section 3302.1 of the International Fire Code.



   (F)   HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building having floors used for human
occupancy located more than 65 feet (19,812 mm) above the lowest level of
Fire Department vehicle access.



   (G)   SELF SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property designed and used
for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers
for the purpose of storing and removing personal property on a self-service
basis.



   (H)   STANDBY PERSONNEL. Qualified fire service personnel, approved
by the Fire Chief. When utilized, the number shall be as directed by the Fire
Chief. Charges for utilization shall be as normally calculated by the
jurisdiction.



(‘78 Code, § 8-42) (Ord. 401, passed 12-17-79; Ord. 487, passed 4-11-83;
Ord. 862, passed 4-23-90; Am. Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1740-09,
passed 4-13-09)



§ 91.18  ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE
OR COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE, ABOVEGROUND TANKS IS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The limits referred to in Section 3404.2.9.5.1 and 3406.2.4.4
of the International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, in which storage of flammable
or combustible liquids in outside, aboveground tanks is prohibited, are
hereby established as follows:



      (1)   Flammable liquids.



         (a)   Motor fuels. The entire City of Mansfield, except
agriculture or farm properties in excess of ten acres where the fuel is
incidental to the operation of farm equipment, or installations complying
with the provisions of the International Fire Code Section 2206 as amended
and that are in an area zoned as a C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2 zoning district, within
a planned development district which specifically authorizes such use, when
the requirements of the International Fire Code as amended are met.



         (b)   Other flammable liquids. The entire City of
Mansfield, except that flammable liquids incidental to a commercial or
manufacturing process may be allowed in outside, aboveground tanks provided
the construction, installation, and placement of the tank and the handling
and use of the liquid conforms to the requirements of the International Fire
Code as amended, and other applicable standards, and further provided that
such tanks are located in an area zoned as a C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2 zoning
district, or are within a planned development district which specifically
authorizes such use.



      (2)   Combustible liquids.



         (a)   Motor fuels. The entire City of Mansfield, with
the following exceptions:



            1.   Subdivision development and construction
sites when the fuel storage is in compliance with the requirements of the
International Fire Code Section 2206 as amended.



            2.   Agriculture or farm property in excess of ten
acres when the fuel is incidental to the operation of farm equipment.



            3.   Installations within the limits allowed under
the provisions of Section 2206 as amended and complying with the provisions
of Section 2206 as amended provided the installation is in an area classified
as a C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2 or has approval for such installation as part of a PD
zoning district.



            4.   Fuel associated with road projects that are
under the control of the Texas Department of Transportation.



            5.   Existing aboveground diesel storage tanks
that were in place prior to the adoption of this section, that do not exceed
a maximum capacity of 550 gallons, that were in compliance with the codes at
the time they were originally installed and are in compliance with other
provisions of this code for above ground fuel storage and dispensing
operations. It is the specific intent of this clause to only allow continued
use of existing tanks. No tank may be added to any site within the city, nor
may any existing tank be replaced with any other tank, unless the tank meets
the provisions of this code.



            6.   Provided that the storage of diesel and other
class II motor fuels in outside, aboveground tanks under these exceptions is
conditioned that the construction, installation, and placement of the tank
and the handling and use of the fuel conforms to the requirements of the
International Fire Code and other applicable standards.



         (b)   Other combustible liquids. The entire City of
Mansfield, with the following exception:



Property located within the following zoning districts: C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2
and where specifically authorized in planned development districts.



   (B)   It is the intention of this section to entirely prohibit bulk
plants and refineries for flammable liquids within the corporate limits of
the City of Mansfield.



(‘78 Code, § 8-43) (Ord. 401, passed 12-17-79; Ord. 487, passed 4-11-83;
Ord. 862, passed 4-23-90; Ord. 933, passed 3-23-92; Ord. 954, passed 3-8-93;
Am. Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1470-09, passed 4-13-09) 
Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.19  ESTABLISHMENT OF SAFETY RULES FOR THE STORAGE OF LIQUIFIED
PETROLEUM GAS.



   (A)   The storage and use of liquified petroleum gases shall be in
accordance with the International Fire Code, N.F.P.A. Standard #58 and any
rules adopted by the Railroad Commission of Texas. The city recognizes that
LP gas is regulated in the state by the Railroad Commission and adopts by
reference the safety rules promulgated by the Railroad Commission of Texas
(NFPA # 58). Where a conflict exists between these regulations, the more
restrictive shall apply.



   (B)   Liquified petroleum gas is prohibited in the city with the
following exceptions:



      (1)   Fixed tanks are prohibited in multi-family zoning
districts. Exception: A single tank with a capacity not to exceed 250 gallons
is permitted for the purpose of heating swimming pools provided natural gas
is not available to the site. The tank must be located a minimum of ten feet
from any dwelling unit.



      (2)   Single-family zoning districts are permitted one
250-gallon tank, provided the tank complies with the spacing provisions of
this code. If the tank is placed where it is a minimum of ten feet from any
adjacent structure or property line, the amount may be increased to 500
gallons.



      (3)   Commercial zoning districts are permitted tanks of up to
1,000-gallon capacity, provided they meet the provisions of this code.



      (4)   Industrial zoning districts are permitted to use
containers with any quantity permitted by this code.



      (5)   Planned development districts are permitted to have
tanks in any quantity authorized by the PD provided the tank installation
conforms with the provisions of this code. Exception: LPG tanks installed
prior to the effective date of this subchapter that were in compliance with
applicable codes at the time of their installation are allowed to continue in
use. Any tank covered by this exception may not be replaced with a tank in
violation of this section.



   (C)   Existing non-conforming uses involving the sale of LPG and
tank sizes will be allowed to continue. No additional tanks may be installed
unless they comply with the provisions of this code.



   (D)   It is the specific intent of this section to prohibit the bulk
storage of LP gas within the City of Mansfield except as herein established.



   (E)   Quantities referred to in this section are aggregate
quantities on each tract of land. It is the responsibility of the property
owner and the installer of any LPG tank to ensure compliance with these
regulations and any tank installed in violation of these provisions must be
immediately removed.



('78 Code, § 8-44) (Ord. 401, passed 12-17-79; Ord. 487, passed 4-11-83;
Ord. 862, passed 4-23-90; Ord. 933, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 1430, passed
6-23-03; Am. Ord. 1544, passed 10-10-05; Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed
4-13-09)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.20  ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH THE STORAGE OF
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS IS TO BE PROHIBITED.



   The limits referred to in Section 3301.2.3 of the International Fire
Code, in which the storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited
are established as the entire city except land located in the C-3, I-1, I-2
zoning districts or within a planned development district which specifically
authorizes such use. and the Fire Department has issued the applicable permit.



('78 Code, § 8-45) (Ord. 401, passed 12-17-79; Ord. 487, passed 4-11-83; Am.
Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09)  Penalty,
see § 91.99



§ 91.21  ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH THE STORAGE OF
COMPRESSED NATURAL GAS IS TO BE PROHIBITED.



   The limits referred to in § 91.19 for the storage of liquified
petroleum gas shall also apply to the storage of compressed natural gas. CNG
is prohibited except in those areas as are hereby established: the entire
City of Mansfield except those areas and quantities as established under §
91.19 for liquified petroleum gases.



(Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. ORD-1470-09, passed 4-13-09)  Penalty,
see § 91.99



§ 91.22  ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH THE STORAGE OF
STATIONARY TANKS OF FLAMMABLE CRYOGENIC FLUIDS ARE TO BE PROHIBITED.



   The presence of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is
prohibited in the entire City of Mansfield.



(Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. ORD-1470-09, passed 4-13-09)  Penalty,
see § 91.99



§ 91.23  ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH THE STORAGE OF
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS IS TO BE PROHIBITED OR LIMITED.



   Limits on storage of hazardous materials. The presence of hazardous
materials in excess of the exempt amounts as defined in the International
Fire Code is prohibited in the entire city except properties located within
the following zoning districts: C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2 and where specifically
authorized in planned development districts.



(Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. ORD-1470-09, passed 4-13-09)  Penalty,
see § 91.99



§ 91.24  AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.



   The International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, is amended as listed in
Exhibit "A" amendments to the 2006 International Fire Code. Exhibit A is
attached to Ordinance OR-1470-09 which will be kept on file or available in
the office of the City Secretary.



(Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1470-09, passed 4-13-09)



§ 91.25  APPEALS.



   Whenever the Fire Marshal disapproves an application or refuses to
grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the
code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal in writing from
the decision of the Fire Marshal to the Fire Chief within ten days from the
date of the decision appealed. The Fire Chief will review the circumstances
and either render an opinion or establish a Board of Appeals in compliance
with Appendix A, attached to Ordinance OR-1470-09, of the International Fire
Code, which after hearing all facts in the case, shall render a written
judgment.



(Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1470-09, passed 4-13-09)



§ 91.26  NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS.



   The Fire Chief or his or her designee and Fire Marshal shall act as a
committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an
opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies for
which permits may be required in addition to those already enumerated in the
International Fire Code.



(Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1470-09, passed 4-13-09)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
code hereby adopted or who fails to comply therewith, or who shall build in
violation of any detailed statement or specifications or plans submitted and
approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from
which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such order
as affirmed or modified by the Board of Appeals or by a court of competent
jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and
every such violation and non compliance be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
punished by a fine not in excess of $2,000. The imposition of one penalty for
any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; all
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or
defects within a reasonable time; and, when not otherwise specified, each day
that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to
prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions, or any other official
action authorized by law.



('78 Code, § 8-49) (Ord. 401, passed 12-17-79; Ord. 487, passed 4-11-83;
Ord. 519, passed 11-28-83; Ord. 773, passed 4-11-88; Ord. 862, passed
4-23-90; Ord. 933, passed 3-23-92; Ord. 954, passed 3-8-93; Am. Ord. 1430,
passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1470-09, passed 4-13-09)



CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section



General Provisions



   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Business injurious to health; offensive substances on
premises



   92.03   Throwing refuse on public or private premises



   92.04   Nuisances defined; prohibited; notice; abatement



   92.05   Vegetation



   92.06   Junkyards and wrecking yards prohibited



   92.07   Abatement



   92.08   Injunctive remedy



   92.09   Court procedure at instance of aggrieved citizen



   92.10   Fee scheduled adopted by reference



Regulation of Smoking



   92.20   Definitions



   92.21   Smoking prohibited in public places



   92.22   Regulation of smoking in eating establishments, nightclubs,
adult entertainment establishments, billiard halls, bingo parlors, and
bowling centers



   92.23   Regulation of smoking in the workplace



   92.24   Where smoking is not regulated



   92.25   Posting of signs; placing receptacles



   92.26   Exemptions



   92.27   Culpability



   92.28   Restricted smoking materials; purpose



   92.29   Sale, delivery, offer, or gift



   92.30   Use or possession of restricted smoking material



   92.31   Use or possession of restricted smoking paraphernalia



   92.32   Location of sale of restricted smoking material and
restricted smoking paraphernalia



   92.33   Defenses to prosecution



   92.34   Sale or distribution of electronic vaping device and liquid
nicotine to minors prohibited



   92.35   Possession of electronic vaping device and liquid nicotine
by minors prohibited



Public Swimming Pool/Spa



   92.40   Designation of regulatory authority



   92.41   State regulations and guidelines



   92.42   Definitions



   92.43   Permit required



   92.44   Review of plans



   92.45   Inspections



   92.46   Pool/spa/interactive water feature closures



   92.47   Pool/spa/interactive water feature records



   92.48   Suspension and revocation of permit



   92.49   Public pool/spa manager certification



 



   92.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.  The city's minimum administrative fee of $200
that shall be assessed when the city abates or causes to be abated a
nuisance. This fee shall not include the actual costs incurred in abating or
causing to be abated a nuisance, but the administrative cost to the city of
processing the abatement. Without amending this chapter, the city may impose
an administrative fee of more than $200 if the city's cost of implementing
this chapter is greater than $200.



   ANTIQUE VEHICLE.  A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years
old.



   AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD.  An establishment or place of business that is
maintained, used or operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling wrecked,
scrapped, ruined or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts.



   BRUSH.  Scrub vegetation or dense undergrowth.



   COLLECTOR.  The owner of one or more antique or special interest
vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades or disposes of special
interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to
restore, preserve and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for
historic interest.



   COSTS.  The actual cost the city incurs in abating or causing to be
abated a nuisance, including without limitation, the cost of mowing, weeding,
removing objectionable rubbish, junk, unsightly, or unsanitary matter and the
like.



   CULTIVATED.  Vegetation that is deliberately grown and currently and
continuously maintained by the owner, occupant, or agent of the property.



   DEMOLISHER.  Any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle
into processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor
vehicles.



   EXPENSES.  The total of the Administrative Fee and Costs incurred by
the city in abating or causing to be abated a nuisance.



   GARBAGE.  All decayable waste from public and private establishments
and restaurants, including vegetable, animal and fish offal and animal and
fish carcasses. The term does not include sewage, body waste or industrial
by-products.



   HEARING OFFICER.  The municipal court judge of the city or the judge's
designated representative.



   JUNK.  All worn out, worthless and discarded material, including odds
and ends, old iron or other metal, glass and cordage.



   JUNKED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is self-propelled and:



      (1)   Does not have lawfully attached to it:



         (a)   An unexpired license plate; or



         (b)   A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and



      (2)   Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or
discarded; or



      (3)   Is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:



         (a)   72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public
property; or



         (b)   30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private
property.



(Tex. Transp. Code § 683.071)



   JUNKYARD.  A business that stores, buys, or sells materials that have
been discarded or sold at a nominal price by a previous owner and that keeps
all or part of the materials outdoors until disposing of them, or an
automobile graveyard.



   MAINTAINED.  Watered, pruned, trimmed, treated, and controlled in such
a manner as to enhance the use or enjoyment of one's property, without
interfering with the enjoyment or use of neighboring property or public
access.



   MOTOR VEHICLE COLLECTOR.  A person who:



      (1)   Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles;
and



      (2)   Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special
interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for
personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle
for historic interest.



   NUISANCE.  Anything which is injurious to the health or morals, or
indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of
property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property.



   OWNER.  A person having title to real property.



   PERSON.  Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership,
trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual.



   REFUSE.  All garbage, rubbish, paper and other decayable and
nondecayable waste, including vegetable matter and animal and fish carcasses.
The term does not include sewage from a public or private establishment or
residence.



   RUBBISH.  All nondecayable waste, except ashes, from public or private
establishments or residences.



   SPECIAL INTEREST VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle of any age that has not
been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its
historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.



   TRASH.  All refuse other than garbage, brush and large appliances and
trees, including household trash, discarded clothing, toys, papers, yard
trash, small shrub and tree trimmings and leaves.



   VEGETATION.  Any grass, weeds, shrubs, brush, bushes, or vines.



   WEEDS.  Vegetation that because of its height is objectionable,
unsightly or unsanitary, but excluding cultivated crops, shrubs, bushes,
trees, flowers, and vines.



   WRECKING YARD.  A place where old automobiles, trucks, equipment or
machinery which have formerly been in a workable or operable condition and
which are no longer in such condition are kept and maintained for the purpose
of storage or resale of all, or parts of, the automobiles, trucks, equipment
and machinery.



('78 Code, § 9-20) (Ord. 154, passed 6-11-63; Ord. 207, passed 10-22-68;
Ord. 257, passed 3-27-73; Ord. 695, passed 9-22-86; Ord. 843, passed 8-28-89;
Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)



§ 92.02  BUSINESSES INJURIOUS TO HEALTH; OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCES ON PREMISES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for any person
to carry on any trade, business or occupation injurious to the health, or
which threatens to become injurious to the health of residents of the city.



('78 Code, § 9-1)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for any person
to carry on any trade, business or occupation which allows any substance to
remain on premises in his or her possession, or controlled by him or her as
agent, tenant or otherwise, which has the effect of being injurious to or
offensive to the senses of residents of the city.



('78 Code, § 9-2)



(Ord. 122, passed 8-1-59) Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.03  THROWING REFUSE ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PREMISES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw, deposit or cause
to be swept, thrown or deposited any trash, refuse, junk, garbage or rubbish
upon or along any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, street or vacant lot, or
upon any publicly or privately owned premises within the city.



('78 Code, § 9-21) (Ord. 113, passed 7-8-58; Ord. 207, passed 10-22-68; Ord.
843, passed 8-28-89) Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Illegal disposal of litter, see Tex. Health & Safety Code § 365.012



§ 92.04  NUISANCES DEFINED; PROHIBITED; NOTICE; ABATEMENT.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, a nuisance is defined as, but
not limited to whatever is dangerous to human life or health, whatever
renders the ground, water, air or food a hazard or injury to human life or
health, or that is offensive to the senses that it is or tends to become
detrimental to the public health. Nuisance includes an object, place or
condition which constitutes a possible and probable medium of transmission of
disease to or between human beings or object, place or condition which may be
specifically declared by this section to be a nuisance.



   (B)    Any and all of the following conditions, acts, commissions,
omissions or deeds by any person shall be and are hereby declared to be a
nuisance.



      (1)   The act of allowing to exist any filth, refuse or manure
which attracts insects, rodents, snakes or other vermin, or tends to attract
insects, rodents, snakes or other vermin on the premises, in the possession
or control by any person as agent, tenant or otherwise.



      (2)   The act of allowing to exist any full or overflowing
privy, vault, cesspool or other receptacle for filth, night soil and human
excrement upon any premises owned or controlled by any person.



      (3)   The act of allowing the contents of a cesspool to be
pumped so as to flow over any premises for fertilizing or other purposes.



      (4)   The act of allowing any imperfect trap, sink or water
closet or any other drainage appliance or fixture to exist in any house or
building within the city from which there shall rise any foul or offensive
gas or odor.



      (5)   The act of casting, draining, throwing or causing to be
cast, drained or thrown or distributed in any public street or highway,
gutter, alley or any public or private ground within the city any kitchen
water, water from exhaust pipes, laundry water, water from service stations
and garages, air conditioners or other wastewater, slop, swill or liquid
filth.



      (6)   The keeping of any lot or piece of ground within the
limits of the city on which there is located a pool or pond of unwholesome,
impure, stagnant or offensive water.



      (7)   The allowing of paper, lumber, rocks or junk or other
trash or debris to accumulate or remain on any piece of property in such
manner as to create a harborage or breeding place for rats, vermin or
insects, or in such a manner as to be offensive, injurious to public health
or unpleasant and disagreeable in sight or odor to persons residing or
occupying any adjacent premises or to persons who may be in a public place or
public right-of-way.



      (8)   The failure of any owner, tenant or lessee to sweep or
cause to be swept the sidewalks in front of his or her place of business, or
the failure to place or cause to be placed all such paper, trash or debris
therefrom in an approved trash receptacle which shall be placed in such place
as set out in Ch. 50 of this Code regulating garbage in the city.



      (9)   To place, permit or abandon an icebox, refrigerator,
deepfreeze or other airtight container, or container which might trap a child
therein without all the locks of all doors having been removed therefrom,
outside of a building or other structure or upon any publicly or privately
owned premises.



      (10)   Any condition or place allowed to exist which
constitutes a breeding place for flies, mosquitoes, bees and other offensive
insects.



      (11)   All sewage, human excreta, wastewater, garbage or other
organic waste deposited, stored, discharged or exposed in such a way as to be
a potential instrument or medium in the transmission of disease to or between
any person or persons.



      (12)   Any collection of water in which mosquitoes are
breeding within the limits of the city.



      (13)   Any place or condition harboring rats in the city.



      (14)   A tree, shrub or other similar plant of any description
which creates a hazard or risk of damage or destruction to persons or
property, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of
the codes and ordinances of the city.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether owner, agent,
occupant or any other person having supervision or control, of any lot, tract
or parcel of land, or a portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, within the
city to allow, suffer or permit a nuisance as defined herein to exist.



   (D)   If any person violates or fails or refuses to comply with this
section within ten days after notice in writing; or by letter addressed to
the person at his or her post office address; or by publication in the
official publication of the city, if personal service may not be had as
aforesaid, or the persons address is not known, the city may enter upon the
premises and do or cause to be done such work as it is necessary to abate or
remove the nuisance and the expense incurred, including the cost of
publishing the notice shall be paid by the city and charged to the owner of
the property.



   (E)   The city may pay for the work and cause the expense to be
assessed against the real estate thereof upon which the nuisance is
maintained or permitted. A bill for the actual cost incurred by the city
resulting from the abatement and for a reasonable administrative fee shall be
mailed to the owner of the premises and must be satisfied within 30 days of
the date of mailing of the bill.



   (F)   In the event that the bill has not been satisfied within the
specified period, the Mayor may file a statement with the County Clerk of the
expenses incurred in the abatement of the described condition on the
premises. The city shall have a privileged lien on any lot or lots upon which
the expense is incurred, second only to tax liens and liens for street
improvements plus 10% per annum interest on the amount from the date of the
payment. For any such expenditure and interest, suit may be instituted and
foreclosure had in the name of the city, and the statement so made, as
aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the
amount expended in any such work. The provisions of this section are
cumulative and in addition to the penalties provided herein for the violation
of this section.



(‘78 Code, § 9-22) (Ord. 122, passed 8-1-59; Ord. 843, passed 8-28-89;
Ord. OR-2060-17, passed 9-7-17) Penalty, see § 92.99



Cross reference:



   Garbage and recycling, see Ch. 50



   Sewer and water service, see Ch. 51



Statutory reference:



   Accumulations; nuisance, see Tex. Health & Safety Code § 341.013



§ 92.05  VEGETATION.



   (A)   Overgrown vegetation, rubbish and other unsanitary matter
prohibited.



      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (4) of this division,
it is an offense for any person owning, leasing, claiming, occupying, or
having supervision or control of any real property within the city, to
suffer, permit, or allow uncultivated grass, weeds, or brush, to grow to a
height greater than ten inches, including along the sidewalk or street
adjacent to the premises between the property line and the curb or, if there
is no curb, between the property line and the driving surface.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of any person owning, leasing,
claiming, occupying, or having supervision or control of any real property
within the city to cut or cause to be cut, grass, weeds and brush, as often
as necessary to comply with the requirements of this chapter.



      (3)   Except as provided in subsection (4) of this division,
all grass, weeds, vegetation, or brush not regularly cultivated and which
exceed ten inches in height shall be presumed to be objectionable, unsightly,
and unsanitary, and are hereby declared a public nuisance.



      (4)   For tracts of land in excess of five acres, or that are
used for the active production of livestock, it shall be required only that
grass, weeds and vegetation, not regularly cultivated, be mowed to a height
of no greater than ten inches within a minimum of 200 feet of all adjacent
property lines and public or private streets. This minimum may be increased
on a case by case basis when deemed necessary by the Fire Department to
insure adequate fire safety of adjacent property containing structures or
equipment.



   (B)   Notice of violation prior to abatement by city.



      (1)   Notice required.  If the owner of land fails to comply
with the requirements of division (A) of this section, a city official may
cause the property owner to be notified to cut the grass, weeds, or brush
within ten days of the date of the notice.



      (2)   Method of notice.  The notice shall be given:



         (a)   Personally to the owner in writing;



         (b)   By letter addressed to the owner at the owner’s
address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the Appraisal
District in which the property is located;



         (c)   If personal service cannot be obtained:



            1.   By publication in the city’s official
newspaper once;



            2.   By posting the notice on or near the front
door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or



            3.   By posting the notice on a placard attached
to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation
relates.



      (3)   Unclaimed notice.  If notice is mailed to a property
owner in accordance with subsection (2) of this division, and the United
States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,”
the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered
delivered.



      (4)   Work to be performed.  If the owner does not cut the
weeds, grass, or plants, within ten days of the notice, the city may go on
such property or authorize another to go on such property, and do or cause
the work to be done and charge the expenses incurred to the owner of the
property and assess the expenses against the real estate on which the work is
done. The remedy provided in this section is in addition to any criminal
penalties or other remedies authorized by this chapter or other law.



      (5)   Additional violations.  Although it is not required,
the city may:



         (a)   Inform the owner by regular or certified mail and
a posting on the property that if the owner commits another violation of the
same kind (failure to mow weeds or high grass) on or before the first
anniversary of date of the notice, the city without further notice may
correct the violation at the owner’s expense and assess the expenses
against the property; and



         (b)   If a violation occurs within the one-year period,
and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership
change, then the city, without notice, may take corrective action and assess
the expenses against the owner and the property.



      (6)   Contents of notice.  The notice shall contain:



         (a)   The name and address of the record owner;



         (b)   An identification, which is not required to be a
legal description, of the property upon which the violation is located;



         (c)   A statement describing the violation and the work
necessary to correct the violation;



         (d)   A statement advising the owner that if the work is
not completed within ten days, the city will complete the work and charge the
expenses to the owner; and



         (e)   A statement that if the city performs the work and
the owner fails to pay the expenses, a priority lien may be placed on the
property.



   (C)   Assessment of expenses; lien; appeal.



      (1)   Notice.  In assessing the expenses incurred pursuant to
division (B) of this section against the property on which the work is done
or improvements made, the city shall send the owner of the property upon
which the work was done a notice which shall include:



         (a)   Identification of the property;



         (b)   A description of the violation;



         (c)   A statement that the city abated the condition;



         (d)   A statement of the city’s expenses in abating
the condition;



         (e)   An explanation of the property owner’s right to
request a hearing within ten days of the date of the letter; and



         (f)   A statement that if the owner fails or refuses to
pay the expenses within 30 days of the date of the notice, the Mayor or his
designee shall place a lien against the property by filing with the County
Clerk of the county in which the property is located a notice of lien and
statement of expenses incurred.



      (2)   Method.  The notice shall be sent in the same manner as
provided in division (B)(2) of this section.



      (3)   Hearing. The City Manager or his designated
representative will conduct a hearing if the property owner submits a written
request within ten days of the date of the notice. At the hearing:



         (a)   The owner and the city may testify or present
witnesses or written information related to the city’s abatement of the
nuisance.



         (b)   The city has the burden to show that a violation
of this chapter existed, notice was given in substantial compliance with this
chapter, and expenses were incurred to abate the violation.



         (c)   At the close of the hearing, the City Manager or
his representative may find, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, that
the expenses are valid, or that they are erroneous or he may adjust them.



      (4)   Placement of lien.  If no hearing is requested, or a
hearing is held and the expenses are determined to be valid or are otherwise
appropriately adjusted, and the owner fails or refuses to pay the expenses
within 30 days after written notification to pay, the Mayor or his designated
representative shall place a lien against the property by filing with the
County Clerk of the county in which the property is located a notice of lien
and statement of expenses incurred.



      (5)   Security.  The lien is security for the expenses and
interest accruing at the rate of 10% per annum from the date the work was
performed or the expenses were incurred by the city.



      (6)   Filing.  When the statement is filed, the city shall
have a privileged lien on that property, second only to tax liens and liens
for street improvements.



      (7)   Suit.  The city may institute suit to recover the
expenses, with interest, and may foreclose on the property. The original or a
certified copy of the statement of expenses is prima facie proof of the
expenses incurred by the city in doing the work or making the improvements.



   (D)   Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without prior
notice.



      (1)   Abatement.  The city may abate, without prior notice,
weeds that have grown higher than 48 inches, and are an immediate danger to
the health, life, or safety of any person.



      (2)   Notice.  Not later than the tenth day after the date
the city abates weeds under this section, the city shall give notice to the
property owner in the same manner provided in division (C)(1) of this section.



      (3)   Hearing.  The City Manager or his designated
representative shall conduct an administrative hearing under this section if,
not later than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the
property owner files with the city a written request for a hearing. The
hearing shall be conducted by the City Manager or his designated
representative not later than the 20th day after the date a request for
hearing is filed. At the hearing:



         (a)   The owner and the city may testify or present
witnesses or written information related to the city’s abatement of the
nuisance.



         (b)   The city has the burden to show that a violation
of this chapter existed, notice was given in substantial compliance with this
section, and expenses incurred to abate the violation were reasonable.



         (c)   The City Manager or his designated representative
may approve the expenses, deny the expenses, or adjust the amount of the
expenses and approve them as adjusted.



(Ord. 144, passed 8-14-62; Ord. 699, passed 10-13-86; Ord. 905, passed
9-23-91; Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01; Ord. OR-2059-17, passed 9-7-17) Penalty,
see § 92.99



§ 92.06  JUNKYARDS AND WRECKING YARDS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   In order to promote and protect the general health, safety and
welfare of persons residing within the city and within 5,000 feet of its
limits, and in order to protect the property and owners of property in such
area, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that wrecking yards
and junkyards shall not be permitted in the areas.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin, operate or
maintain a wrecking yard or junkyard within the city or in the area
contiguous to the city and within one mile of the corporate limits.



('78 Code, § 9-27) (Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Cross reference:



   Junked vehicles, see Ch. 93



§ 92.07  ABATEMENT.



   In the event that the owner of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or a
portion thereof, situated within the corporate limits of the city shall fail
to comply with § 92.05(C), then the Fire Marshal of the city, or his or her
designated representative, may notify the owner by certified letter addressed
to the owner at his or her post office address or by publication two times in
ten consecutive days in the official newspaper of the city, if personal
service may not be had as aforesaid or the owner's address be not known, of
the owner's failure to comply with § 92.05(C) of this chapter. At the
expiration of ten days after notification, the city may do such work as
necessary or cause the same to be done in order that the premises comply with
the requirements set forth in § 92.05(C). The city may pay for the work and
cause the expense thereof to be assessed against the real estate. A bill for
the actual cost incurred by the city resulting from the abatement of the
above described condition and for a reasonable administrative fee shall be
mailed to the owner of the premises and must be satisfied within 30 days of
the date of mailing of the bill. In the event that the bill has not been
satisfied within the specified period, the Mayor of the city may file a
statement with the County Clerk of the expenses incurred in the abatement of
the described condition on the premises, and the city shall have a privilege
lien on any lot or lots upon which the expense is incurred second only to tax
liens and liens for street improvements and 10% per annum interest on the
amount from the date the payment is due. For any such expenditure and
interest as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure
had in the name of the city and the statement so made as aforesaid, or a copy
thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in the work
performed by the city.



('78 Code, § 9-28) (Ord. 144, passed 8-14-62; Ord. 699, passed 10-13-86;
Ord. 905, passed 9-23-91)



Statutory reference:



   Abatement by city, see Tex. Health & Safety Code §§ 342.006 - 342.007



   Health officer, see Tex. Health & Safety Code § 341.082



§ 92.08  INJUNCTIVE REMEDY.



   The committing of any one of the acts declared to be a nuisance shall
create and give a cause of action to any aggrieved or offended resident of
the city, or to the city itself, for the abatement of the nuisance by remedy
of injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction in the state.



('78 Code, § 9-29) (Ord 122, passed 8-1-59)



§ 92.09  COURT PROCEDURE AT INSTANCE OF AGGRIEVED CITIZEN.



   When any one of the acts declared to be a nuisance are committed within
the city, any resident of the city offended by the act may file a sworn
complaint with the Judge of the Municipal Court. The Judge of the Court shall
then set the matter for hearing at a time certain subsequent to ten days
after the filing of the sworn complaint, will notify the party charged,
enclose with the notice a copy of the sworn complaint, will hear the matter
at the time set and thereafter enter his or her order thereon.



('78 Code, § 9-30) (Ord. 122, passed 8-1-59)



§ 92.10  FEE SCHEDULE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Tarrant County fee schedule for the inspection and regulation of
food establishments, public pools, spas and interactive water features within
the City of Mansfield, as may be amended from time to time, is adopted by
reference, the same as if set out in full herein.



(Ord. OR-1929-14, passed 11-24-14)



REGULATION OF SMOKING



§ 92.20  DEFINITIONS.



   ADMINISTRATIVE AREA. Any enclosed indoor area, under the control of an
employer, to which employees, but not the general public, except by specific
invitation, have access to during the course of employment, including, but
not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, employee restrooms, conference
rooms, and employee cafeterias.



   ADULTS ONLY ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business that limits its
customers to individuals 18 years of age or older and that employs no one
below the age of 18. Businesses of this category may include restaurants,
bars, sports bars, billiard halls, bingo parlors, retail tobacco shops or
other comparable businesses.



   AIR BARRIER. A system that creates an air curtain to prevent the drift
or penetration of tobacco smoke from a smoking area to a non-smoking area not
allowing drift or penetration from the ceiling down to 24 inches above the
floor.



   AIR PURIFICATION SYSTEM. An electrically powered hospital grade, hepa
media filter that will clean all of the air in a designated smoking area
every 15 minutes as follows: not less than 95% of three-tenths (0.3) micron
particulates efficiency including dust, smoke, pollen, mold spores, bacteria,
tobacco smoke, viruses, and allergens and not less than 95% removal of gases,
vaports, volatile organic compounds (V.O.C.) and odors and contains an air
barrier system or other barrier system if required by a licensed professional
engineer, to prevent air from the smoking area from being drawn across the
non-smoking area.



   BAR. An establishment licensed by the State of Texas for the sale of
alcoholic beverages that derives more than 75% of the establishment’s gross
revenue from the on-premise sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise
consumption. For the purposes of this definition, gross revenue shall be
calculated using the total amount of gross revenue received from the sale of
alcoholic beverages and from the sale of food by the establishment for the
preceding 12-month period. Such establishment shall make available to the
city or its agents, during reasonable hours, its books and records for
inspection if required by the city.



   BILLIARD HALL. A place of amusement whose chief purpose is providing
the use of billiard/pool tables to the public.



   BINGO PARLOR. A facility regulated under V.C.S., Article 179d -
“Bingo Enabling Act.”



   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers
and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle, other
than a taxi cab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.



   BUSINESS. Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture,
corporation, or other business entity formed for profit-making or non-profit
purposes, including but not limited to, banks, laundromats, hotels, motels,
retail establishments, professional corporations, and other entities where
legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional
services are delivered.



   CITY. The City of Mansfield.



   EATING ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where food is served for on-premises
consumption and which is accessible by the public or a substantial group of
the public.



   ELECTRONIC VAPING DEVICE.  Any electronically or battery powered
device designed to simulate the smoking of tobacco, cigarettes, pipes or
cigars, that provides a vapor derived from liquid nicotine and/or other
substances which is intended to be inhaled by a user thereof. The term
includes such devices generally manufactured to resemble cigarettes, cigars,
pipes or other smoking devices, regardless of the details of the product
design, appearance or marketed name.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person, partnership, corporation, municipal corporation,
non-profit entity, or other entity who employs the services of one or more
individual persons.



   EMPLOYER. Any person who employs the services of an individual person.



   ENCLOSED AREA. An area closed in by a roof and walls with appropriate
openings for ingress and egress.



   HEALTH FACILITY. Any institution that provides medical, surgical, and
overnight facilities for patients, including but not limited to, hospitals,
clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors’ offices,



dentists’ offices, nursing homes, adult care facilities, convalescent
homes, and residential treatment centers/homes.



   LIQUID NICOTINE.  Any liquid product composed of nicotine, propylene
glycol, vegetable glycerin, flavoring and/or other substances manufactured
for use with an electronic vaping device.



   MAJOR RENOVATION. Changing the amount of floor space in a building by
1/3.



   MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.



   NET FLOOR AREA. The total floor area of the interior of an eating
establishment, excluding the kitchen, restrooms, storage areas, and offices.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, or venture.



   PHYSICAL BARRIER. A barrier that will form an effective membrane
continuous from outside wall to outside wall, from a smoke barrier to a smoke
barrier, from floor to floor or roof above, or a combination thereof,
including continuity through all concealed spaces, such as above suspended
ceilings, interstitial structural and mechanical spaces. Transfer grilles,
louvers and similar openings shall not be used in these partitions. Self
closing, tight fitting doors are permitted in such barriers.



   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed area under the control of an employer
including but not limited to work areas, employee lounges, restrooms,
conference rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A private
residence shall not be considered a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT .



   PORTABLE AIR PURIFICATION SYSTEM. A portable electrically powered
hospital grade, hepa media filter that will clean all of the air in a
designated smoking area every 15 minutes as follows: not less than 95% of
three tenths (0.3) micron particulates efficiency including dust, smoke,
pollen, mold spores, bacteria, tobacco smoke, viruses and allergens and not
less than 95% removal of gases, vapors, volatile organic compounds (V.O.C.)
and odors.



   PRIVATE CLUB. Any building, premise or portion thereof which is
permitted by the state and allowed by special use permit by the city as a
private club for the storing, possession, and dispensing for on-premises
consumption of alcoholic beverages. However, PRIVATE CLUB does not include a
premise operated by an organization which is not available to and not
customarily used by the general public and entry and privileges thereto are
established by regulations that are created by an organization distinct from
a Texas Alcohol and Beverage private club membership.



   PRIVATE FUNCTION. The rental of a ballroom, restaurant, private club,
or other facility for the sole purpose of entertaining, private parties,
events, or other social functions.



   PUBLIC BUSINESS. Any deliberation between a quorum of members of any
board, commission, department, committee or agency within the executive or
legislative department of the State of Texas, or the City Council or any
board or commission of the City of Mansfield at which any public business or
public policy is discussed or considered or at which any formal action is
taken.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed area in which the public is invited or
permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, educational facilities,
health facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception
areas, restaurants, marketing establishments, retail service establishments,
retail stores, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a
PUBLIC PLACE , nor is a facility while it is being used for a private
function, such as a reception, party, and the like. Private clubs are not
considered a PUBLIC PLACE .



   RESTAURANT. Any place where food is manufactured, packaged, produced,
processed, transported, stored, sold, commercially prepared, vended, or
otherwise handled. The term includes any such place regardless of the
duration of the permit or whether there is a charge for the food. The term
includes, but is not limited to, a coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich shop,
private or public school cafeteria, and any other eating establishment that
gives or offers food to the public, guests, or employees, including 
catering facilities. The term shall not include a cocktail lounge or tavern
if the cocktail lounge or tavern is a “bar” as defined in this section.
The term does not include private homes where food is prepared or served for
guests and individual family consumption.



   RESTRICTED SMOKING MATERIAL.   Any substance, however marketed, which
can reasonably be converted for smoking purposes whether it is presented as
incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof if it includes any of
the following chemicals or a comparable chemical:



      (1)   Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant
presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not,
the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every
compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such
plant, its seeds or extracts;



      (2)   2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phen
ol (also known as CP47,497) and homologues;



      (3)   (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan
-2-yl)-6a,7,10 ,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol) (also known as HU-211 or
Dexanabinol);



      (4)   1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018);



      (5)   1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073); or



      (6)   1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl)indole (also known as
JWH-081).



Products containing some of the above substances are currently being marketed
under the following commercial names: “K-2", “K-2 SUMMIT”, “K-2
SEX”, “GENIE”, “DASCENTS”, “ZOHAI”, “SAGE”, “SPICE”,
“KO KNOCK-OUT 2", “SPICE GOLD”, “SPICE DIAMOND”, “YUCATAN
FIRE”, “SOLAR FLARE”, “PEP SPICE”, “FIRE N’ ICE”, AND
“SALVIA DIVINORUM”.  It is anticipated by the Council that new products
will be marketed under different names but will be subject to this definition
if they contain any of the chemical components set forth above.



   RESTRICTED SMOKING MATERIAL PARAPHERNALIA.   Any paraphernalia,
equipment or utensil that is used or intended to be used in ingesting or
inhaling illegal smoking materials and may include:



      (1)   A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or
ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or
punctured metal bowl;



      (2)   A water pipe;



      (3)   A carburetion tube or device;



      (4)   A smoking or carburetion mask;



      (5)   A chamber pipe;



      (6)   A carburetor pipe;



      (7)   An electric pipe;



      (8)   An air-driven pipe;



      (9)   A chillum;



      (10)   A bong; or



      (11)   An ice pipe or chiller.



   For purposes of interpretation and enforcement, the term USED as found
in this definition shall mean CUSTOMARILY USED .



   RETAIL OR SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment which sells goods or
services to the general public.



   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail store whose primary business is the sale
of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of products is
merely incidental.



   SELL. To offer for sale, convey, exchange, barter, or trade.



   SERVICE LINE. Any indoor line or area where persons wait for goods or
service of any kind, regardless of whether or not an exchange of money will
occur. Such service includes, but is not limited to, sales, giving of
information, directions, advice, and the transfer of money or goods.



   SMOKING. The combustion of any cigar, cigarette, pipe , tobacco
product, weed, plant, or other combustible substance and the use of any
electronic vaping device as defined herein.



   SPORTS ARENA. Sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas,
swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, and other similar places where members
of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise,
participate in athletic competition or witness sports events.



   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any tobacco, cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless
tobacco, snuff, or any other form of tobacco, which may be utilized for
smoking, chewing, inhalation or other manner of ingestion or absorption.



   TOBACCO SHOP. A retail establishment whose annual gross revenues from
the sale of tobacco products and smoking accessories are at least 50% of
total revenue.



   TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic
self-serving device which, upon insertion of money, tokens, or any other form
of payments, dispenses tobacco products.



   VALID IDENTIFICATION. A valid driver’s license or an identification
card issued by the Department of Public Safety which contains a physical
description and a photograph consistent with the person’s appearance. The
proof of identification may include a driver’s license issued by Texas or
another state, a passport, or an identification card issued by a state or the
federal government.



   VENTILATION SYSTEM. A HVAC system designed by a licensed professional
engineer to meet the requirements of this subchapter and all other
requirements of the city’s building code. A ventilation system must provide
an air change every 15 minutes; exhaust the air to the exterior of the
building and the air from the smoking area cannot be drawn across the
non-smoking area; and has an air barrier system, if required by a licensed
professional engineer, to prevent air from the smoking area from being drawn
across the non-smoking area.



   WORKPLACE. Any enclosed area of a structure, or portion thereof,
intended for occupancy by employees who provide primarily clerical,
professional or business services of a business entity, or which provide
primarily clerical, professional or business services to other business
entities or to the public at that location.



(‘78 Code, § 9-81) (Ord. 741, passed 5-19-87; Am. Ord. 1309, passed
4-10-00; Am. Ord. OR-1737-09, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. OR-1773-10, passed
6-28-10; Meeting Minutes 6-28-10; Am. Ord. OR-1910-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 92.21  SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   City-owned buildings.



      (1)   All enclosed buildings owned or leased by the City of
Mansfield shall be designated non- smoking with no designated smoking
section, except as listed in division (A)(2) below.



      (2)   Jail cells located in city facilities used for the
incarceration of prisoners may be designated as a smoking area at the
discretion of the Director of Public Safety. All other areas shall be
designated as non-smoking areas.



   (B)   Places where smoking is prohibited. A person commits an
offense if he or she is smoking or possesses a burning tobacco, weed, or
other plant product in any of the following indoor or enclosed areas:



      (1)   Public or private schools.



      (2)   City buildings.



      (3)   Public elevators and stairwells.



      (4)   Buses, taxi cabs, and other means of public
transportation.



      (5)   All boarding and waiting areas of public transit depots.



      (6)   Public restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways and
any other common use area.



      (7)   Service lines and waiting queues, whether indoor or
outdoor.



      (8)   Retail or service establishments.



      (9)   Businesses, including all areas available to and
customarily used by the general public.



      (10)   Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums.



      (11)   Day care centers, except that day care centers that are
also private homes shall be considered private residences when the children
or adults receiving care have gone home.



      (12)   Every publicly or privately owned theater, auditorium
or other enclosed facility which is open to the public for the primary
purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, musical recital,
athletic event or any other performance or event, except when smoking is part
of a stage production.



      (13)   Any portion of any publicly or privately owned area to
which the public has access. This division (B)(13) section does not apply to
private residences.



      (14)   Any seating area of any publicly or privately owned
outdoor athletic facility.



      (15)   Health care facilities and hospitals.



      (16)   Hotels and motels, except as provided for in §
92.24(A)(2).



      (17)   Any seating area of any publicly or privately owned
outdoor theater or amphitheater.



      (18)   City parks and recreational facilities.



      (19)   Within 30 feet of any door, operable window/vent or
other opening to an indoor enclosed area of a use listed above.



   (C)   Exceptions.



      (1)   An adults only establishment as defined in § 92.20 is
exempt from the non-smoking provisions set forth above under the following
circumstances:



         (a)   It must prohibit the entry of customers below the
age of 18;



         (b)   It may have no employees or guests below the age
of 18;



         (c)   It must prominently display a sign by all public
entrances reflecting that this is an adults only establishment and that no
one under 18 years of age is permitted within the establishment and that it
permits smoking in all areas and that there are no non-smoking facilities
contained within.



      (2)   A business establishment listed above under division (B)
where smoking would otherwise be prohibited may construct a separate but
contiguous facility of the same business where smoking is permitted. The
facility must be separated from the non-smoking facility by a solid wall
which extends from floor to ceiling, must have a separate entrance and must
not share a common heating and air conditioning system which allows the
passage of air from one facility to the other. It may have no employees or
guests below the age of 18. The smoking portion of the business must display
a sign at all public entrances reflecting that this is an adults only
establishment and that no one under 18 years of age is permitted within the
establishment and that smoking is permitted in all areas and that there are
no non- smoking facilities contained within. A business establishment
operating pursuant to this section may serve both the smoking and non-smoking
dining areas from a single kitchen provided that the facility is designed and
constructed in a manner that does not permit smoke from the smoking portion
to pass through the kitchen to the non-smoking area. An establishment
operating under this section may serve both the smoking and non-smoking areas
from a single set of restrooms provided that they are located within the
non-smoking portion of the establishment and the facility is designed and
constructed in such a manner as to prevent smoke from the smoking area being
drawn into the non-smoking area when patrons pass from one portion of the
establishment to the other.



      (3)   It is an exception to division (B)(15) above that a
hospital provide a room in which a patient may reside and smoke providing
that all patients assigned to that room are agreeable and the administrator
of the facility concurs with the designation. A room placed in this status
shall prominently display a sign which states: "Smoking is permitted in this
room."



      (4)   A person is exempt from the non-smoking provisions set
fort above if the use of an electronic vaping device is at the direction or
under a prescription issued by a licensed physician authorized to prescribe
such devices for the treatment of medical conditions.



      (5)   A city park and/or public recreational facility that is
operated by the governmental unit or that is leased to or operated by an
outside private entity via a contract or agreement with the governmental
entity may choose to designate an unenclosed area within the facility as a
permitted  smoking location. The area shall not be enclosed, not located
within 30 feet of a playground or seating area, not located within 30 feet of
a door, operable window/vent or other opening to an enclosed area and not a
part of an athletic field or dugout. The operator or manager of the facility
may choose to prohibit smoking at the facility at the discretion of the
operator or manager. It shall be the duty of the operator or manager to
either clearly mark the designated smoking area or to provide notice that
smoking will not be permitted on the entire premises.



   (D)   Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under this section
that the conveyance or public place within which the offense occurred did not
have prominently displayed a reasonably sized notice that smoking was
prohibited.



(‘78 Code, § 9-82) (Ord. 741, passed 5-19-87; Am. Ord. 1309, passed
4-10-00; Am. Ord. OR-1737, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. OR-1910-14, passed 4-29-14)



§ 92.22  REGULATION OF SMOKING IN EATING ESTABLISHMENTS, NIGHTCLUBS, ADULT
ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS, BILLIARD HALLS, BINGO PARLORS, AND BOWLING
CENTERS.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he or she is smoking tobacco or
possesses a burning tobacco, weed or other plant product in an eating
establishment, bar, night club, adult entertainment establishment, billiard
hall, bingo parlor, or bowling center unless it operates in compliance with
§ 92.21(C).



   (B)   An owner, manager, or operator of an eating establishment,
bar, night club, adult entertainment establishment, billiard hall, bingo
parlor, or bowling center commits an offense if he or she allows smoking in
the establishment unless it operates in compliance with § 91.21(C).



   (C)   Defenses. It is a defense to a prosecution under division (A)
above that the establishment did not have prominently displayed a reasonably
sized notice that smoking was prohibited.



   (D)   Existing businesses and facilities. All businesses and
facilities in operation on the effective date of Ordinance OR-1737-09 shall
have 18 months from February 9, 2009 to be in compliance.



   (E)   Owner/operator responsibility.



      (1)   The owner, manager, or operator of an eating
establishment, bar, night club, adult entertainment establishment, billiard
hall, bingo parlor, or bowling center commits an offense if he or she
designates or maintains a smoking area in violation of this subchapter.



      (2)   The owner or manager of an establishment governed by
this subchapter commits an offense if he or she fails to post and maintain
any signs required by this subchapter.



(‘78 Code, § 9-83) (Ord. 741, passed 5-19-87; Am. Ord. 1309, passed
4-10-00; Am. Ord. OR-1737-09, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. OR-1910-14, passed
4-29-14)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.23  REGULATION OF SMOKING IN THE WORKPLACE.



   (A)   An employer who owns, occupies, or controls a workplace may:



      (1)   Have and implement a written policy on smoking which
conforms to this subchapter.



      (2)   Make the policy available for inspection by employees
and communicate the policy to all employees at least three weeks prior to its
adoption.



      (3)   Prominently display reasonably sized signs that smoking
is prohibited.



      (4)   Provide facilities in sufficient numbers in such
locations as to be readily accessible for the extinguishment of smoking
materials.



      (5)   Not discharge, retaliate, or discriminate against an
employee who:



         (a)   Files a complaint or causes a proceeding to be
instituted under or related to this subchapter;



         (b)   Testifies or will testify in a proceeding
instituted under this subchapter; or



         (c)   Exercises on his or her own behalf or the behalf
of others any right afforded by this subchapter.



(‘78 Code, § 9-84) (Ord. 741, passed 5-19-87; Am. Ord. 1309, passed
4-10-00; Am. Ord. OR-1737-09, passed 2-9-09)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.24  WHERE SMOKING IS NOT REGULATED.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter to the
contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking
restrictions of this subchapter:



      (1)   Private residences, including porch and yard areas,
except when used as a child care, adult day care or health care facility.



      (2)   Not more than 10% of hotel and motel rooms rented to
guests shall be designated as smoking rooms. The following standards shall
apply:



         (a)   All smoking rooms shall be on the same floor,
shall be contiguous to the other smoking rooms and shall be configured and
ventilated in a manner to restrict the smoke from these rooms from
infiltrating into areas where smoking is prohibited under provisions of this
subchapter;



         (b)   Separate ventilation and HVAC systems that prevent
the commingling of air with other rooms, hallways and all other non-smoking
areas shall be required; and



         (c)   The status of rooms as smoking or non-smoking may
not be changed, except to add additional non-smoking rooms.



      (3)   Retail tobacco stores, where a retail store is utilized
primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the
sale of other products is merely incidental. Separate ventilation and HVAC
systems that prevent the commingling of air with other businesses, common
areas, hallways and other non-smoking areas shall be required.



      (4)   Enclosed meeting or assembly rooms in restaurants,
hotels, motels, and other public places while the entire room is being used
for a private function provided it has a portable air purification system
(defined in § 92.20).



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any
owner, operator, manager, or other person who controls any establishment
described in this section may designate the entire establishment as a
non-smoking establishment.



(Ord. 1309, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord. OR-1737-09, passed 2-9-09)



§ 92.25  POSTING OF SIGNS; PLACING RECEPTACLES.



   (A)   Signs. All signs shall be in letters not less than one inch
high with a stroke of not less than 1/8-inch on a contrasting background.



      (1)   A place or conveyance regulated by § 92.21 that is
required to be totally non-smoking shall have signs conspicuously posted at
all public entrances which state: "No Smoking - City Ordinance."



      (2)   If a place or conveyance regulated by § 92.21(C)
permits smoking, it shall post and maintain the sign required in § 92.21(C).



   (B)   Receptacles. A place, establishment or conveyance regulated by
§ 92.21(B) or § 92.22 which is partially or totally non-smoking shall have
facilities for the extinguishment of smoking materials located no farther
than 30 feet or closer than 15 feet of all public entrances and within all
designated smoking areas. The owner, manager, or operator of a place,
conveyance or establishment commits an offense if he or she fails to post
signs and provide extinguishment facilities as required by this section.



(‘78 Code, § 9-85) (Ord. 741, passed 5-19-87; Am. Ord. 1309, passed
4-10-00; Am. Ord. OR-1737-09, passed 2-9-09)



§ 92.26  EXEMPTIONS.



   Any owner or manager of a business, facility, room, structure, or other
establishment existing on the effective date of Ordinance OR-1737-09 which is
subject to §§ 92.21, 92.23 and 92.25 may apply for an exemption or
modification to any provision of this subchapter due to unusual circumstances
or conditions. Such exemption may be granted by the City Council, only if the
evidence presented by the applicant for exemption demonstrates that:



   (A)   The applicant cannot comply with the provisions of this
subchapter for which an exemption is requested without incurring expenses for
structural or other physical modifications, other than posting signs, to
buildings and structures; or



   (B)   Due to such unusual circumstances, the failure to comply with
the provision for which the exemption is requested will not result in a
danger to health or annoyance, inconvenience, or discomfort.



(Ord. 1309, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord. OR-1737-09, passed 2-9-09)



§ 92.27  CULPABILITY.



   There shall be no requirement of a culpable mental state for a
violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1309, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord. OR-1737-09, passed 2-9-09)



§ 92.28  RESTRICTED SMOKING MATERIALS; PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this section is to prohibit the sale or delivery of
restricted smoking materials as defined herein to any individual below 21
years of age within the city limits of the City of Mansfield and to prohibit
the possession of restricted smoking materials by any individual below 21
years of age within the city limits of the City of Mansfield. Any form of
delivery to include a simple gift constitutes a violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. OR-1773-10, passed 6-28-10)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.29  SALE, DELIVERY, OFFER, OR GIFT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell,
deliver to or to give any restricted smoking material to anyone below 21
years of age.



   (B)   For purposes of interpretation and enforcement, the term SELL
as found in this section shall include "display for sale".



(Ord. OR-1773-10, passed 6-28-10; Meeting Minutes 6-28-10)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.30  USE OR POSSESSION OF RESTRICTED SMOKING MATERIAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person below 21 years of age to have in
their possession or to use restricted smoking materials within the corporate
limits of the City of Mansfield.



(Ord. OR-1773-10, passed 6-28-10)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.31  USE OR POSSESSION OF RESTRICTED SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession any
restricted smoking paraphernalia with the intent to use it, to ingest, inhale
or otherwise consume restricted smoking material if they are below 21 years
of age. If an individual below 21 years of age is found in possession of this
type of paraphernalia it will be a violation of this subchapter if
appropriate forensic testing is done on the paraphernalia and traces of
restricted smoking material are present on the device.



(Ord. OR-1773-10, passed 6-28-10)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.32  LOCATION OF SALE OF RESTRICTED SMOKING MATERIAL AND RESTRICTED
SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell,
deliver or to give any restricted smoking material or restricted smoking
paraphernalia to any person within 1,000 feet of the following:



      (1)   A church;



      (2)   A public or private elementary or secondary school;



      (3)   A licensed day care center;



      (4)   A public park, recreation center or water park; and



      (5)   A public library.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used for purpose of selling or
delivering the restricted smoking material or restricted smoking
paraphernalia to the nearest property line of the premises of a church,
public or private elementary or secondary school, licensed day care center,
public library, public park, recreation center or water park.



   (C)   For purposes of interpretation and enforcement, the term SELL
as found in this section shall include "display for sale".



(Ord. OR-1773-10, passed 6-28-10; Meeting Minutes 6-28-10)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.33  DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION.



   (A)   It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this
section if the use of the restricted smoking material is at the direction or
under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to
prescribe controlled substances within the State of Texas.



   (B)   It shall be a defense to prosecution under the terms of this
section if an individual charged with a violation can provide proper and
complete historic documentation that the use of such materials is a portion
of a religious undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which
they have long standing historic membership supported by documentation from
clergy or spiritual leader recognized by the State of Texas.



(Ord. OR-1773-10, passed 6-28-10)



§ 92.34  SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF ELECTRONIC VAPING DEVICE AND LIQUID
NICOTINE TO MINORS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person sells, gives,
transfers or otherwise causes to be sold or given an electronic vaping device
or liquid nicotine to a minor or to a another person who intends to deliver
it to a minor.



   (B)   If an offense under this section occurs in connection with a
sale or delivery of an electronic vaping device or liquid nicotine at a
business by an employee of the business, the employee who commits the offense
shall also be subject to prosecution in addition to the business.



   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that at the
time of the sale or delivery of an electronic vaping device or liquid
nicotine, the minor presented the person with an apparently valid
identification showing that the minor was at least 18 years of age.



   (D)   It is not a defense to prosecution under this section that the
minor purchased the electronic vaping device or liquid nicotine from a
vending machine or other self-service merchandising machine if the machine
was located on the premises of the person.



(Ord. OR-1910-14, passed 4-29-14)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.35  POSSESSION OF ELECTRONIC VAPING DEVICE AND LIQUID NICOTINE BY
MINORS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   A minor commits an offense if the minor purchases, accepts,
possesses or attempts to purchase, accept or possess an electronic vaping
device or liquid nicotine.



   (B)   A minor commits an offense if the minor falsely represents
himself or herself to be 18 years of age or older for purpose of purchasing
or receiving an electronic vaping device and or liquid nicotine.



   (C)   It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section if at
the time of the purchase, acceptance or possession, the minor is:



      (1)   in the presence of an adult parent, guardian or spouse,
or other adult to whom the minor has been entrusted by a court; or



      (2)   In the course and scope of the minor’s employment by a
person or entity in the distribution, wholesale or retail of electronic
vaping devices or liquid nicotine, and the acceptance or possession of the
electronic vaping device or liquid nicotine by the minor is part of the
duties of such employment.



(Ord. OR-1910-14, passed 4-29-14)  Penalty, see § 92.99



PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL/SPA



§ 92.40  DESIGNATION OF REGULATORY AUTHORITY.



   The city designates the Tarrant County Public Health Department as its
regulatory authority for the purpose of insuring minimum standards of
environmental health and sanitation within the scope of that department’s
function.



(‘78 Code, § 9-88) (Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14, passed
11-24-14)



§ 92.41  STATE REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES.



   There is hereby adopted by reference of the V.T.C.A., Tex. Health and
Safety Code § 341.064; and the Tex. Admin. Code §§ 265.181 through
265.208, “Standards for Public Pools and Spas “ and Tex. Admin. Code §§
265.301 through 265.308 “Public Interactive Water Features and
Fountains”. Three certified copies of each shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Secretary.



(‘78 Code, § 9-89) (Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14, passed
11-24-14)



§ 92.42  DEFINITIONS.



   All definitions in the V.T.C.A., Tex. Health and Safety Code Chapter
341 and Title 25, Chapter 265, Subchapter L of the Texas Department of State
Health Services regulations, “Standards for Public Pools and Spas,” are
hereby adopted. In addition, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CERTIFIED POOL OPERATOR.  A person who possesses a valid pool
operator’s certificate from a course approved by the regulatory authority.



   CITY.  Authorized representatives of the City of Mansfield, which
shall include the director and representatives of the Tarrant County Public
Health Department.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the Tarrant County Public Health
Department, who shall be an authorized representative of the city with
respect to public pool and spa inspections and permitting.



   POOL.  Any manmade permanently installed or non-portable structure,
basin, chamber, or tank containing an artificial body of water that is used
for swimming, diving, aquatic sports, or other aquatic activity other than a
residential pool and that is operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee
or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for use. The POOL
may be either publicly or privately owned. The term does not include a spa or
a decorative fountain that is not used as a pool.



   PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL POOL.  A pool that is located on private property
that is intended for use by one single-family and their invited guests,
located on property used for the placement of a single-family residence.



   PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SPA.  A spa that is located on private property
that is intended for use by one single-family and their invited guests,
located on property used for the placement of a single-family residence.



   PUBLIC INTERACTIVE WATER FEATURE AND FOUNTAIN (PIWF).  Any indoor or
outdoor installation maintained for public recreation that includes water
sprays, dancing water jets, waterfalls, duping buckets, or shooting water
cannon in various arrays for the purpose of wetting the persons playing in
the spray streams.



   REGULATORY AUTHORITY.  The director and representatives of the Tarrant
County Public Health Department.



   SPA.  A constructed permanent or portable structure that is two feet
or more in depth and that has a surface area of 250 square feet or less or a
volume of 3,250 gallons or less and that is intended to be used for bathing
or other recreational uses and is not drained and refilled after each use. It
may include, but is not limited to, hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold
water, mineral baths, air induction bubbles, or any combination thereof. A
SPA does not refer to a business establishment, such as a day spa or a health
spa. Industry terminology for a SPA includes, but is not limited to,
“hydrotherapy pool”, “whirlpool”, “hot spa”, “hot tub”, and
the like. A SPA does not include a private residential spa.



(‘78 Code, § 9-90) (Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14, passed
11-24-14)



§ 92.43  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
public pool, spa, or interactive water feature in the city without a current
and valid pool, spa or interactive water feature permit.



   (B)   Posting. A valid permit issued to a public swimming pool, spa
or interactive water feature shall be posted in public view in a conspicuous
place at the permitted facility.



   (C)   Nontransferable (change of ownership). Permits issued under
the provisions of this chapter are not transferable. Upon change of ownership
of a business, the new business owner will be required to meet current
standards as defined in city ordinances and state law before a permit will be
issued. The new owner shall notify the regulatory authority within ten days
after assuming ownership of the pool, spa, or interactive water feature.



   (D)   Multiple permits. A separate permit shall be required for
every public pool, spa, or interactive water feature, except that public
pools or spas or interactive water features on a single water filtration
system require just one permit.



   (E)   Denial of permit. A permit may be denied if the regulatory
authority, upon inspection, determines that the applicant has failed to
comply with approved plans and specifications adopted in accordance with
these rules.



   (F)   Inspections for permits. An inspection shall be required
annually to qualify for a permit. A permit is valid for one year from the
date of issuance.



(‘78 Code, § 9-91) (Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14, passed
11-24-14) Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.44  REVIEW OF PLANS.



   (A)   Submission of plans. Before a public pool’s and/or spa’s
and/or interactive water feature’s construction or extensive remodeling
begins, the person proposing to construct or remodel shall submit an
application to the regulatory authority for review and approval. The
application shall include:



      (1)   The construction or remodeling plans, under an
engineer’s seal, and specifications stating that the proposed construction
or remodeling complies with these rules and indicating that the proposed
layout, mechanical plans, construction materials of work areas, and the type
and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities;



      (2)   The date on or after which proposed construction is to
begin;



      (3)   The phone number and address of the entity primarily
responsible for constructing the pool, spa, or interactive water feature and
the phone number and address of the entity primarily responsible for
operating the pool, spa, or interactive water feature;



      (4)   A check or money order in the amount of $150 payable to
Tarrant County, Texas; and



      (5)   And any necessary additional information necessary to
verify compliance.



   (B)   Approval. The regulatory authority shall approve plans and
specifications that meet the requirements of these rules. No public pool,
spa, or interactive water feature shall be constructed or extensively
remodeled except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
regulatory authority.



(‘78 Code, § 9-92) (Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14, passed
11-24-14) Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.45  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Preoperational inspections. The regulatory authority shall
inspect a newly constructed or remodeled public pool, spa. or interactive
water feature prior to operation to determine compliance with approved plans
and specifications and with the requirements of these regulations. Requested
inspections must be made a minimum of three working days prior to the desired
opening date.



   (B)   Inspections. The regulatory authority shall inspect all public
pools, spas, or interactive water features at least once per year. The owner
or operator shall request an inspection by permit application providing the
pool, spa, or interactive water feature owner’s name and address and, if
different, the pool or spa operator’s name and address.



   (C)   Inspection fees. A fee, as set out, adopted, and defined in
the annual budget for the city, shall be required to be paid for
preoperational inspections and, thereafter, on an annual basis. Fees shall be
paid to Tarrant County Public Health Department at 1101 South Main, Fort
Worth, Texas 76104. Inspection fees shall be based on the number of
filtration systems located at a single address.



(Ord. OR.-1930-14, passed 11-24-14)



§ 92.46  POOL/SPA/INTERACTIVE WATER FEATURE CLOSURES.



   (A)   A public pool, spa, or interactive water feature shall be
closed if any of the following conditions occur:



      (1)   Disinfectant level below the minimums set by the Texas
Department of State Health Services;



      (2)   pH below 7.0;



      (3)   Inability to see bottom drain (poor visibility);



      (4)   Chlorine levels above eight ppm; or



      (5)   Any other imminent health hazards.



   (B)   The regulatory authority will immediately post a closed sign
and the pool or spa access gate shall be locked until all violations have
been corrected.



(‘78 Code, § 9-93) (Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14, passed
11-24-14)



§ 92.47  POOL/SPA/INTERACTIVE WATER FEATURE RECORDS.



   Daily records for each permitted public pool, spa, or interactive water
feature shall be kept on premises and shall include information pertaining to:



   (A)   Disinfectant - three times per day;



   (B)   pH - three times per day;



   (C)   Alkalinity - one time per week;



   (D)   Chemicals added - as noted by name, amount and date; and



   (E)   Other information needed to ensure the facility’s proper
operation.



(Ord. OR-1930-14, passed 11-24-14)



§ 92.48  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Notice of suspension. The regulatory authority may temporarily
suspend the permit of a public pool, spa, or interactive water feature for
noncompliance with state pool, spa, or interactive water feature standards,
by issuing a written notice for suspension. When a permit is suspended, pool,
spa, or interactive water feature operations shall immediately cease. The
regulatory authority will immediately post a closed sign and the pool, spa,
or interactive water feature access gate shall be locked until any and all
violations have been corrected.



   (B)   Reinstatement of permit after suspension. Whenever a notice of
suspension is issued by the regulatory authority, the holder of the permit or
the person in charge will be given an opportunity to correct the violation(s)
prior to final revocation of the permit. The regulatory authority may end the
suspension any time if the reasons for suspension no longer exist.



   (C)   Revocation of permit. The regulatory authority may, after
providing notice of pending revocation and an opportunity for a hearing,
revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements
of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the
performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority
shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of
the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit
shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice.
Unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority
by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period, the revocation of the
permit becomes final.



   (D)   Service of notices. A notice provided for in these rules is
properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the
person in charge of pool and/or spa and/or interactive water feature
operations, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the address listed on the permit application. A copy of
the notice shall be fifed in the records of the regulatory authority.



   (E)   Hearings. The hearings provided for in these rules shall be
conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it.
Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearings, the regulatory authority
shall make a final finding, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice
or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision
shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority.



   (F)   Right of appeal. Any permit holder who wishes to dispute the
decision of a hearing may appeal the decision to the director of the
regulatory authority.



   (G)   Application after revocation. Final revocation of a pool
and/or spa and/or interactive water feature permit shall not prevent the
holder of the revoked permit from making written application for a new permit
to the regulatory authority.



   (H)   Closed pool, spa, or interactive water feature. Prior to
reopening, the owner or operator shall provide the application and fee
required by § 92.44(A) if a pool or spa:



      (1)   Closes voluntarily at the request of the regulatory
authority on more than two occasions in one calendar year; or



      (2)   Closes on court order on more than two occasions in one
calendar year.



(‘78 Code, § 9-94.1) (Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14,
passed 11-24-14)



§ 92.49  PUBLIC POOL/SPA MANAGER CERTIFICATION.



   (A)   Requirement. All facilities permitted under this chapter shall
have at least one certified pool or spa operator employed to maintain the
pool, spa, or interactive water feature.



   (B)   Termination of certified pool, spa, or interactive water
feature operator. In the event that a certified pool or spa operator is
terminated or transferred, a certified pool or spa operator must be
designated within 60 days from the operator’s termination or transfer date.
This requirement is applicable even if pool, spa, or interactive water
feature maintenance operations are contracted to an outside company.



(‘78 Code, § 9-95) (Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14, passed
11-24-14) Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Upon conviction for violation of any provisions of §§ 92.01
through 92.09, relating to the maintaining of a public nuisance as described
herein, or in permitting or allowing the public nuisance to exist, the
violators shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200, or the maximum
permitted by state law, whichever is greater, and each day that the nuisance
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (‘78 Code, § 9-47)



   (B)   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who
violates any of the provisions of, §§ 92.20 through 92.35 shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the
City of Mansfield, Texas, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum
of $500 for each offense, and each and every day any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.



   (C)   (1)   It is an offense for a person, firm, company, or
corporation to violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to comply with or
resist the enforcement of any of the provisions of §§ 92.40 through 92.48.
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.



      (2)   An offense under division (C)(1) of this section is a
Class C Misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000 for each
offense.



(Ord. 257, passed 3-27-73; Ord. 465, passed 5-10-82; Ord. 519, passed
11-28-83; Ord. 695, passed 9-22-86; Ord. 741, passed 5-19-87; Ord. 773,
passed 4-11-88; Ord. 843, passed 8-28-89; Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Ord.
922, passed 1-27-92; Am. Ord. 1309, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord. OR-1737-09,
passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. OR-1773-10, passed 6-28-10; Am. Ord. OR-1910-14,
passed 4-29-14; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14, passed 11-24-14)



CHAPTER 93: JUNKED VEHICLES



Section



   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Applicability of provisions



   93.03   Declaration of public nuisances



   93.04   Notice



   93.05   Hearing



   93.06   Abatement of nuisance



   93.07   Junked vehicles not to be reconstructed after removal



   93.08   Notice to Department of Transportation



   93.09   Relocation of junked vehicles



   93.10   Disposal of junked vehicles



   93.11   Application of chapter



   93.12   Maintaining a nuisance



   93.13   Enforcement



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANTIQUE VEHICLE.  A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years
old.



   JUNKED VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is self-propelled and:



      (1)   Displays an expired license plate or does not display a
license plate; and



      (2)   Is:



         (a)   Wrecked, dismantled, or partially dismantled or
discarded; or



         (b)   Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more
than:



            1.   Seventy-two consecutive hours, if the vehicle
is on public property; or



            2.   Thirty consecutive days, if the vehicle is on
private property.



   The term JUNKED VEHICLE shall also include:



      (1)   An aircraft that does not have lawfully printed on the
aircraft an unexpired federal aircraft identification number registered under
Federal Aviation Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14
C.F.R. Part 47; and



      (2)   A watercraft that does not have lawfully on board an
unexpired certificate of number and is not a watercraft described by Tex.
Parks & Wildlife Code § 31.055.



   MOTOR VEHICLE COLLECTOR.  A person who owns one or more antique or
special interest vehicles and acquires, collects or disposes of an antique or
special interest vehicle, or part of an antique or special interest vehicle,
for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest
vehicle for historic interest.



   SPECIAL INTEREST VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle of any age that has not
been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its
historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.



(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord.
OR-2058-17, passed 9-7-17)



Cross reference:



   Nuisance definitions, see § 92.01



§ 93.02  APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle
part that meets the following conditions:



   (A)   Is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner
where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property.



   (B)   Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in
connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or
that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle
collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor
storage area, if any, are as follows:



      (1)   Maintained in an orderly manner.



      (2)   Not a health hazard.



      (3)   Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means,
including a fence, rapidly growing trees or shrubbery.



(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98)



§ 93.03  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible
from a public place or public right-of-way, which meets the following
conditions is a public nuisance:



   (A)   Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public.



   (B)   Tends to reduce the value of private property.



   (C)   Invites vandalism.



   (D)   Creates fire hazards.



   (E)   Constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the
health and safety of minors.



   (F)   Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and
continuing development of the city.



(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)



§ 93.04  NOTICE.



   (A)   Prior to any official action being taken to abate and remove a
junked vehicle constituting a public nuisance from private property, public
property or public right-of-way, not less than ten days notice shall be
given, except as hereinafter provided, to the following parties:



      (1)   The last known registered owner of the junked vehicle as
shown on the certificate of title.



      (2)   Any lienholder of record.



      (3)   The owner or occupant of the property upon which the
junked vehicle is located or the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent
to the public right-of-way on which the junked vehicle is located.



   (B)   The notice shall be mailed, by certified mail with five-day
return requested, and if the vehicle is reasonably accessible, also by
posting a copy of such notice to the front windshield, and shall state the
following:



      (1)   The nature of the public nuisance.



      (2)   That it must be removed and abated not later than the
tenth day after the date on which the notice was mailed.



      (3)   That any request for a hearing must be made in writing
before the ten day period expires.



      (4)   That failure to abate the nuisance, request a hearing or
attend the hearing, if requested, constitutes a waiver by the owner and
lienholders of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and their consent
to disposal for the junked vehicle under the terms of the Texas
Transportation Code concerning the disposal of junked vehicles.



   (C)   If the post office address of the last known registered owner
of the junked vehicle is unknown, notice may be placed on the junked vehicle,
or, if the owner is located, hand delivered.



   (D)   If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States
Post Office, the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is
considered as delivered, however, official action to abate the nuisance shall
be continued to a date not earlier than 11 days after the date of the return
of the notice.



(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)



Cross reference:



   Fire Marshal, see §§ 33.15 et seq.



§ 93.05  HEARING.



   (A)   The owner of the vehicle or occupant of the premises may,
within the ten-day period after the service of notice required by § 93.04(B)
to abate the nuisance, request the clerk of the municipal court of the city,
either in person or in writing and without the requirement of bond, to set a
date and time to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a public
hearing to determine whether the person is in violation of this division. If
a hearing is requested within ten days after service of notice to abate the
nuisance, the junked vehicle shall not be abated by the city until ordered to
do so by the judge of the municipal court.



   (B)   At the public hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and
consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests and shall receive
testimony from owners, witnesses, city employees and interested persons
relative to such alleged public nuisance. The hearing may be continued from
time to time.



   (C)   At the hearing the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless
demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable.



   (D)   Following the public hearing, the hearing officer shall
consider all evidence and determine whether the vehicle, or any part thereof,
constitutes a public nuisance as alleged. If the hearing officer finds that a
public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to abate the
nuisance, and that notice requirements provided in this division have been
met, the hearing officer shall make a written order setting forth his
findings and ordering that the nuisance be abated.



   (E)   If the information is available at the location of the
nuisance, the order requiring removal of the nuisance must include the
vehicle's:



      (1)   Description;



      (2)   Vehicle identification number;



      (3)   License plate number; and



      (4)   A statement that the vehicle will be disposed of in
accordance with the Texas Transportation Code.



(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)



§ 93.06  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.



   If no hearing is requested prior to the expiration of ten days after
the notice required by § 93.04(B) was served or in the event the hearing
officer orders abatement of the nuisance, the city or any duly authorized
person may abate such public nuisance by removal and disposal of the junked
vehicle after the issuance of an order meeting the requirements of §
93.05(E).



(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)



§ 93.07  JUNKED VEHICLES NOT TO BE RECONSTRUCTED AFTER REMOVAL.



   After any junked vehicle has been removed under the authority of this
chapter, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable again.



(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01) Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.08  NOTICE TO DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION.



   No later than the fifth day after the date of removal of a junked
vehicle pursuant to this chapter, notice must be given to the State
Department of Transportation. The notice must identify the vehicle.



(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)



§ 93.09  RELOCATION OF JUNKED VEHICLES.



   After the city has sent notice in accordance with § 93.04, the
relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location
in the city has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes
a public nuisance at the new location.



(Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)



§ 93.10  DISPOSAL OF JUNKED VEHICLES.



   Any junked vehicles taken into custody by the city or any duly
authorized person pursuant to a provision of this chapter shall be disposed
of in accordance with applicable provisions of the Texas Transportation Code,
Ch. 683.



(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)



§ 93.11  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle
part that is:



   (A)   Completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where
it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or



   (B)   Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in
connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or
that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle
collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor
storage area, if any, are:



      (1)   Maintained in an orderly manner;



      (2)   Not a health hazard; and



      (3)   Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means,
including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery.



(Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)



§ 93.12  MAINTAINING A NUISANCE.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public
nuisance described by § 93.03.



   (B)   An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by
the provisions of § 93.99.



(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.13 ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Removal with permission of owner or occupant.  If, within ten
days after receipt of notice from the Fire Marshal or his designated
representative to abate the nuisance as herein provided, the owner or
occupant of the premises shall give his written permission to the Fire
Marshal or his designated representative for removal of the junked motor
vehicle from the premises, the giving of such permission shall be considered
compliance with provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Right of removal from streets preserved.  Nothing in this
chapter shall affect ordinances that permit immediate removal of a vehicle
left on public property which is abandoned or which constitutes an
obstruction to traffic.



(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $200  for each
offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)



CHAPTER 94: FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND FOOD HANDLERS



Section



   94.01   Designation of health authority



   94.02   State regulations adopted



   94.03   Definitions



   94.04   Permit required



   94.05   Review of plans



   94.06   Inspections



   94.07   Food manager/food handler certification



 



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  DESIGNATION OF HEALTH AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The director of the Tarrant County Public Health Department is
hereby designated as the regulatory authority in charge of insuring minimum
standards of environmental health and sanitation within the scope of that
department’s functions.



   (B)   Whenever necessary to make inspections to enforce any of the
standards or provisions adopted herein for the preparation and handling of
food, the regulatory authority may enter food establishments at all
reasonable times.



(Ord. OR-1928-14, passed 11-24-14)



§ 94.02  STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED.



   (A)   The City of Mansfield adopts by reference the provisions of
the rules adopted by the Executive Commissioner of the Health and Human
Services Commission, as amended from time to time, found in Tex. Admin. Code
Title 25, Chapter 229, §§ 161 through 171 and 173 through 175 regarding the
regulation of food establishments in the city.



   (B)   A certified copy of each rule manual shall be kept on file in
the office of the city secretary.



(Ord. OR-1928-14, passed 11-24-14)



§ 94.03  DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the definitions adopted in the rules listed in § 94.02
above, the following definitions shall apply to this chapter:



   AUTHORIZED AGENT, REPRESENTATIVE, OR EMPLOYEE.  The employees of the
regulatory authority.



   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT.  A food service establishment, a retail food
store, a temporary food establishment, a mobile food unit, and/or a roadside
food vendor.



   OWNERSHIP OF BUSINESS.  The owner or operator of the business. Each
new business owner or operator shall comply with the current code of the city.



   REGULATORY AUTHORITY.  The Tarrant County Public Health Department.



   STATE RULES.  The state rules found at Tex. Admin. Code Title 25,
Chapter 229, §§ 161 through 171 and 173 through 175. These rules are also
known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules.



(Ord. OR-1928-14, passed 11-24-14)



§ 94.04  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Requirement. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
food establishment in the city, unless he possesses a current and valid
health permit issued by the regulatory authority.



   (B)   Posting. A valid permit shall be posted in public view in a
conspicuous place at every food establishment regulated by this chapter.



   (C)   Nontransferable (change of ownership). Permits issued under
the provisions of this chapter are not transferable. Upon change of ownership
of a business the new business owner will be required to meet current
standards as defined in city ordinances, state laws and state rules before a
permit will be issued.



   (D)   Application for permit. Any person desiring to operate a food
establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided
by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name, address,
and phone number of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed
food establishment and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not
be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying
information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit.
Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information
is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit.



   (E)   Inspection for permits. Prior to the approval of an initial
permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall
inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with state
laws and rules. A food establishment that does not comply with state laws and
rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit.



   (F)   Suspension of permit. The regulatory authority may, without
warning, notice, or hearing suspend any permit to operate a food
establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an
imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the
notice required by division (G) of this section. When a permit is suspended,
the holder of the permit shall immediately cease all food operations.
Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an
opportunity for a hearing within ten days of receipt of a request for a
hearing.



   (G)   Notification of right to hearing. Whenever a permit is
suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified
in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately
suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written
request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of
the permit within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within
ten days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the
suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist.



   (H)   Revocation of permit. The regulatory authority, after
providing notice and an opportunity for a hearing, may revoke a permit for
serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or
the state rules or for interference with regulatory authority in the
performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority
shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of
the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit
shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice.
Unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority
by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period, the revocation of the
permit becomes final.



   (I)   Service of notice. A notice provided for in these rules is
properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or
certificate, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the
holder of the permit or certificate. A copy of the notice shall be filed in
the records of the regulatory authority.



   (J)   Hearings. The hearings provided for in these rules shall be
conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it.
Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearings, the regulatory authority
shall make a final finding, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice
or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision
shall be furnished to the holder of the permit or certificate by the
regulatory authority.



   (K)   Right of appeal. Any permit holder who wishes to dispute the
decision of a hearing may appeal the decision to the director of the
regulatory authority.



   (L)   Application after revocation. Whenever a revocation of a
permit has become final, the holder of the revoked permit may make written
application for a new permit to the regulatory authority.



   (M)   Permit fees. A fee, as set out, adopted and defined in the
annual budget of the city, shall be required to be paid for the
preoperational inspection and, thereafter, on an annual basis. Fees shall be
paid to Tarrant County Public Health Department at 1101 South Main, Fort
Worth, Texas 76104.



(Ord. OR-1928-14, passed 11-24-14)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.05  REVIEW OF PLANS.



   (A)   Submission of plans. Whenever a food establishment is
constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is
converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and
specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be
submitted to the regulatory authority for review and approval before
construction, remodeling or conversion is begun. Extensive remodeling means
that 20% or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled
or when equipment required by these rules is to be relocated or removed. The
plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement,
mechanical plans, and construction materials of work areas, and the type and
model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The regulatory authority
shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of
the state rules. No food establishment shall be constructed, extensively
remodeled, or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the regulatory authority.



   (B)   Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will
result in a permit denial, suspension, or revocation.



   (C)   Preoperational inspection. The regulatory authority shall
inspect any food establishment prior to its beginning operation to determine
compliance with approved plans and specifications and with the requirements
of these rules.



   (D)   The fees for the review of plans shall be set out, adopted and
defined in the annual budget of the city.



(Ord. OR-1928-14, passed 11-24-14)



§ 94.06  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Before a permit is issued, the regulatory authority shall
inspect and approve the food establishment. An inspection of a food
establishment shall be performed at least once annually and shall be
prioritized based upon assessment of the food establishment’s compliance
and potential of causing foodborne illness according to Tex. Admin. Code
Title 25, § 229.171(h).



   (B)   The regulatory authority shall classify food establishments as
special priority, high priority, medium priority, or low priority, according
to the type of operation; particular foods that are prepared; number of
people served; susceptibility of the population served; history of violations
and any other risk factor deemed relevant to the operation.



   (C)   Refusal of an owner, manager or employee to allow the
authorized representative of the regulatory authority, upon presentation of
credentials, to inspect any permitted business or operation therein during
normal business hours will result in an immediate suspension of the permit,
requiring all permitted activities to abate until after such time as a
hearing may be held per § 94.04(G).



(Ord. OR-1928-14, passed 11-24-14)



§ 94.07  FOOD MANAGER/FOOD HANDLER CERTIFICATION.



   (A)   Requirement.



      (1)   Each food establishment shall have at least one person
employed in a managerial capacity possessing a current food manager
certificate approved by the regulatory authority.



      (2)   Each food establishment with six or more employees must
have at least one employee with a current food manager certificate on site
during all operations.



      (3)   Every employee of a food establishment who does not hold
a current food manager certificate must maintain a valid food handler
certification registered with the regulatory authority.



      (4)   Food manager and food handler certificates must be
maintained in the food establishment and presented upon request by the
regulatory authority.



   (B)   Expiration.



      (1)   Food manager certificates are valid for a period of up
to five years as determined by the regulatory authority, unless revoked by
the regulatory authority prior to the expiration date.



      (2)   Food handler certification shall be valid for a period
of up to three years, as determined by the regulatory authority.



(Ord. OR-1928-14, passed 11-24-14)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   It is an offense for a person, firm, company, or corporation
to violate any provision of this chapter.



   (B)   It is an offense for the holder of a permit issued under this
chapter to allow a food establishment to be operated in violation of any
provision of this chapter.



   (C)   Each day that a violation is committed, continued, or
permitted shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. OR-1928-14, passed 11-24-14)



CHAPTER 95: LIBRARY



Section



Library Board



   95.01   Created



   95.02   Purpose



   95.03   Composition; appointment; term; filling of vacancies



   95.04   Powers and duties



Use of Library Materials; Regulations; Enforcement



   95.15   Fees and charges



   95.16   Intentional damage to materials



   95.17   Unlawful retention of materials



   95.18   Failure to pay fees and charges



   95.19   Notice



LIBRARY BOARD



§ 95.01  CREATED.



   Pursuant to the City Charter, § 6.08, there is hereby created a board
known as the Mansfield Public Library Advisory Board.



(‘78 Code, § 9.5-11) (Ord. 432, passed 12-8-80; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed
9-26-11;  Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16)



§ 95.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Library Advisory Board is to advise city
administration and the City Council on matters related to the development and
maintenance of public library service in the city, and the operation of the
Mansfield Public Library.



(‘78 Code, § 9.5-12) (Ord. 432, passed 12-8-80; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed
9-26-11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16)



§ 95.03  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERM; FILLING OF VACANCIES.



   (A)   The Library Advisory Board will be made up of nine residents
of the city appointed by the City Council.



   (B)   Members of the Library Advisory Board will serve two-year
terms, with appointments staggered so they do not expire at once.



   (C)   Library Advisory Board members may be removed at any time by
the City Council, whether or not their terms have expired.



   (D)   Vacancies on the Library Advisory Board will be filled by the
City Council for the duration of the unexpired term, whether made vacant by
removal, resignation or for any other reason.



(‘78 Code, § 9.5-13) (Ord. 432, passed 12-8-80; Ord. 528, passed 3-26-84;
Ord. 1528, passed 4-11-05; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed 9-26-11; Ord. OR-2022-16,
passed 10-1-16)



§ 95.04  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Library Advisory Board will:



   (A)   Act as the liaison between the public and the library;



   (B)   Advocate for the continuing development of public library
service in the city;



   (C)   Recommend policies and programming regarding public library
service to city administration and the City Council;



   (D)   Review the annual library budget prior to its submission to
the City Council;



   (E)   Assist in planning public library services and facilities.



(‘78 Code, § 9.5-14) (Ord. 432, passed 12-8-80; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed
9-26-11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16)



USE OF LIBRARY MATERIALS; REGULATIONS; ENFORCEMENT



§ 95.15  FEES AND CHARGES.



   Fees and charges as set forth in this section may be charged to a
person who borrows library materials or uses library services. The types and
amounts of fees and charges will be determined by the City Council.



   (A)   Overdue materials.  Late fees may be charged on library
books, magazines, audio/visual media and other materials that are retained
beyond their due dates, not to exceed the suggested retail prices of the
materials in question.  Such fees are as follows:



      (1)   $.25 a day each for late books, magazines, newspapers,
and audio books.



      (2)   $.50 a day for each late interlibrary loan items.



      (3)   $1.00 a day each for late DVDs, videotapes, music CDs,
and portable WiFi hotspots.



   (B)   Lost or destroyed materials.  Charges for lost or destroyed
materials will be their full suggested retail price, provided that the
materials are commercially available, or the full suggested retail price of
suitable substitutes.



   (C)   Damaged materials.  Damaged materials will be repaired and
remain in use if practicable. If materials are judged to be damaged beyond
repair and further use, they will be considered destroyed and the patron may
be charged for them. Patrons must surrender such materials to the library,
but may have them returned to them upon paying for them.



   (D)   Other fees and charges.  Other fees and charges are as
follows:



      (1)   $.10 a page for black and white printing from a computer.



      (2)   $.25 a page for color printing from a computer.



      (3)   $.10 a page for black and white photocopies.



      (4)   $.20 a page for black and white photocopies, two sides.



      (5)   $.25 a page for color photocopies.



      (6)   $.50 a page for color photocopies, two sides.



      (7)   $1.00 per page to send a fax.



      (8)   $2.00 each to replace a library card.



      (9)   $3.00 each to replace a video case, DVD case, or music
CD case.



      (10)   $6.00 each to replace an audio book case.



      (11)   $3.00 each for interlibrary loan items not picked up.



      (12)   $40.00 per annual user fee for nonresident library card
holders.



      (13)   $40.00 refundable deposit for use of the library
Community Room.



   (E)   Fees and charges may be adjusted by the City Librarian for
cause, on an individual basis, as necessary.



(‘78 Code, § 9.5-21) (Ord. 1083, passed 7-10-95; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed
9-26-11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16)



§ 95.16  INTENTIONAL DAMAGE TO MATERIALS.



   It will be unlawful to intentionally injure, deface, damage or destroy,
whether by neglect or intent,  any materials owned by, or subject to the
control of the Mansfield Public Library.  Anyone doing so will be held
responsible for the cost of replacement or repair of said materials. 
Library card privileges may be suspended until payment is made.



(‘78 Code, § 9.5-31) (Ord. 1083, passed 7-10-95; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed
9-26-11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.17  UNLAWFUL RETENTION OF MATERIALS.



   It will be unlawful for any person who borrows library materials to
fail to return any materials owned by, or subject to the control of the
Mansfield Public Library, within 15 days after the library has given notice
to return them, provided notice is given after expiration of the time for
which the materials were lent under the rules of the library. Failure to
return library materials will result in suspension of library card privileges.



(‘78 Code, § 9.5-32) (Ord. 1083, passed 7-10-95; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed
9-26-11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.18  FAILURE TO PAY FEES AND CHARGES.



   If fees and charges owed to the library have not been paid, or
arrangements have not been made with the City Librarian 15 days after the
patron has been notified, the patron’s library card privileges will be
suspended.  Such notice shall advise the patron that owing such fees and
charges is unlawful and that his or her library card privileges have been
suspended until payment or arrangements have been made.



(‘78 Code, § 9.5-33) (Ord. 1083, passed 7-10-95; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed
9-26-11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.19  NOTICE.



   All notices required to be sent under this chapter, whether by
telephone, text or electronic mail, will be given to the patron at the
telephone number or email address reflected in the most recent record held by
the library. The notice will be deemed given to the patron when delivered by
telephone or sent electronically via text message or email.



(‘78 Code, § 9.5-34) (Ord. 1083, passed 7-10-95; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed
9-26-11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16)



CHAPTER 96: PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



General Provisions



   96.01   Definitions



   96.02   Purpose



   96.03   Rental application process



   96.04   Eligibility



   96.05   Policy



   96.06   Parks and recreation sponsorship program



Regulations



   96.20   Limitation of activities by permit



   96.21   Vandalism - damage or removal of property



   96.22   Driving of vehicles or riding of animals in parks



   96.23   Teasing, injuring or killing animals



   96.24   Curfew in parks



   96.25   Glass containers prohibited



Administration and Enforcement



   96.35   Department of Parks and Recreation established; Director



   96.36   Regulations and acts declared a governmental function



   96.37   Parks and Recreation Board



Cross-reference:



   For provisions concerning Park Land Dedication and Dedication Fees, see
Ch. 156



Statutory reference:



   General authority as to parks and recreation, see Tex. Local Gov't Code
§§ 331.001



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FACILITIES.  To include playgrounds, recreation centers, athletic
fields, pavilions, amphitheaters, rest rooms, concession stands, press boxes
and any other building or structure located on park lands.



   PARK LANDS.  Those areas of land that may from time to time be
purchased, leased or otherwise placed under the control of the city and used
by the Parks and Recreation Department for athletic, recreational or
open-spaced purposes, either singly or in cooperation with the Mansfield Park
and Facility Development Corporation or any other agency, corporation or
individual. To include all land which may be selected, ordained or acquired
by the city for use as parks, recreation facilities, parkways, esplanades,
median strips or grounds.



(‘78 Code, § 12-1) (Ord. 319, passed 11-22-76; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed
6-24-13)



§ 96.02  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this policy is to provide for proper
utilization and maintenance of city parks and recreation facilities to ensure
that they are maintained and available for the effective utilization by the
citizens and the various associations which organize activities on their
behalf. This policy identifies that certain organizations coordinate and
administer, on a volunteer basis, activities that otherwise would require the
efforts of the Parks and Recreation Department. Accordingly, the rate for
usage of facilities factors the costs to the organizations for providing the
services.



   (B)   For the purposes of this policy the organizations are
identified as associations that are recognized and sponsored by the city as
organizations that support and provide services encouraged by the city to our
citizens. These “sponsored associations” include, but are not limited to
the youth and adult associations recognized by the Parks and Recreation
Department such as Mansfield Youth Baseball Association, Mansfield Girls’
Softball Association, Mansfield Pee Wee Football Association and Mansfield
Soccer Association.



(‘78 Code, § 12-21) (Ord. 958, passed 4-26-93; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed
6-24-13)



§ 96.03  RENTAL APPLICATION PROCESS.



   (A)   Athletic field rental application process. Athletic fields
shall be reserved by permit. An application to receive a permit may be
obtained from the Parks and Recreation Department.



      (1)   Reservation fees/deposits.



         (a)   Reservations fees and/or deposits for all athletic
facilities will be accepted on an in-person basis only with all deposits
and/or fees paid in advance. Upon receipt of all fees due, a receipt and
permit will be issued. Sponsored associations will abide by seasonal
contracts signed by the Parks and Recreation Director or designee.



         (b)   Fees are set as defined and adopted in the annual
budget.



      (2)   Practices and games.



         (a)   Athletic facilities rented for practice or games
may be reserved no earlier than two weeks ahead of date(s) requested. No more
than two bookings shall be reserved on one permit per individual. If a
practice or game is canceled due to weather conditions, the Parks and
Recreation Department must be contacted within two days to reschedule the
practice, receive a refund or credit for a future practice or game.



         (b)   Fees are set as defined and adopted in the annual
budget.



      (3)   Tournaments, camps and clinics.



         (a)   Athletic facilities rented for tournaments, camps
and clinics may not be reserved within two weeks prior to the event date. No
refunds will be given after seven days prior to the event date. If the event
is canceled due to weather conditions, the event will be rescheduled or a
refund will be given. All fees and deposits are to be paid no later than one
week prior to the tournament start date. No refunds on deposits will be made
until facilities are inspected by the Parks Department.



         (b)   Fees are set as defined and adopted in the annual
budget.



      (4)   Concession stand. Fees are set as defined and adopted in
the annual budget.



      (5)   Additional services.



         (a)   Additional services which are not normally
provided by the city, such as special sound and lighting equipment,
additional stage facilities, extra electrical and utility services and the
like must be furnished solely by the individual or association who agrees to
acquire necessary electrical, health, sound and other permits as may be
required and to comply with all codes and laws of the city. If additional
services are provided by the city, fees may be applicable.



         (b)   Fees are set as defined and adopted in the annual
budget.



      (6)   Limitation on reservations. The Parks and Recreation
Department reserves the right to limit reservations in an effort to allow all
associations or individuals the opportunity to use the facilities.



      (7)   Right to cancel reservations/rental. The Parks and
Recreation Department reserves the right to cancel reservations/rentals
without advance notice if facility(ies) are unsafe or otherwise not usable.
For information regarding closings, call 817-453-1467 after 3:00 p.m.



   (B)   Pavilion and amphitheater rental application process. The
pavilion and amphitheater facilities located in the city owned parks shall be
used on a first come/first serve basis unless reserved through the Parks and
Recreation Department. Should an individual, organization or group want to
reserve a pavilion or amphitheater for a specific time and date, a permit may
be obtained from the Parks and Recreation Department.



      (1)   Reservation fees/deposits. Reservation fees and/or
deposits for all pavilion and amphitheater facilities will be accepted at the
time the reservation is made. Upon receipt of all fees due, a receipt and
permit will be issued. All reservations are subject to approval by the
Director of Parks and Recreation or designee.



      (2)   Fees are set as defined and adopted in the annual budget.



   (C)   Mansfield activities center rental application process. The
facilities located in the Mansfield Activities Center shall be rented on a
first come/first serve basis. A permit may be obtained from the Parks and
Recreation Department.



      (1)   Reservation fees/deposits. Reservation fees and/or
deposits for all Mansfield Activities Center facilities will be accepted at
the time the reservation is made. Upon receipt of all fees due, a receipt and
permit will be issued. All reservations are subject to approval by the
Director of Parks and Recreation or designee.



      (2)   Fees are set as defined and adopted in the annual budget.



(‘78 Code, § 12-22) (Ord. 958, passed 4-26-93; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed
6-24-13)



§ 96.04  ELIGIBILITY.



   Any individual, group, league or team making a rental application for a
park and recreation facility shall not discriminate against any persons on
the grounds of race, color, national origin, religion or sex while using
property owned by the city.



(‘78 Code, § 12-23) (Ord. 958, passed 4-26-93; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed
6-24-13) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.05  POLICY.



   (A)   The city and its employees shall assume no responsibility for
any property placed on or in its facilities or grounds. Further, the city and
employees of the city are released and discharged from any and all liability
for loss, injury or damage to persons or property, or damages or injuries
done to the premises that may be sustained by the use or occupancy of the
facilities by any individual or group.



   (B)   Any group using the facilities agrees to leave the premises in
as good or better condition than that which existed prior to their usage or
risk losing related deposit.



   (C)   Glass containers and/or alcoholic beverages are not permitted
in the parks, leased facilities or parking lots.



   (D)   Any group using the facilities shall agree to abide by and
conform to all rules and regulations which may be adopted from time to time
by the City Council. All groups using the facilities shall comply with all
laws - federal, state and local - including all ordinances of the city and
all rules, regulations and requirements of the Police and Fire Departments.
The general policies and rules governing the use of any and all facilities
may be changed at any time without notice by the city.



(‘78 Code, § 12-24) (Ord. 958, passed 4-26-93; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed
6-24-13) Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross reference:



   General offenses, see Chapter 130



§ 96.06  PARKS AND RECREATION SPONSORSHIP PROGRAM.



   The Parks and Recreation Department may offer a sponsorship program to
help offset the expense of offering programs, services and special events as
approved by the Mansfield Park Facilities Development Corporation.
Participation in the sponsorship program shall be strictly voluntary with the
amounts and levels of sponsorship set by the Mansfield Park Facilities
Development Corporation. In return, participants in the sponsorship program
shall receive recognition at Parks and Recreation events and facilities,
advertisements for upcoming events and listed as Title Sponsor depending on
the level of sponsorship.



(Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-24-13)



REGULATIONS



§ 96.20  LIMITATION OF ACTIVITIES BY PERMIT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any individual to participate in any
activity in any facility when the activity will create a danger to the public
health, safety or welfare, or may be considered a public nuisance. The
Director of Parks and Recreation may designate particular locations within
parks and playground areas for specific activities and when deemed necessary
he/she may limit the conduct of such activities by issuance of a special
permit upon application, which permit shall set out the particular conditions
under which such activities shall be permitted.



   (B)   Overnight camping shall be prohibited on any park lands
without written permission by the Director of Parks and Recreation unless
otherwise permitted or authorized by ordinance.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale
any foods, drinks, confections, merchandise, and any items or services in any
park within the city until the person has obtained an approved rental permit
issued by the Director of Parks and Recreation or designee permitting the
sale of the items in the park. Open air vending is not allowed in the parks,
unless otherwise permitted or authorized by ordinance.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or erect any
structure, sign, bulletin board, post, pole or advertising device of any kind
whatsoever in any park, or to attach any bill, poster, sign, wire, rod or
cord to any tree, shrub, fence, railing, post or structure within any park.
However, the Director of Parks and Recreation or designee may, by written
permit, authorize the erection of temporary decorations on occasions of
public celebrations or holidays.



   (E)   No solicitation of any kind is allowed in the parks without
written approval of the Parks and Recreation Director.



   (F)   Alcohol shall be prohibited on any park lands without written
permission by the Director of Parks and Recreation, unless otherwise
permitted by ordinance.



(‘78 Code, § 12-9) (Ord. 319, passed 11-22-76; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed
6-24-13) Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Code enforcement, see Chapter 35



   Food establishments and food handlers, see Chapter 94



   Streets and Sidewalks, see Chapter 98



   General Offenses, see Chapter 130



§ 96.21  VANDALISM - DAMAGE OR REMOVAL OF PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, cut, break,
deface or in any way injure the trees, shrubs, plants, grass, turf,
fountains, seats, fences, structures, equipment, improvements, ornaments or
monuments or other property located within or upon any of the parks of the
city.



(‘78 Code, § 12-10) (Ord. 131, passed 4-11-61; Ord. 319, passed 11-22-76;
Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-24-13) Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross reference:



   General Offenses, see Chapter 130



Statutory reference:



   Criminal mischief, see Tex. Penal Code, § 28.03



§ 96.22  DRIVING OF VEHICLES OR RIDING OF ANIMALS IN PARKS.



   (A)   The lawful maximum reasonable and prudent speed limit on all
roadways, drives and parking areas within any park in the city shall be 15
miles per hour.



   (B)   Where vehicle parking lots or areas have been set aside in any
park in the city, no vehicle shall be driven over or across the curbs,
sidewalks, grass or lawn within the park, and vehicles shall be parked in the
parking lots or areas as designated and not elsewhere without prior approval
of the Parks and Recreation Director.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or propel any
vehicle over or through any park except along or upon park drives or park
boulevards, and it shall be unlawful for any person to ride any horse or
other animal over or through any park except along and upon the designated
equestrian trail and driveways in the park without prior approval of the
Parks and Recreation Director.



(‘78 Code, § 12-11) (Ord. 319, passed 11-22-76; Ord. 794, passed 9-26-88;
Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-24-13) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.23  TEASING, INJURING OR KILLING ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to tease, annoy, molest, catch,
injure or kill, or throw any stone, object or missile of any kind at, or
strike with any stick, object or weapon, any animal, bird, fowl or fish in
any park of the city. Texas Parks and Wildlife regulations are posted at
designated bodies of water regarding fishing.



(‘78 Code, § 12-12) (Ord. 319, passed 11-22-76; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13,
passed 6-24-13) Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross reference:



   Animals, see Chapter 90



Statutory reference:



   Cruelty to animals, see Tex. Penal Code, § 42.09



§ 96.24  CURFEW IN PARKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than law enforcement
personnel or employees of the Department of Parks and Recreation to enter or
remain in any portion of a park, playground or recreational area when the
area is closed to the public. The times during which an area is open to the
public shall be posted by the city. Unless otherwise posted by the city, the
hours during which parks, playgrounds and recreational areas are open to the
public are as follows:



      (1)   High activity parks, defined as parks with lighted
amenities for use after dark, will be open from 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.



      (2)   Low activity parks, defined as parks with low level or
security level lighting only, will be open from 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Elmer
W. Oliver Nature Park winter hours will be 5:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. beginning
November through February.



      (3)   Any lighted section of linear park trail will be open
from 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Any unlit section of linear park trail will be
open from 5:00 a.m. to 30 minutes after sundown.



   (B)   A special permit may be granted by the city for organized
sports or special events which exceed the posted hours, in which case the
area containing the permitted activity shall remain open to the public until
the activity ends, at which time the area shall be closed to the public.



(‘78 Code, § 12-13) (Ord. 403, passed 2-11-80; Ord. 771, passed 3-14-88;
Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-24-13; Am. Ord. OR-1912-14, passed 5-27-14)
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.25  GLASS CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.



   Its shall be unlawful for any person to possess in any public park
within the corporate limits of the city any glass container.



(‘78 Code, § 12-14) (Ord. 762, passed 12-14-87; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13,
passed 6-24-13) Penalty, see § 10.99



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 96.35  DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION ESTABLISHED; DIRECTOR.



   There is hereby established a department of city government to be known
as Department of Parks and Recreation. A Director of Parks and Recreation
shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall be responsible to the City
Manager for the conduct and affairs of the Department.



(‘78 Code, § 12-8) (Ord. 319, passed 11-22-76; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed
6-24-13)



§ 96.36  REGULATIONS AND ACTS DECLARED A GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION.



   All of the regulations and acts of the Parks and Recreation Department
performed and to be performed in accordance with the provisions herein in the
operation and maintenance of the park system of the city are hereby declared
to be governmental and for the benefit of the general public. Any member of
the City Council, the Parks and Recreation Department and any city official
or employee charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
acting for the city in the discharge of his/her duties hereunder shall not
thereby render him/herself personally liable.



(‘78 Code, § 12-7) (Ord. 319, passed 11-22-76; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed
6-24-13)



§ 96.37  PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD.



   (A)   Established; membership. There is an established Mansfield
Park Facilities Development Corporation board that also serves as the Parks
and Recreation Board consisting of seven members appointed by the City
Council. No person shall be eligible for appointment to membership to the
Board who is not a resident of the city. Members of the board shall not
receive any salary or compensation for their services, except that they shall
be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their
official duties as officers. The Mansfield Park Facilities Development
Corporation has established Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws regarding
purpose, board of directors, offices, financial corporate duties and
requirements, and miscellaneous provisions.



   (B)   Term of office.  The term of office of members of the Board
subject to the provisions relative to removal therefrom shall be two years,
the terms to begin from the first regular meeting of the City Council in May
of each year. Three members shall be appointed in odd years and four members
shall be appointed in even years. (‘78 Code, § 12-3)



   (C)   Removal; vacancies.  Members of the Parks and Recreation
Board shall be subject to removal from office and may be removed from office
by the City Council. Any vacancy in the membership of the Board shall be
filled by the City Council for the unexpired term of the member whose place
has, by removal or otherwise, become vacant. (‘78 Code, § 12-4)



   (D)   Organization.  The Parks and Recreation Board shall select a
Chairman and Secretary from its membership who shall serve as the officers of
the Board for the period that shall be determined by a majority of the
membership of the Board. The Secretary shall keep minutes of each meeting and
the minutes shall be of public record. All meetings shall conform to the
state open meetings law. (‘78 Code, § 12-5)



   (E)   Powers, jurisdiction, scope of activities.  The Parks and
Recreation Board, subject to the authority of the City Council, shall serve
in an advisory capacity concerning the acquisition, maintenance, operation
and use of parks, playgrounds and open-spaces in the city. The Board further
shall have the responsibility on or before each July first of presenting to
the Director of Parks and Recreation a proposed budget for the next fiscal
year accompanied by a five year capital improvement program. (‘78 Code, §
12-6)



(Ord. 319, passed 11-22-76; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-24-13)



Statutory reference:



   Open meetings law, see Tex. Gov’t code §§ 551.001 et seq.



CHAPTER 97: ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   97.01   Definitions



   97.02   Permit required; application; fee; transferability; false
statements



   97.03   Alarm permit duration and renewal



   97.04   Duties of the alarm user



   97.05   Duties of alarm installation company and monitoring company



   97.06   Duties and authority of the alarm administrator



   97.07   Fines



   97.08   Suspension



   97.09   Appeals



   97.10   Reinstatement



   97.11   Confidentiality



   97.12   Governmental immunity



 



   97.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Fine and fee table



§ 97.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT OF GOD.  Events outside of human control, such as sudden floods,
tornados or other natural disasters, for which no one can be held responsible.



   ALARM ADMINISTRATOR.  A person or persons designated by the Chief to
administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer
the provisions of this chapter.



   ALARM DISPATCH REQUEST.  A notification to the city that an alarm has
been activated at a particular alarm site and that city emergency service is
requested.



   ALARM INSTALLATION COMPANY.  A person in the business of selling,
providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or
installing an alarm system in an alarm site.



   ALARM PERMIT.  Authorization granted by the alarm administrator to an
alarm user to operate an alarm system.



   ALARM PERMIT APPLICATION.  The written application for and alarm
permit filed by an alarm user with the alarm administrator.



   ALARM SITE.  A single fixed premises or location served by an alarm
system or systems. Each unit, if served by a separate alarm system in a
multi-unit building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site,
and is further defined by the following categories:



      (1)   RESIDENTIAL SITE.  A single-family residence and each
residential unit of multi-unit building or complex which is served by an
alarm system.



      (2)   COMMERCIAL SITE.  Every premises or location where any
business activity is regularly conducted and which is served by an alarm
system. Each unit of a business premises or business location, if served by a
separate alarm system in a multi-unit building or complex, shall be
considered a separate commercial alarm system site.



      (3)   FINANCIAL SITE.  Every premises or location of a
financial institution which is required to have an alarm system pursuant to
the Bank Protection Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. § 1882).



      (4)   EDUCATIONAL/GOVERNMENT SITE.  Every premises or
location of a public or private school or school administrative office and
every premises or location of any federal, state, county or municipal
governmental office.



      (5)   CHURCH SITE.  A building for public worship or
religious services. Each unit of a church premises or church location, if
served by a separate alarm system in a multi-unit building or complex, shall
be considered a separate church alarm system site.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  A device or series of devices, including, but not
limited to, hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio
frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or
transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an
alarm condition and intended to summon a city emergency service response,
including local alarm systems. ALARM SYSTEM does not include an alarm
installed in a vehicle or on someone's person unless the vehicle or the
personal alarm is permanently located at a site.



   ALARM USER.  Any person who (which) owns or operates an alarm system
at an alarm site.



   ARMING STATION.  A device that allows control of an alarm system.



   AUTOMATIC VOICE DIALER.  Any electrical, electronic, mechanical, or
other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message,
when activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system,
to a city emergency service requesting dispatch.



   CANCELLATION.  The process where response is terminated when a
monitoring company (designated by the alarm user) for the alarm site notifies
the responding city emergency service that there is not an existing situation
at the alarm site requiring a response after an alarm dispatch request.



   CHIEF.  The Chief of Police of the City of Mansfield or authorized
representative.



   CITY.  The City of Mansfield, Texas.



   CITY EMERGENCY SERVICE.  Any emergency service provided by the city,
including police, fire, and emergency medical services.



   CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager of the City of Mansfield, Texas, or
the City Manager's designee.



   DISABLED VETERAN EXEMPTION.  You qualify for a disabled veteran alarm
permit/renewal fee exemption if you are a veteran who was designated as 100%
disabled while serving with the United States Armed Forces.  The veteran
must provide official documents to the alarm administrator or designee from
either the Veteran's Administration or the branch of the armed forces that
clearly reflects the 100% disability rating at the time of the application to
be eligible for this exemption.



   DURESS ALARM.  A silent alarm system signal generated by the entry of
a designated code into an arming station in order to signal that the alarm
user is being forced to turn off the system and requires law enforcement
response.



   FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION.  An alarm notification to the City of
Mansfield when a police officer is dispatched to respond to the location and
is cancelled enroute by the alarms system company or the responding officer
finds, through an inspection of the interior or exterior of the alarm site,
no evidence of an attempted or actual unauthorized intrusion, burglary,
robbery or hostage taking and the officer has responded to the site within 30
minutes of the city receiving the alarm notification.



   HOLDUP ALARM.  A silent alarm signal generated by the manual
activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress.



   LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM.  Any alarm system, which is not monitored, that
emits an audible alarm only at the alarm site.



   MONITORING.  The process by which a monitoring company receives
signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the
municipality for the purpose of summoning city emergency services to the
alarm site.



   MONITORING COMPANY.  A person in the business of providing monitoring
services.



   PANIC ALARM.  An audible alarm system signal generated by the manual
activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency
situation requiring emergency response.



   PERSON.  An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
organization or similar entity.



   RESPONDER.  An individual capable of reaching the alarm site within 30
minutes and having access to the alarm site, the code to the alarm system and
the authority to approve repairs to the alarm system.



   SIA CONTROL PANEL STANDARD CP-01.  The ANSI - American National
Standard Institute approved Security Industry Association - SIA CP-01 Control
Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended
design features for security system control panels and their associated
arming and disarming devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control
panels built and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or
other nationally recognized testing organizations, will be marked to state:
"Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard
Features for False Alarm Reduction".



   TRANSFER.  The transaction or process by which an alarm user takes
over control of an existing alarm system, which was previously controlled by
another alarm user.



   VERIFY.  An attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative,
to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other
electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to
determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting city emergency
service dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch
request. For the purpose of this chapter, telephone verification shall
require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the
first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify
themselves to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting an
emergency response.



   ZONES.  Division of devices into which an alarm system is divided to
indicate the general location from which an alarm system signal is
transmitted.



(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10)



§ 97.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE; TRANSFERABILITY; FALSE
STATEMENTS.



   (A)   No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm
system at its alarm site without a valid alarm permit.  A separate alarm
permit is required for each alarm site.



   (B)   The fee for an alarm permit or an alarm permit renewal is set
forth below and shall be paid by the alarm user. No refund of a permit or
permit renewal fee will be made. The initial alarm permit fee must be
submitted to the alarm administrator within five days after the alarm system
installation or an alarm system transfer.



      (1)   Permit fees: (see Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table).



      (2)   Renewal fees: (see Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table).



   (C)   Upon receipt of a completed alarm permit application form and
the alarm permit fee, the alarm administrator shall register the applicant
unless the applicant has:



      (1)   Failed to pay a fine assessed under § 97.07; or



      (2)   Had an alarm permit for the alarm site suspended and the
violation causing the suspension has not been corrected.



   (D)   Each alarm permit application must include the following
information:



      (1)   The name, complete address (including apt/suite number),
and telephone numbers of the person who will be the permit holder and be
responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and
payment of fees assessed under this chapter.



      (2)   The classification of the alarm site as either
residential (includes apartment, condo, mobile home, etc.) commercial,
financial, church or educational/government.



      (3)   For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the
classification of the alarm system (i.e. burglary, holdup, fire, emergency
medical, duress, panic alarms or other) and for each classification whether
such alarm is audible or silent.



      (4)   Mailing address, if different from the address of the
alarm site.



      (5)   Any dangerous or special conditions present at the alarm
site.



      (6)   Names and telephone numbers of at least two individuals
who are able and have agreed to:



         (a)   Receive notification of an alarm system activation
at any time;



         (b)   Respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes at any
time; and



         (c)   Upon request can grant access to the alarm site
and deactivate the alarm system if necessary.



      (7)   Type of business conducted at a commercial alarm site.



      (8)   Signed certification from the alarm user stating the
following:



         (a)   The date of installation or transfer of the alarm
system, whichever is applicable.



         (b)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
alarm installation company or companies performing the alarm system
installation or transfer and of the alarm installation company responsible
for providing repair service to the alarm system.



         (c)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
monitoring company if different from the alarm installation company.



         (d)   That a set of written operating instructions for
the alarm system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms,
have been left with the applicant by the alarm installation company.



         (e)   An acknowledgment that the alarm installation
company has trained the applicant in proper use of the alarm system,
including instructions on how to avoid false alarms.



         (f)   An acknowledgment that the alarm user understands
and agrees that a city emergency service response may be influenced by
factors including, but not limited to the availability of city emergency
service units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions,
emergency conditions, staffing levels, etc.



         (g)   Any false statement of a material fact made by an
applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient
cause for refusal to issue a permit or for suspension of an existing permit.



         (h)   An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another
person or alarm site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator of
any change that alters any of the information listed on the alarm permit
application within five business days of such change.



         (i)   All fines and fees owed by an applicant must be
paid before an alarm permit may be issued or renewed.



         (j)   The alarm administrator will issue the following
when issuing an alarm permit:



            1.   An alarm permit issued by the department. The
alarm permit will contain the alarm permit number, date of issuance and the
date of expiration.



            2.   A window decal containing the alarm permits
number, alarm permit date of issuance and the date of expiration. The decal
can be placed at a location chosen by the alarm user and serve as a reminder
of the alarm permit's expiration date.



(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10) 
Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.03  ALARM PERMIT DURATION AND RENEWAL.



   (A)   An alarm permit shall expire 12 months from the date of
issuance, and must be renewed annually by submitting an updated application
and a permit renewal fee to the alarm administrator.



   (B)   The alarm administrator will send written notification to a
current permit holder 30 days prior to the expiration of their current alarm
permit.



   (C)   It is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit an
application prior to the permit expiration date. Failure to renew will be
classified as use of a non-permitted alarm system and fines shall be
assessed. A $10 late fee may be assessed if the renewal is more than 30 days
late.



(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10)



§ 97.04  DUTIES OF THE ALARM USER.



   (A)   An alarm user shall:



      (1)   Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner
that will minimize or eliminate false alarms;



      (2)   Make every reasonable effort to have a responder arrive
at the alarm system's location within 30 minutes when requested by a city
emergency service in order to:



         (a)   Deactivate an alarm system;



         (b)   Provide access to the alarm site; and/or



         (c)   Provide alternative security for the alarm site.



      (3)   Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than
an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.



   (B)   An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the
mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of
an alarm site will sound for no longer than ten minutes after being activated.



   (C)   An alarm user shall not use automatic voice dialers.



   (D)   An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site, a set of
written operating instructions for each alarm system.



   (E)   All alarm users shall review with their alarm installation
company and/or monitoring company the alarm user false alarm prevention
checklist or an equivalent checklist approved by the alarm administrator and
acknowledge their understanding of false alarm prevention procedures by
signing and dating same. A fully executed copy of the customer false alarm
prevention checklist shall be filed with the original application for an
alarm permit.



   (F)   It is the responsibility of the alarm permit holder to notify
both the alarm monitoring company and the alarm administrator in the event
they discontinue service or no longer occupy the permitted alarm site.



(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10) 
Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.05  DUTIES OF ALARM INSTALLATION COMPANY AND MONITORING COMPANY.



   (A)   The alarm installation company shall provide written and oral
instructions to each of its alarm users in the proper use and operation of
their alarm systems. Such instructions will specifically include all
instructions necessary to turn the alarm system on and off and to avoid false
alarms.



   (B)   Upon the effective date of this chapter, alarm installation
companies shall not install a device to activate a holdup alarm which is a
single action, non-recessed button.



   (C)   Ninety days after enactment of this chapter, the alarm
installation companies shall, on new installations, use only alarm control
panel(s) which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01.



   (D)   An alarm company shall not use automatic voice dialers.



   (E)   A monitoring company shall:



      (1)   Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers
designated by the alarm administrator;



      (2)   Verify every alarm signal, except a duress or holdup
alarm activation before requesting a city emergency service response to an
alarm system signal;



      (3)   Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the city in a
manner and form determined by the alarm administrator;



      (4)   Communicate cancellations to the city in a manner and
form determined by the alarm administrator;



      (5)   Ensure that all alarm users of alarm systems equipped
with a duress, holdup or panic alarm are given adequate training as to the
proper use of the duress, holdup or panic alarm;



      (6)   Communicate any available information (north, south,
front, back, floor, etc.) about the location on all alarm signals related to
the alarm dispatch request;



      (7)   Communicate type of alarm activation (silent or audible,
interior or perimeter);



      (8)   Provide the address of the alarm site;



      (9)   After an alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the
responding city emergency service if the monitoring company knows that the
alarm user or the responder has or has not been contacted;



      (10)   Upon the effective date of this chapter, monitoring
companies must maintain for a period of at least one year from the date of
the alarm dispatch request, records relating to alarm dispatch requests. 
Records must include the name, address and telephone number of the alarm
user, the alarm system zone(s) activated, the time of alarm dispatch request
and evidence of an attempt to verify. The alarm administrator may request
copies of such records for individually named alarm users. If the request is
made within 60 days of an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company
shall furnish requested records within ten business days of receiving the
request. If the records are requested between 60 days to one year after an
alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish the requested
records within 30 days of receiving the request.



   (F)   An alarm installation company and/or monitoring company that
purchases alarm system accounts from another person shall notify the alarm
administrator of such purchase and provide details as may be reasonably
requested by the alarm administrator.



(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10) 
Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.06  DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF THE ALARM ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The alarm administrator shall:



      (1)   Designate a manner, form and telephone numbers for the
communication of alarm dispatch requests; and



      (2)   Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm
dispatch requests.



   (B)   The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure to record
such information on alarm dispatch requests necessary to permit the alarm
administrator to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the
information listed below:



      (1)   Identification of the permit number for the alarm site.



      (2)   Identification of the alarm site.



      (3)   Date and time alarm dispatch request was received.



      (4)   Date and time of the city emergency service arrival at
the alarm site.



   (C)   The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure for the
notification to the alarm user of a fineable false alarm.



   (D)   The alarm administrator may require a conference with an alarm
user and the alarm installation company and/or monitoring company responsible
for the repair or monitoring of the alarm system to review the circumstances
of each false alarm.



   (E)   The alarm administrator may create and implement an alarm user
awareness class. The alarm administrator may request the assistance of
associations, alarm companies and law enforcement agencies in developing and
implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems
created by false alarms and teach alarm users how to avoid generating false
alarms.



   (F)   The alarm administrator may require an alarm user to remove a
holdup alarm that is a single action, non-recessed button, if a false holdup
alarm has occurred.



   (G)   If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not
being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and
reduction of false alarm notifications, the alarm administrator may require a
conference with an alarm permit holder.  If the alarm permit holder fails to
attend a conference, after receiving notice, an administrative fee (see
Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table) may be imposed against the alarm permit
holder.



(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10)



§ 97.07  FINES.



   (A)   An alarm user shall be subject to fines, depending on the
number of false alarms in the preceding 12-month period based upon the fee
schedule (see Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table).



   (B)   In addition, any person operating a non-permitted alarm system
will be subject to a fine (see Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table) for each false
alarm in addition to any other fines. The alarm administrator may waive this
additional fine for a non-permitted system if the alarm user submits an
application for alarm permit within ten days after notification of such
violation.



   (C)   The alarm installation company shall be subject to a fine (see
Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table) if the responding city emergency service
determines that an on-site employee of the alarm installation company
directly caused the false alarm.  In this situation, the false alarm will
not be counted against the alarm user.



   (D)   The monitoring company shall be subject to a fine (see
Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table) for each failure to verify alarm system
signals as specified in § 97.05(E)(2).



   (E)   The alarm installation company shall be subject to a fine (see
Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table) if the alarm administrator determines that an
alarm installation company employee knowingly made a false statement
concerning the inspection of an alarm site or the performance of an alarm
system.



   (F)   An alarm user shall be subject to a fine for operating an
alarm system during the time the alarm permit is under suspension (see
Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table).



   (G)   Notice of the right of appeal under this chapter will be
included with any fines.



(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10)



§ 97.08  SUSPENSION.



   (A)   The alarm administrator may suspend any alarm permit upon the
occurrence of any of the following conditions:



      (1)   If the alarm user provides any false information in, or
in connection with, an alarm permit application;



      (2)   If an alarm site has more than 12 false alarms in any
12-month period; or



      (3)   If any fines assessed by the alarm administrator become
180 days or more past due.



   (B)   An alarm user may appeal the suspension of an alarm permit in
accordance with the provision for appeals set forth in this chapter.



   (C)   The alarm administrator will notify the alarm user in writing
ten business days prior to the effective date an alarm permit has been
suspended and the reason for the suspension. The notice of suspension may
also include the amount of the fine for each false alarm, if applicable.



(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10)



§ 97.09  APPEALS.



   (A)   If the alarm administrator assesses a fine or denies the
issuance, renewal or reinstatement of an alarm permit, the alarm
administrator shall send written notice of the action and a statement of the
right to an appeal to either the affected applicant or alarm user and the
alarm installation company and/or monitoring company.



   (B)   The alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring
company may appeal an assessment of a fine or the suspension of an alarm
permit to the alarm administrator by setting forth in writing the reasons for
the appeal within ten business days after receipt of the fine or notice of
suspension and by submitting a certified check in the amount of $25 payable
to the city to cover the cost of processing the appeal. The payment for the
cost of the appeal will not be refunded.



   (C)   The alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring
company may appeal the decision of the alarm administrator by requesting,
within ten business days from the date of the decision, that the alarm
administrator forward the appeal to the City Manager. The alarm administrator
will, within five business days of such a request, provide the City Manager
with notice of the appeal. The City Manager shall, within a period of 30 days
from receipt of the notice of appeal from the alarm administrator, hear the
appeal and the facts as presented by the appellant and the alarm
administrator, affording both parties a reasonable and equal amount of time
for the presentation of facts, evidence, and the questioning and
cross-examination of witnesses. Within ten business days of the hearing, the
City Manager shall render a final, written decision affirming or reversing
the decision of the alarm administrator. Such written decision shall be filed
with the City Secretary.



   (D)   Filing of a notice of appeal shall stay the action by the
alarm administrator suspending an alarm permit or requiring payment of a
fine, until the City Manager has rendered a decision. If a request for an
appeal to the City Manager is not made within the required ten business day
period, the action of the alarm administrator is final.



   (E)   The alarm administrator may adjust the count of false alarms
based on:



      (1)   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by an Act of God;



      (2)   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by action of the
telephone company;



      (3)   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by a power outage
lasting longer than four hours;



      (4)   Evidence that the alarm dispatch request was not a false
alarm; and/or



      (5)   Evidence that a city emergency service response was not
completed in a timely fashion.



   (F)   With respect to fines of an alarm installation company or
monitoring company the alarm administrator may take into consideration
whether the alarm company or monitoring company has engaged in a consistent
pattern of violations.



(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10)



§ 97.10  REINSTATEMENT.



   (A)   A person whose alarm permit has been suspended may, at the
discretion of the alarm administrator, have the alarm permit reinstated by
the alarm administrator if the person:



      (1)   Submits a new application and pays a reinstatement fee
(see Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table);



      (2)   Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding citations
and fines; and



      (3)   Submits a certification from an alarm installation
company, stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if
necessary) by the alarm installation company.



   (B)   In addition, the alarm administrator may require one or more
of the following as a condition to reinstatement:



      (1)   Proof that an employee of the alarm installation company
or monitoring company caused the false alarm;



      (2)   A certificate showing that the alarm user has
successfully completed the alarm user awareness class as provided under §
97.06;



      (3)   Upgrade the alarm control panel to meet SIA Control
Panel Standard CP-01;



      (4)   A written statement from an independent inspector that
the alarm system has been inspected and is in good working order;



      (5)   Confirmation that all motion detectors are "dual
technology" type;



      (6)   Confirmation that the alarm system requires two
independent zones to trigger before transmitting an alarm signal to the
monitoring company;



      (7)   Confirmation that the alarm system requires two
independent detectors to trigger before transmitting an alarm signal to the
monitoring company;



      (8)   Certification that the monitoring company will not make
an alarm dispatch request unless the need for a city emergency service is
confirmed by a listen-in device;



      (9)   Certification that the monitoring company will not
request an alarm dispatch unless the need for a city emergency service
response is confirmed by a camera device; or



      (10)   Certification that the monitoring company will not make
an alarm dispatch request unless the need for a city emergency service
response is confirmed by a person at the alarm site.



(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10)



§ 97.11  CONFIDENTIALITY.



   In the interest of public safety, all information contained in and
gathered through the alarm permit applications and applications for appeals
shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the city
and by any third-party administrator or employees of a third-party
administrator with access to such information.



(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10)



§ 97.12  GOVERNMENTAL IMMUNITY.



   An alarm permit is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract,
duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, for a city emergency
response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the
city's failure or inability to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed
and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an
alarm permit, the alarm user acknowledges that a city emergency response may
be influenced by factors such as: The availability of city emergency service
units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency
conditions, staffing levels and prior response history.



(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Penalty/Violations.



      (1)   General. A person commits an offense if he violates by
commission or omission any provision of this chapter that imposes upon him a
duty or responsibility, regardless of the presence or absence of a culpable
mental state.



      (2)   Alarm user.  A person who is required to have a permit
under this chapter commits an offense if he/she knowingly operates, causes or
permits to be operated an alarm system without a current alarm permit issued
by the Chief.



      (3)   Revoked permit.  A person who is required to have a
permit under this chapter commits an offense if he knowingly operates, causes
or permits to be operated an alarm system during the period in which the
alarm permit is suspended.



      (4)   Alarm systems company.  It is unlawful for an alarm
systems company or any owner, operator, manager, agent or employee thereof to
allow or permit a violation of any of the duties imposed by § 97.05 to occur.



      (5)   Penalty.  A person who violates a provision of this
chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each violation committed,
continued or permitted, and each offense is punishable by a fine of not more
than $500.



   (B)   Corporations, Partnerships and Associations.  In addition to
prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of individuals, it is the intent of
this chapter to hold a corporation, partnership or other association
criminally responsible for acts or omissions performed by an agent acting in
behalf of the corporation, partnership or other association, and within the
scope of his employment.



(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10)



APPENDIX A: FINE AND FEE TABLE



 




FEE TYPE

 

CODE SECTION

 

FEE PURPOSE

 

FEE AMOUNT



Permit
 

97.02

 

Residential site permit (initial issuance)
(Persons 65 years of age or older are exempt from this permit fee)

 

$50.00



Permit
 

97.02

 

Residential site permit (renewal)
(Persons 65 years of age or older are exempt from this permit fee)

 

$25.00 (annually)



Permit
 

97.02

 

Commercial/church site permit (issuance/renewal)

 

$100.00 (annually)



Permit
 

97.02

 

Financial institution site permit (issuance/renewal)

 

$200.00 (annually)



Permit
 

97.02

 

Government/education site permit

 

No fee



Late fee
 

97.03

 

Permit received 30-days past expiration

 

$10.00



Service
 

97.07

 

Alarm system company providing incorrect information

 

$25.00



No permit fee
 

97.07

 

Operating a non-permitted alarm system (may be waived by obtaining permit)

 

$100.00 (per incident)



Fine
 

97.07

 

Operating an alarm system during alarm permit suspension

 

$200.00



Administrative
 

97.06

 

Mandatory performance review (failure to attend)

 

$25.00



Appeal
 

97.09

 

Appeal processing fee

 

$25.00



Administrative
 

97.10

 

Reinstatement of suspended permit

 

$25.00



Fine
 

97.07

 

4th and 5th false alarm within the preceding 12-month period

 

$50.00



Fine
 

97.07

 

6th and 7th false alarm within the preceding 12-month period

 

$75.00



Fine
 

97.07

 

8th and any additional false alarms within the preceding 12-month period

 

$100.00



Fine
 

97.07

 

Monitoring company failure to verify

 

$100.00



Fine
 

97.07

 

False statement by alarm company employee

 

$200.00



Fine
 

97.05

 

Failure to comply or violation of § 97.05

 

$200.00 (per incident)





 



CHAPTER 98: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   98.01   Obstructing, damaging streets or alleys



   98.02   Street specifications



   98.03   Solicitations and sales in certain locations



   98.04   Prohibition of aggressive panhandling



Excavations



   98.15   Permit required; fee



   98.16   Backfilling



   98.17   Notice in case of street closing



   98.18   Guarding, warning devices required



Mass Gatherings



   98.30   Definitions



   98.31   Permits required



   98.32   Permit application; fee; bond



   98.33   Investigations



   98.34   Hearing



   98.35   Permit issuance or denial



   98.36   Permit revocation



   98.37   Appeals



Garage Sales



   98.50   Definitions



   98.51   Permit required



   98.52   Sale hours



   98.53   Garage sale signs



   98.54   Restrictions



   98.55   Complaints



   98.56   Variance requests



STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



§ 98.01  OBSTRUCTING, DAMAGING STREETS OR ALLEYS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct or injure or
cause to be obstructed or injured or maintain an obstruction in any manner
whatsoever upon any street or alley within the city.



('78 Code, § 15-1) (Ord. 144, passed 8-14-62) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to remove street obstructions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art.
1175(18)



   Offense of placing street obstructions, see Tex. Penal Code, § 42.03



§ 98.02  STREET SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   All new streets shall be constructed of concrete.



   (B)   The City Manager, subject to the approval of the City Council,
is hereby authorized to promulgate definitions, rules, regulations, standards
and specifications for construction, installation, design, location and
arrangement of streets, curbs, street lights, alleys, utility layouts,
utility easements, gates for utility easements, sidewalks, water supply and
water distribution systems, fire hydrants, sewage disposal systems, septic
tanks, water wells, monuments, criteria for drainage easement requirements,
drainage facilities and crosswalk ways. He/she shall file same with the
Planning and Zoning Commission for approval, and thereafter, file with the
City Secretary at least ten days before they become effective. He/she may,
subject to the approval of the City Council, amend the same from time to
time, upon the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission, and the
amendment shall be filed with the City Secretary at least ten days before it
becomes effective. No such rules, regulations, standards and specifications
shall conflict with this section or any ordinance of the city. All
improvements shall be constructed, installed, designed, located and arranged
by the subdivider in accordance with the rules, regulations, standards and
specifications.



('78 Code, § 15-7) (Ord. 493, passed 5-9-83) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.03  SOLICITATIONS AND SALES IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, sell or
offer for sale or distribution any goods, wares, merchandise or service, or
solicit a ride, employment, donations, contributions or business within a
roadway, or on any median, traffic island or within the right-of-way of any
street or highway within the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, sell, offer
for sale or distribution any goods, wares, merchandise, or solicit a ride,
employment, donations or contributions by a direct transaction or exchange
with the occupant of any vehicle upon any street or highway within the city.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to contact, direct, or
otherwise solicit business, patronage, or other commerce with the occupant of
any vehicle on any public roadway from said roadway, shoulder of roadway,
medians or right-of-ways.



   (D)   An offense under this section occurs when the offer,
solicitation or distribution is made regardless of whether a transaction is
completed, or the operator or occupant of the vehicle was ever aware of the
offer, solicitation or distribution.



   (E)   For purposes of division (A), ROADWAY is defined as that
portion of a street or highway designed, improved or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, typically delineated by curbs, edgelines or the edge of
pavement.



(Ord. 1472, passed 1-29-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.04  PROHIBITION OF AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING.



   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates another meaning.



      AGGRESSIVE PAN HANDLING. Includes approaching or following
pedestrians, repetitive solicitation despite refusals, the use of abusive or
profane language to cause fear and intimidation, unwanted physical contact,
or the intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



      AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE or ATM. A machine, other than a
telephone, that is capable of being operated by a patron to communicate to a
financial institution;



         (a)   A request to withdraw money from an account
directly or under a line of credit previously authorized;



         (b)   An instruction to deposit money in an account with
the financial institution;



         (c)   An instruction to transfer money between one or
more accounts maintained with the financial institution;



         (d)   An instruction to apply money against an
indebtedness to the financial institution; or



         (e)   A request for information concerning the balance
of the account with the financial institution.



      FINANCIAL TRANSACTION. The actual purchasing, paying, charging or
negotiating for the procurement or sale of any goods or services.



      FUEL DISPENSING DEVICE.  A pump or other machine utilized for
dispensing fuel to motor vehicles or containers.



      PAY TELEPHONE.  Any coin-operated or credit or debit card reader
operated telephone located on any public or private property that is
accessible for public use.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  A street, sidewalk, or other place that is open
to the public.



      REQUEST.  Any imperative instruction, whether verbal or
non-verbal, by a solicitee to a solicitor to desist the solicitation
including but not limited to words or gestures such as "stop," "back off,"
"stay back," "get away," "leave me alone," or "withdraw."



      SOLICITATION.  The act of panhandling by seeking through a
communication with another person, whether by gesture or verbally, funds or
goods for food, personal favors (such as trips, transportation, clothing, or
other), drink, lodging, vehicle fare, or any other purpose to directly
benefit an individual or his family members.



      SOLICITEE.  Any individual to whom a solicitor, as defined
herein, directs a solicitation.



      SOLICITOR.  Any person who engages in the act of solicitation as
defined above.



   (B)   It shall be a violation for anyone to knowingly with respect
to the nature of their conduct or to circumstances surrounding their conduct
to violate any provision of this section.



   (C)   Immediately upon any request from a solicitee to a solicitor,
a solicitor who is in a public place when the request is made shall
discontinue the solicitation until there is a space of at least ten feet
between the solicitor and the solicitee. For the purposes of this division
(C), distance shall be measured from any extension of the solicitor's body,
including without limitation any sign or other object being used or carried
by the solicitor, to any part of the solicitee's body.



   (D)   No solicitor shall engage in solicitation within a distance of
20 feet from any ATM, pay telephone, fuel dispensing device, or outdoor
dining or seating establishment, including, but not limited to, a sidewalk
cafe. For the purposes of this division (D), distance shall be measured from
any extension of the solicitor's body, including without limitation any sign
or other object being used or carried by the solicitor, to any part of the
physical structure of the ATM, pay telephone, fuel dispensing device, or
outdoor dining or seating establishment.



   (E)   No solicitor shall engage in solicitation of anyone who is
engaged in a financial transaction.



   (F)   Aggressive panhandling as defined herein is prohibited.



(Ord. OR-1837-12, passed 6-11-12)



EXCAVATIONS



§ 98.15  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate across, along, in or
about any public street, alley or other public way without first having
obtained a permit for such purpose from the City Secretary. A fee of $10 will
be paid to the City Secretary for each permit herein provided for and shall
be paid at the time the permit is delivered.



('78 Code, § 15-2) Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross reference:



   Banners over streets, see § 130.21



§ 98.16  BACKFILLING.



   (A)   Any person having done any excavation across, along, in or
about any public street, alley or other public way in the city shall refill
any excavations according to city specifications.



   (B)   When it is necessary to cross an existing street with a
utility line, the road crossing will be bored where it is possible. Should it
not be possible to bore the street or if the utility main is in the existing
street, the street may be open cut and the ditch back filled as outlined
above.



('78 Code, § 15-3) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.17  NOTICE IN CASE OF STREET CLOSING.



   Any excavation requiring the closing of a street must be reported to
the Police and Fire Departments prior to closing.



('78 Code, § 15-4)



§ 98.18  GUARDING, WARNING DEVICES REQUIRED.



   (A)   The person working in the street, alley or other public way
shall be responsible for providing all warning devices and signs to provide
for the safety of both pedestrians and vehicular traffic.



('78 Code, § 15-5)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person having charge of any
public or private improvement or building in the city to leave any hole,
ditch or excavation of any kind in the surface of the earth in or adjoining
any public square, street, alley, sidewalk or other public place without
guarding or covering same in such manner as to protect persons and animals
from injury.



('78 Code, § 15-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



MASS GATHERINGS



§ 98.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ISSUING OFFICER.  The City Manager, or his designated representative.



   MASS GATHERING.  Any meeting or gathering held within the city,
wherein anyone in attendance at the meeting or gathering is not or is not
expected to be within a permanent structure and which attracts or can be
expected to attract more than 100 persons who will remain at the location of
the gathering for a period of more than six continuous hours.



   PERMANENT.  As used in "permanent structure" means any man-made
structure for which the city has issued a building permit, a plumbing permit
and an electrical permit, which has existing and currently operating plumbing
and electrical service which complies with all ordinances of the city, which
has an existing and currently operating supply of water provided only by the
city and which has existing and currently operating sanitary sewer service
provided only by the city.



   PROMOTER.  Any person, group of persons, firm, corporation,
partnership or association that organizes, promotes, manages, finances or
holds a mass gathering.



('78 Code, § 11-20)



Statutory reference:



   Mass Gatherings Act, see Tex. Health & Safety Code §§ 751.001 et seq.



   Outdoor music festival regulations, see Tex. Occ. Code §§ 2104.001 et
seq.



§ 98.31  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   No person may act as a promoter of a mass gathering in the city unless
he/she obtains a permit from the issuing officer under the provisions of this
subchapter. If the owner of the property on which the mass gathering will be
held is not the promoter as defined in § 98.30, the owner of the property
shall also be required to obtain a permit under the provisions of this
subchapter as specified and required of a promoter.



('78 Code, § 11-21) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.32  PERMIT APPLICATION; FEE; BOND.



   (A)   At least 60 days before a mass gathering is to be held, the
promoter of the mass gathering shall file with the issuing officers an
application for a permit.



   (B)   The application shall include the following:



      (1)   The name and address of the promoter.



      (2)   A financial statement reflecting all funds which are
being supplied to finance the mass gathering and who supplied them.



      (3)   The name and address of the owner of the property on
which the mass gathering is to be held and a certified copy of the agreement
made between the promoter and the owner of the property.



      (4)   The location and a description of the property on which
the mass gathering is to be held.



      (5)   The dates and the times that the mass gathering will be
held.



      (6)   The number of persons the promoter will allow to attend
the mass gathering and the plan which the promoter intends to use to limit
attendance to this number.



      (7)   The names and addresses of the performers who have
agreed to appear and their agents and a description of any agreements reached
with these performers.



      (8)   A description of all steps taken by the promoter to
assure that minimum standards of sanitation and health will be maintained
during the mass gathering.



      (9)   A description of all preparations being made to provide
traffic control and to assure that the mass gathering will be conducted in an
orderly fashion and that the physical safety of the persons in attendance
will be protected.



      (10)   A description of the preparations made to provide
adequate medical and nursing care.



      (11)   A description of the preparations made to supervise
minor persons who may attend the mass gathering.



   (C)   A filing fee of $25 must be submitted with the application for
a permit.



   (D)   The issuing officer, upon a full and complete investigation of
the proposed mass gathering, shall have the authority to require the promoter
to post a bond in an amount that would cover all reasonable expenses entailed
in cleaning up the premises after the gathering in the event the promoter
fails to do so. The issuing officer shall have the authority to require
either a cash bond or a corporate surety bond in his/her discretion. The bond
shall be released and returned upon the clean up and maintenance being
accomplished by the promoter. If it is necessary for the city to accomplish
the clean up, the bond will be used to cover the city's reasonable and
necessary expenses.



('78 Code, § 11-22)



§ 98.33  INVESTIGATIONS.



   (A)   After an application is filed with the issuing officer, he/she
shall send copies to the city health officer or the party serving in that
capacity as designated by the City Manager and the Chief of Police.



   (B)   The city health officer shall inquire into preparations for
the mass gathering and at least five days before the hearing shall submit a
report to the issuing officer stating whether or not he/she believes that the
minimum standards of health and sanitation provided by state and local laws,
rules, regulations and orders will be maintained.



   (C)   The Chief of Police shall investigate preparations for the
mass gathering and at least five days before the hearing shall submit a
report to the issuing officer stating whether or not he/she believes that the
minimum standards provided by state and local laws, rules, regulations and
orders for assuring public safety and order will be maintained.



   (D)   The issuing officer may conduct any additional investigation
which he/she considers necessary.



   (E)   The city health officer and the Chief of Police shall be
available to give testimony relating to their reports at the hearing.



('78 Code, § 11-23)



§ 98.34  HEARING.



   (A)   The issuing officer shall set a date and a time for a public
hearing on the application which shall be held at least ten days before the
day on which the mass gathering is to begin.



   (B)   Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be
given to the promoter and to any persons who have an interest in the granting
or denial of the permit, including notice to all owners of property which
abuts the property where the mass gathering will be held.



   (C)   At the hearing, any person may appear and testify for or
against the granting of the permit.



('78 Code, § 11-24)



§ 98.35  PERMIT ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.



   (A)   After the hearing is completed, the issuing officer shall
enter his/her findings in the record and shall grant or deny the permit.



   (B)   The issuing officer may deny the permit if he/she finds the
following:



      (1)   The application contains false or misleading information
or required information is omitted.



      (2)   The financial backing of the promoter is insufficient to
assure that the mass gathering will be conducted in the manner stated in the
application.



      (3)   The location selected for the mass gathering is
inadequate for the purpose for which it is to be used.



      (4)   The promoter has not made adequate preparations to limit
the number of persons attending the mass gathering or to provide adequate
supervision for minor persons attending the mass gathering.



      (5)   The promoter does not have assurance that performers who
are scheduled to appear will appear.



      (6)   The preparations for the mass gathering do not assure
that minimum standards of sanitation and health will be maintained or that
the mass gathering will be conducted in an orderly fashion and the physical
safety of persons in attendance will be protected or that adequate
supervision of minor persons will be provided.



      (7)   Adequate arrangements for traffic control have not been
provided.



      (8)   Adequate medical and nursing care will not be available.



('78 Code, § 11-25)



§ 98.36  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   (A)   After a permit is issued, if the issuing officer finds that
preparations for the event will not be completed by the time the mass
gathering is to begin or that the permit has been obtained by fraud or
misrepresentation, lie may revoke the permit.



   (B)   The issuing officer must give notice to the promoter 24 hours
in advance of the revocation and hold a hearing on the revocation if
requested by the promoter.



('78 Code, § 11-26)



§ 98.37  APPEALS.



   Any promoter or person affected by the action of the issuing officer in
granting, denying or revoking a permit under this subchapter may request a
hearing before the City Council.



('78 Code, § 11-27)



GARAGE SALES



§ 98.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ESTATE SALE. A way of liquidating the belongings of a family or estate,
usually much more than a garage sale or yard sales, and is used when someone
is in need of a way to sell off personal belongings due to downsizing,
moving, divorce, bankruptcy, or death.



   GARAGE SALE. A sale of household goods, furniture, equipment, utensils,
appliances, tools, personal clothing, glassware or similar personal property,
including, but not limited to any sale commonly termed “estate sale,”
“porch sale,” “yard sale,” “lawn sale,” “group family sale,”
or “attic sale.”



(‘78 Code, § 10-80) (Ord. 705, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. OR-1974-15,
passed 11-9-15)



§ 98.51  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   A garage sale permit issued by the Development Services
Department shall be obtained prior to a garage sale.



   (B)   A permit fee in the amount of $5 shall be paid to the city at
the time an application is made.



   (C)   A garage sale shall not exceed three consecutive days in
duration for each permit.



   (D)   No more than two garage sale permits shall be issued for any
one premise per calendar year.



(‘78 Code, § 10-81) (Ord. 705, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. OR-1974-15,
passed 11-9-15) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.52  SALE HOURS.



   No person shall conduct a garage sale before 7:00 a.m. of any day or
after 7:00 p.m. on any day.



(‘78 Code, § 10-82) (Ord. 705, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. OR-1974-15,
passed 11-9-15) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.53  GARAGE SALE SIGNS.



   (A)   No more than three signs may be allowed per garage sale. Signs
shall be allowed with consent of the property owner at off-site locations.



   (B)   Signs shall be limited to a maximum area of four square feet
and a maximum height of three feet when measured from the ground to the top
of the sign.



   (C)   Signs shall be removed promptly after a garage sale.



   (D)   A garage sale permit must be obtained before the placement of
signs.



   (E)   The address of the garage sale location must be on the sign.



   (F)   Pennants, spinners, balloons, streamers, flags, wind signs or
other similar devices shall not be attached to any sign.



   (G)   Signs shall be permitted in city street right-of-way, but
shall not be placed in any street median on any fence, sign pole, utility
pole or other fixed objects in the city right-of-way.



   (H)   Signs shall not be placed in such a manner as to obscure
vision at any intersection, traffic sign or signal.



   (I)   Any sign found illegally placed will be immediately removed
and discarded.



(‘78 Code, § 10-83) (Ord. 705, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. OR-1974-15,
passed 11-9-15) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.54  RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   All sidewalks, walk areas or driveways, abutting on and in
front of the property at which any garage sale is being conducted shall
remain free and uncongested so as to allow normal passage of traffic, both
pedestrian and motor vehicles.



   (B)   A garage sale shall not be held for the purpose of conducting
a commercial enterprise or selling items purchased for resale.



(‘78 Code, § 10-84) (Ord. 705, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. OR-1974-15,
passed 11-9-15) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.55  COMPLAINTS.



   Complaints shall be filed with the Development Services Department.



(‘78 Code, § 10-85) (Ord. 705, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. OR-1974-15,
passed 11-9-15)



§ 98.56  VARIANCE REQUEST.



   Any party or individual, who needs to conduct an estate sale and feels
that he or she cannot comply with the requirements in § 98.51(D) due to
special circumstances, may request a variance by submitting a letter of
request containing information and evidence as they deem appropriate to
demonstrate the justification for not complying with the requirements. The
Deputy City Manager in charge of the Development Services Department will
decide on the variance request based upon whether or not he or she believes
the information and evidence submitted by the applicant is sufficient to
demonstrate that compliance with the requirements in § 98.51(D) will cause
unnecessary hardship due to special circumstances not simply a  hardship
related to convenience and that the granting of the variance will not be
contrary to the public interest.



(Ord. OR-1974-15, passed 11-9-15)



CHAPTER 99: NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT



Section



General Provisions



   99.01   Title



   99.02   Purpose and intent



   99.03   Definitions



Permits



   99.15   Tree removal permit required



   99.16   Authority for review



   99.17   Submittal requirements



   99.18   Action on permit application



Regulations



   99.30   Clear cutting



   99.31   Selective thinning



   99.32   Ground level cuts



   99.33   New developments



   99.34   Private property



   99.35   Municipal/public domain property, rights-of-way and easements



   99.36   Exceptions



   99.37   Tree replacement requirements



   99.38   Tree protection



   99.39   Tree pruning restrictions



   99.40   Tree planting restrictions



Administration and Enforcement



   99.50   Additional duties and authorities of the Tree Board



   99.51   Building permit



   99.52   Acceptance of improvements



   99.53   Certificate of occupancy



   99.54   Fiscal security



 



   99.98   Violations



   99.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Tree exhibit



   Appendix B:   Tree diameter measurement



   Appendix C:   Tree protection detail



   Appendix D:   List of items required on tree survey



   Appendix E:   Construction plan requirements



   Appendix F:   Tree pruning recommendations



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 99.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to as the Natural
Resources Management Ordinance.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)



§ 99.02  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote site planning which furthers
the preservation of mature trees and natural areas, to protect trees during
construction, to facilitate site design and construction which contribute to
the long term viability of existing trees and to control the removal of trees
when necessary. It is the further purpose of this chapter to achieve the
following broader objectives:



   (A)   Prohibit the indiscriminate clearing of property.



   (B)   Protect and increase the value of residential and commercial
properties within the city.



   (C)   Maintain and enhance a positive image for the attraction of
new business enterprises to the city.



   (D)   Protect healthy quality trees and promote the natural
ecological environmental and aesthetic qualities of the city.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)



§ 99.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words
and terms used in this chapter, but not defined in this chapter shall have
the meanings ascribed thereto in the zoning ordinance or other ordinances of
the city. Words and terms defined in two ordinances shall be read in harmony
unless there exists an irreconcilable conflict in which case the definition
contained in this chapter shall control.



   AGRICULTURAL USE.  The use of land to produce plant or animal
products, such as the growing of crops, raising and pasturing of livestock or
farming. It does not include the processing of plant or animal products after
harvesting or the production of timber or forest products.



   BUILDABLE AREA.  That portion of a building site exclusive of the
required yard areas on which a structure or building improvements may be
erected and including the actual structure, driveway, parking lot, pool and
other construction as shown on a site plan.



   BUILDING PAD.  The actual foundation area of a building and the area
within six feet of the foundation that is used for construction and grade
transition.



   CLEAR CUTTING.  The removal of all of the trees or a significant
majority of the trees within an area.



   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE (CRZ).  The area of undisturbed natural soil around
a tree defined by a concentric circle with a radius equal to the distance
from the trunk to the outermost portion of the dripline. (See Appendix A.)



   CUT/FILL.  Areas where the natural ground level has been excavated
(cut) or fill brought in.



   DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH).  The diameter of a tree trunk, or, in
the case of a multi-trunk tree, the total of the diameter of the largest
trunk and one-half of the diameter of each additional trunk, measured at a
height of four and one-half feet above the ground.



   DRIP LINE.  A vertical line run through the outermost portion of the
canopy of a tree and extending to the ground. (See Appendix A.)



   LIMITS OF CONSTRUCTION.  A delineation on the graphic exhibit which
shows the boundary of the area within which all construction activity will
occur.



   MUNICIPAL/PUBLIC DOMAIN PROPERTY.  Examples of this would include City
Hall, public parks, county property, Corps of Engineers property, State of
Texas R.O.W., library, fire stations, water tower sites or similar properties.



   PROTECTIVE FENCING.  A physical and visual barrier installed around
the critical root zone of a protected tree as required by this chapter in
order to prevent damage to the tree and its root system.



   SELECTIVE THINNING.  The process by which noncontiguous protected
trees are identified and removed within a heavily wooded area to provide the
maximum benefit to the remaining protected trees.



   TREE.  Any self-supporting, woody, perennial plant which will attain a
trunk diameter of two inches or more when measured at a point four and
one-half feet above ground level and normally an overall height of at least
15 feet at maturity, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches.
It may appear to have several stems or trunks as in several varieties of oaks.



   TREE BOARD.  There is hereby created and established a City Tree
Board. This Board shall be the Planning and Zoning Commission unless
otherwise appointed by City Council.



   TREE, PARK.  Trees in public parks and all areas owned by the city to
which the public has free access to as a park.



   TREE, PROTECTED.  Any canopy tree that has a diameter at breast height
of six inches or greater; any understory tree that has a diameter at breast
height of two inches or greater; any specimen tree which is determined by the
Landscape Administrator to be of unique and intrinsic value to the general
public because of its size, age, historic association or ecological value; or
any tree listed in the most current edition of the Big Tree Registry, as
amended, published by the Texas Forest Service.



   TREE, STREET.  Trees on land lying between property lines on either
side of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes or ways within the city.



   TREE TOPPING.  The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10)



PERMITS



§ 99.15  TREE REMOVAL PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, remove or
move or effectively destroy through damaging any protected tree situated on
property regulated by this chapter without first obtaining a tree removal
permit unless otherwise specified in this chapter.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98) Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.16  AUTHORITY FOR REVIEW.



   The Landscape Administrator shall be responsible for the review and
approval of all requests for tree removal permits submitted in accordance
with the requirements specified herein.



   (A)   Deferrals.  The Landscape Administrator may defer the
approval of a tree removal permit to the Tree Board for any reason. All
decisions made by the Tree Board shall be final.



   (B)   Appeals.  Any decision made by the Landscape Administrator
may be appealed to the Tree Board. All decisions made by the Tree Board shall
be final.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)



§ 99.17  SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   The Landscape Administrator shall establish administrative procedures
necessary to facilitate the implementation and enforcement of this chapter.



   (A)   Tree removal permit.  A request for a tree removal permit
must be submitted and approved prior to the removal of any protected tree in
the city unless the tree is exempt under a provision of this chapter.



   (B)   Fees.  All tree removal permits shall be accompanied by a
payment made to the city in the amount specified by City Council.



   (C)   Required documents.  Either a transparency or tree survey
shall be required as determined by the Landscape Administrator and must
include the items referenced in this chapter and its appendices.



   (D)   Permit expiration.  Permits for tree removal issued in
connection with a building permit or site plan shall be valid for the period
of that building permit's or site plan's validity. Permit(s) for tree removal
not issued in connection with a building permit or a site plan shall become
void 180 days after the issue date on the permit.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)



§ 99.18  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION.



   The Landscape Administrator or the Tree Board shall grant a tree
removal permit based on the following criteria:



   (A)   Whether or not a reasonable accommodation or alternative
solution can be made to accomplish the desired activity without the removal
of the tree.



   (B)   The cost of preserving the tree.



   (C)   Whether the tree is worthy of preservation depending on the
individual characteristics of the tree.



   (D)   The effect of the removal on erosion, soil moisture,
retention, flow of surface waters and drainage systems.



   (E)   The need for buffering of residential areas from the noise,
glare and visual effects of nonresidential uses.



   (F)   Whether the tree interferes with a utility service.



   (G)   Whether the proposed tree replacement pursuant to the tree
replacement requirements hereof adequately mitigates the removal of the tree.



   (H)   Whether the removal affects the public health, safety or
welfare.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10)



REGULATIONS



§ 99.30  CLEAR CUTTING.



   The clear cutting of land as defined in this chapter is prohibited.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98) Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.31  SELECTIVE THINNING.



   The removal of selected trees from within a densely forested area when
done in a professionally accepted manner shall be allowed as a single permit
upon approval by the Landscape Administrator. Approval will only be granted
when the Landscape Administrator determines that the selective thinning is
being done in a manner that would enhance the environment and likelihood of
survival for the remaining trees.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98) Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.32  GROUND LEVEL CUTS.



   Where protected tree removal is allowed through exemption or by tree
removal permit and the root system is intertwined with protected trees which
are intended to be saved, the tree shall be removed by flush cutting with the
natural level of the surrounding ground. Where stump removal is also desired,
stump grinding shall be allowed, or upon approval of the Landscape
Administrator, a trench may be cut between the two trees sufficient to cut
the roots near the tree to be removed, thereby allowing removal of the
remaining stump without destruction of the root system of the saved tree.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)



§ 99.33  NEW DEVELOPMENTS.



   All developments which have not submitted final construction plans as
of the effective date of this chapter shall be subject to the requirements
for tree protection and replacement specified as follows.



   (A)   Residential developments.  All areas within street
right-of-ways, utility or drainage easements as shown on an approved final
plat and areas designated as cut/fill on the master construction plan
approved by the Landscape Administrator shall be exempt from the tree
protection and replacement requirements specified herein. The developer may
request the Landscape Administrator to allow trees within potential building
pad areas be included in the exemption described herein. All other area shall
be subject to these requirements.



   (B)   Non-residential development.  All area within street
right-of-ways, public utility or drainage easements as shown on an approved
final plat, area designated as cut/fill on the master construction plan
approved by the Landscape Administrator, plus fire lanes, parking areas and
building pad as shown on an approved construction plan shall be exempt from
the tree protection and replacement requirements specified herein.



   (C)   Gas well drilling and production facilities/natural gas
pipelines.  Facilities constructed for gas well drilling and production,
such as drill sites, operation sites, compressor stations, frac ponds and
access roads, and natural gas pipelines and their related surface
appertances, shall not be exempt from the tree protection and replacement
requirements of this chapter.



   (D)   Permit requirements.  A tree-removal permit shall not be
required for removal of a protected tree within an area noted in divisions
(E)(1) and (E)(2) below, however a permit must be obtained prior to the
removal of any other protected tree on the property.



   (E)   Landscape Administrator review.



      (1)   Residential development.  A developer shall be required
to furnish a digital copy of the proposed development showing all proposed
improvements (e.g. right-of-ways, easements, lot patterns, cut/fill, etc.)
with the submittal of a site plan, development plan, preliminary plat, or
final plat, whichever occurs first. The digital copy shall use the North
American Datum 1983 (NAD 83), Texas State Plane - North Central Zone (4202),
United States, and providing a scale factor if a surface survey is used. The
Landscape Administrator is authorized to require a tree survey meeting the
requirements of Appendix D herein when determined to be needed to fully
evaluate the impact on trees.



      (2)   Non-residential development.  A developer shall be
required to furnish a digital copy of the proposed development showing all
proposed improvements (e.g. right-of-ways, easements, lot patterns, cut/fill,
fire lanes, parking areas and building pads, etc.) with the submittal of a
site plan, development plan, construction plan, plot plan or building permit
application, whichever occurs first. The digital copy shall use the North
American Datum 1983 (NAD 83), Texas State Plane - North Central Zone (4202),
United States, and providing a scale factor if a surface survey is used. The
Landscape Administrator is authorized to require a tree survey meeting the
requirements of Appendix D herein when determined to be needed to fully
evaluate the impact on trees.



      (3)   It is highly recommended that the developer consult with
the Landscape Administrator and submit the required transparency or survey
for review as early as possible so as to minimize changes in preliminary or
final plats and to determine that there is adequate area for the proposed
improvements after tree protection and replacement have been taken into
consideration.



      (4)   The Landscape Administrator will evaluate the required
transparency, survey or plan to determine that the developer has made a best
good-faith effort at saving as many protected trees as possible. The
Administrator will forward review comments to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for consideration regarding denial or approval of the development.
If the review involves a document that normally does not require the approval
of the Planning & Zoning Commission, the Administrator will follow the
procedures in division (E)(1) herein.



   (F)   Parking area.  When a non-residential development consists of
extra parking spaces beyond 110% of the minimum parking spaces required by
the Zoning Ordinance, the developer shall be required to replace a percentage
of the trees removed or make a payment into the Tree Restoration Fund. The
replacement trees shall be calculated by multiplying the total diameter of
trees removed in all parking spaces by the percentage of said extra parking
spaces to the total number of parking spaces (i.e. total diameter of trees
removed x extra parking spaces ÷ total parking spaces). The replacement
trees shall be provided in accordance with § 99.37.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10)



§ 99.34  PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   Homestead.  The owner of property which is used for an
individual residence or homestead shall be exempt from the tree protection
and replacement requirements specified herein.



   (B)   Property owned by home builder.  All areas within the
building pad, driveway, sidewalks, patios, septic tank and lateral lines,
parking area, pool and associated deck area as shown on a plot plan approved
by the Landscape Administrator shall be exempt from the tree protection and
replacement requirements specified herein. All other area of the lot shall be
subject to these requirements.



      (1)   Permit requirements.  A tree removal permit shall not
be required for removal of a protected tree within an area noted above;
however a permit must be obtained prior to the removal of any other protected
tree on the property.



      (2)   Landscape Administrator review.  A transparency showing
all proposed improvements shall be required with the submittal of a building
permit application. The transparency shall be on a sheet drawn to a scale as
required by the Landscape Administrator or on a computer disk in the format
of a commonly used Computer-Aided Design (CAD) program. The Landscape
Administrator is authorized to require a tree survey meeting the requirements
of Appendix D herein when determined to be needed to fully evaluate the
impact on trees.



   (C)   Agricultural property.  The owner of property being actively
used for agricultural purposes shall be permitted to remove up to seven
protected trees per calendar year without obtaining a permit. Protected trees
removed in excess of seven will require permits. It is not the intent of this
chapter to prohibit the clearing of land for legitimate, agricultural use.
The property owner shall request the Landscape Administrator to make an
on-site inspection of the property to be cleared and provide the Landscape
Administrator the purpose and reason for the clearing. If the Landscape
Administrator determines the clearing of land to be for a legitimate,
agricultural reason, he/she will issue a tree removal permit.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98) Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.35  MUNICIPAL/PUBLIC DOMAIN PROPERTY, RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND EASEMENTS.



   All construction and maintenance activities within municipal/public
domain property, public right-of-ways or public easements by the city or
franchise utility companies shall be subject to the requirements for tree
protection and replacement specified herein.



   (A)   Removal of protected trees.  A tree removal permit shall not
be required for removal of a protected tree. Pruning activities by a utility
shall be governed by the provisions of § 99.39.



   (B)   Tree Board responsibilities.  The Tree Board is authorized to
study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update periodically, and
administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting,
replanting, removal or disposition of trees in parks, along streets and in
other public areas. When adopted by the City Council, such plan shall
represent the comprehensive tree plan for the city.



   (C)   Acceptable trees.  The Landscape Administrator shall maintain
a list of trees acceptable for planting along streets, within parks or other
public areas. Trees other than those listed as acceptable may only be planted
upon approval of the Landscape Administrator.



   (D)   Street tree spacing.  The spacing of street trees shall be in
accordance with recommendations of the Landscape Administrator. Closer
spacings or group plantings may be approved by the Landscape Administrator in
unique situations and when recommended by a registered landscape architect.



   (E)   Public tree care.  The city shall have the right to plant,
prune, and maintain street trees and park trees within the lines of all
streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be
necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and
beauty of such public properties.  The city may remove or cause or order to
be removed any tree or part thereof, which is in an unsafe condition, or
which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines,
gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or which is affected
with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10) Penalty, see
§ 99.99



§ 99.36  EXCEPTIONS.



   A tree removal permit and tree protection and replacement requirements
shall not be required under any of the following circumstances. The burden of
proof as a qualified exemption is upon the remover of a tree. It is highly
recommended that qualification as an exemption be determined with the
Landscape Administrator prior to removal of any tree.



   (A)   Preexisting conditions.  All construction activities for
which final construction plans and building permit applications have been
submitted prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be exempt.



   (B)   Diseased trees.  The tree is diseased, damaged beyond the
point of recovery or in danger of falling as determined by the Landscape
Administrator prior to the removal of the tree. The removal of a diseased
tree by the city or an individual is required to reduce the chance of
spreading the disease to adjacent healthy trees.



   (C)   Public safety.  The tree endangers the public health, welfare
or safety and immediate removal is required.



   (D)   Utility service interruption.  The tree has disrupted a
public utility service due to a tornado, storm, flood or other act of God.
Removal shall be limited to the portion of the tree reasonably necessary to
reestablish and maintain reliable utility service.



   (E)   Landscape nursery.  All licensed plant or tree nurseries
shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter as they pertain to
those trees planted and growing on the premises of the licensee that are so
planted and growing for the sale or intended sale to the general public in
the ordinary course of the licensee's business.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)



§ 99.37  TREE REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Tree replacement.  In the event that it is necessary to
remove a protected tree as specified in §§99.33 through 99.35, the party
(other than franchise utility companies) removing the tree shall be required
to replace the protected trees being removed with quality trees approved by
the Landscape Administrator.  A sufficient number of trees shall be planted
to equal or exceed the diameter (measured at four and one-half inches above
ground level) of each tree removed. This mitigative measure is not meant to
supplant good site planning. Tree replacement will be considered only after
all design alternatives which could save more existing trees have been
evaluated and reasonably rejected. Said replacement trees shall be a minimum
of three-and-a-half inch diameter (measured at one foot above ground) and
seven feet in height when planted.



   (B)   Replacement procedures.  At the time of review, the agent
responsible for replacement, the time of replacement and the location of the
new trees will be determined by the Landscape Administrator. The replacement
trees shall be located on the subject site whenever possible. However if this
is not feasible, the Landscape Administrator has the authority to allow the
planting to take place on another property, including public property.
Franchise utility companies shall be exempt from this requirement. If the
Landscape Administrator approves the planting of replacement trees more than
30 days after the removal of protected trees, the applicant shall provide the
Landscape Administrator with an affidavit that all replacement trees will be
planted within six months. Any replacement tree required by this chapter must
be covered by a one-year warranty that is acceptable to the Landscape
Administrator.



   (C)   Tree Reforestation Fund.  In a densely forested area, the
applicant, upon approval of the Landscape Administrator, may make a payment
into the Tree Reforestation Fund in lieu of planting the replacement tree on
the subject site. The funds shall be used for: purchasing and planting trees
on public property; acquiring wooded property which shall remain in a
naturalistic state in perpetuity; and any irrigation, administrative and
other costs incurred by the city while pursuing the activities described
herein and other activities in support of tree planting, preservation and
maintenance, and the general purpose and intent of this chapter.  The amount
of the payment required for each replacement tree shall be calculated based
on a schedule published periodically by the Landscape Administrator which
sets forth the average cost of a quality tree added to the average cost of
planting a tree.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10) Penalty, see
§ 99.99



§ 99.38  TREE PROTECTION.



   A major purpose of this chapter is to protect all protected trees which
are not required to be removed to allow approved construction to occur. The
following procedures are required.



   (A)   Construction plan requirements.  All construction plans shall
include the requirements noted in Appendix E.



   (B)   Prohibited activities.  The following activities shall be
prohibited within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree
subject to the requirements of this chapter.



      (1)   Material storage.  No materials intended for use in
construction or waste materials accumulated due to excavation or demolition
shall be placed within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected
tree. However, this restriction shall not apply to material storage in areas
exempt from the tree protection and replacement requirements (for example,
building pad, driveway, patio, parking lot and the like.)



      (2)   Equipment cleaning/liquid disposal.  No equipment shall
be cleaned or other liquids deposited or allowed to flow overland within the
limits of the critical root zone of a protected tree. This includes, without
limitation, paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar or similar
materials.



      (3)   Tree attachments.  No signs, wires or other
attachments, other than those of a protective nature shall be attached to any
protected tree.



      (4)   Vehicular traffic.  No vehicular and/or construction
equipment traffic or parking shall take place within the limits of the
critical root zone of any protected tree other than on an existing street
pavement. This restriction does not apply to single incident access within
the critical root zone for purposes of clearing underbrush, establishing the
building pad and associated lot grading, vehicular traffic necessary for
routine utility maintenance or emergency restoration of utility service or
routine mowing operations.



      (5)   Grade changes.  No grade changes shall be allowed
within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree unless
adequate construction methods are approved by the Landscape Administrator or
if grading is as directed by the city's drainage inspector.



      (6)   Impervious paving.  No paving with asphalt, concrete or
other impervious materials in a manner which may reasonably be expected to
kill a tree shall be placed within the limits of the critical root zone of a
protected tree except as otherwise allowed in this chapter.



   (C)   Preserved tree.  A protected tree shall be considered to be
preserved only if a minimum of 75% of the critical root zone is maintained at
undisturbed natural grade and no more than 25% of the canopy is removed due
to building encroachment.



   (D)   Prior to construction.  The following procedures shall be
followed on all types of construction projects (including residential
subdivisions, commercial, multi family, industrial developments, residential
builders and municipal/public).



      (1)   Tree flagging or marking.  Trees that are approved by
the Landscape Administrator for removal shall be flagged with bright
fluorescent orange vinyl tape wrapped around the main trunk or marked with
bright fluorescent orange paint at a height of four feet or more such that it
is very visible to workers operating construction equipment. This shall not
include the flagging or marking of all protected trees adjacent to
right-of-ways within approved residential subdivisions during the
construction of the roadway. Trees that are not flagged or marked shall be
saved and protected by fencing in accordance with the requirements in
division (D)(2).



      (2)   Protective fencing.  In those situations where a
protected tree is so close to the construction area that construction
equipment might infringe on the root system or is within 20 feet of the
construction area, a protective fencing shall be required between the outer
limits of the critical root zone of the tree and the construction activity
area. Four feet high protective fencing shall be supported at a maximum of
ten feet intervals by approved methods. All protective fencing shall be in
place prior to commencement of any site work and remain in place until all
exterior work has been completed.



      (3)   Bark protection.  In situations where a protected tree
remains in the immediate area of intended construction, the tree shall be
protected by enclosing the entire circumference of the tree with 2" x 4"
lumber encircled with wire or other means that do not damage the tree. The
intent here is to protect the bark of the tree against incidental contact by
construction equipment.



   (E)   Permanent construction methods.



      (1)   Boring.  Where it is not possible to trench around the
critical root zone of a protected tree, boring of utilities under the
protected tree shall be required. The length of the bore shall at least be
the width of the critical root zone and the depth of the bore shall at least
be 24 inches.



      (2)   Grade change.  In situations where the grade change
within the critical root zone of a protected tree exceeds the limits noted in
division (B) of this section, the procedures noted in the city standard
detail sheet shall be required.



      (3)   Trenching.  All trenching shall be designed to avoid
trenching across the critical root zone of any protected tree. Although this
section is not intended to prohibit the placement of underground services
such as electric, phone, gas and the like, the placement of these utilities
is encouraged to be located outside of the critical root zone of protected
trees. Irrigation system trenching shall be placed outside of the critical
root zone with only the minimum required single head supply line allowed
within that area placed radially to the tree trunk.



      (4)   Root pruning.  All roots two inches or larger in
diameter which are exposed as a result of trenching or other excavation shall
be cut off square with a sharp medium tooth saw and covered with pruning
compound within two hours of initial exposure.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98) Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.39  TREE PRUNING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   General.  No protected tree should be pruned in a manner
which significantly disfigures the tree without proper cause or in a manner
which would reasonably lead to the death of the tree. All pruning shall be
conducted in accordance with universally accepted arboricultural standards
and the regulations contained in this chapter.



   (B)   Permit requirements.  All franchise utility companies shall
be required to maintain at the city a set of pruning specifications (updated
annually) to be followed by all pruning contractors working for the company
within the city.  Prior to beginning any pruning not requested by the owner
of the tree, the contractor for a non-franchise entity shall submit to the
city an application for a pruning permit for approval. Utility companies may
prune trees as necessary to maintain safe and reliable service or to
re-establish disrupted electric service without obtaining a permit. Prior
notification of any pruning activity shall be given to the city within 72
hours of work commencing.



   (C)   Allowed pruning.  The Landscape Administrator may approve
pruning of a protected tree in cases where protected trees must be
strategically pruned to allow construction or demolition of a structure. When
allowed, all pruning shall be in accordance with § 99.38(C), approved
Arboricultural techniques and the recommendations of Appendix F. This section
is not intended to require a tree permit for reasonable pruning performed or
contracted to be performed by the owner of the tree when unrelated to
construction activity.



   (D)   Required pruning.  The owners of all trees adjacent to public
right-of-way shall be required to maintain a minimum clearance of 14 feet
above the traveled pavement or curb of a public street. Said owners shall
also remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs
which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall also
have the right to prune trees overhanging within public right-of-way which
interfere with the proper spread of light along the street from a street
light or interfere with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or
as necessary to preserve the public safety.



   (E)   Tree topping.  It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for
any person, firm or city department to top any street tree, park tree or
other tree on public property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other
causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where
other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at
the determination of the Landscape Administrator.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10) Penalty, see
§ 99.99



§ 99.40  TREE PLANTING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Overhead lines.  Any required replacement trees shall not be
planted within an area such that the mature canopy of the tree will be within
ten feet of overhead utility lines.



   (B)   Proximity to utilities.  Any required replacement trees or
street trees shall not be planted within five feet of electrical facilities
(underground or surface), public utility lines, including water lines, sewer
lines, transmission lines or other utilities. No trees shall be planted
within ten feet of a fire hydrant. Shrubs will be permitted outside of the
minimum clearance of surface electrical facilities established by the
franchise electrical company.



   (C)   Street corners.  No street tree shall be planted closer than
25 feet of any street comer, measured from the point of nearest intersecting
curbs or curblines.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98) Penalty, see § 99.99



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 99.50  ADDITIONAL DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES OF THE TREE BOARD.



   The Tree Board shall have the responsibility to review and grant a tree
removal permit for the following land use:



   (A)   Any public or recreational use that is deemed acceptable to
the Tree Board.



   (B)   Any private use that is deemed acceptable to the Tree Board
that usually requires large areas of open space.



   (C)   In granting the tree removal permit, the Tree Board is
authorized to impose whatever conditions of approval that is deemed necessary
by the Tree Board.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)



§ 99.51  BUILDING PERMIT.



   No building permit shall be issued unless the applicant signs an
application or permit request which states that all construction activities
shall meet the requirements of this chapter. The Building Official shall make
available to the applicant a copy of this chapter or a condensed summary of
the relevant aspects pertaining to the type of permit requested.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)



§ 99.52  ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   No acceptance of public improvements shall be authorized until all
fines for violations of this chapter have been paid to the city or otherwise
disposed of through the Municipal Court. No acceptance of public improvements
shall be authorized until all replacement trees have been planted or
appropriate payments have been made to the Tree Reforestation Fund.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)



§ 99.53  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all fines for
violations of this chapter have been paid to the city or otherwise disposed
of through the Municipal Court. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
until all replacement trees have been planted or appropriate payments have
been made to the Tree Reforestation Fund.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)



§ 99.54  FISCAL SECURITY.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 99.51 through 99.53, public
improvements may be accepted and certificate of occupancy may be issued
before all trees have been replaced if a fiscal security is posted in an
amount equal to the prevailing rate for installed trees with a one year
guarantee, plus 15% to cover administrative costs.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)



§ 99.98  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be deemed a violation of this chapter for any person or firm
to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating or removing
street or park trees within the city without first procuring approval from
the Landscape Administrator.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98) Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who
violates the provisions of §§ 99.15 and 99.33 through 99.36 this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction hereof shall be fined
not to exceed $300 per diameter inch of the tree(s) removed or damaged.



   (B)   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who
violates any other provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction hereof shall be fined not to exceed $500 for
each incident. The unlawful injury, destruction or removal of each protected
tree shall be considered a separate incident and each incident subjects the
violator to the maximum penalty set forth herein per tree.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10)




APPENDIX A




[Click here to view appendix.]




APPENDIX B




[Click here to view appendix.]




APPENDIX C




Tree Protection Detail







 



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10)




APPENDIX D





List of Items Required on Tree Survey




1.   Appropriate title (for example, Tree Removal Exhibit or Tree Survey)



2.   Title block which includes street address, lot and block, subdivision
name, city and date of preparation.



3.   North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity.



4.   Scale at a size no larger than 1"=100' for residential development;
scale to be determined by the Landscape Administrator for nonresidential and
home building activities.



5.   Name, address and phone of owner and person preparing the document.



6.   Location of all right-of-way lines and public easements.



7.   Location of all buildings, structures, pools, parking and other
improvements which are existing or intended on the lot.



8.   Areas of cut/fill with amount of each shown and flow lines shown.



9.   Existing and proposed spot elevations, grades and major contours,
along with existing landscaping, streams, ponds and major natural features.



10.   Areas of no disturbance labeled as "No Disturbance Area." This area
must be clearly marked on the plan and surrounded with protective fencing on
the ground. A single incidence removal of underbrush and vines is allowed.1



11.   All protected trees shown individually on the plan.² Canopy Trees
six inches or greater in size and Understory Trees two inches or greater in
size. Trees in close proximity that all have a caliper of less than four
inches may be designated as a group of trees with quantity of quality,
marginal and understory trees shown. (See Appendix C)



12.   The location of protected trees must be tied by horizontal control
(including dimensions from lot lines or placed through coordinates determined
via survey.)



13.   All protected trees shown with diameter (four and one-half feet from
the ground), common name and condition.



14.   Any proposed replacement trees shown with caliper size, common name
of tree and mature size.



15.   Graphic representations distinguishing protected trees that will be
saved versus those that will be removed.



16.   Phasing of tree survey along with phasing of the development is
permitted.



Notes: 



1   The Landscape Administrator shall have the authority to designate
areas as "no disturbance" areas where a survey would not be required due to
no intended construction.



²   An area may be designated as a "No Disturbance Zone" on the plan when
approved by the Landscape Administrator and trees within that zone are not
required to be individually identified on the plan.



³   The Landscape Administrator shall have the authority to exempt any of
the above items that he/she deems to be not applicable.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)




APPENDIX E





Construction Plan Requirements




   The following shall be required as a part of all construction plans
submitted to the city when tree removal or tree protection is required during
any phase of site work or construction.



1.   A Tree Preservation Detail Sheet shall include the following at a
minimum.



   a.   The requirements of § 99.38 (B) through (D) shall be noted.



   b.   A graphics legend to be used throughout the plans for the
purposes of showing the following:  trees to be flagged, protective fencing,
trees requiring bark protection, boring, areas of cut and fill impacting
protected trees.



   c.   Graphic tree exhibit showing the features of a tree to include
the critical root zone, trunk, canopy, drip line and method of diameter
measurement (per Appendices A & B).



   d.   Graphic exhibits showing methods of protection to include snow
fences, boarded skirts and the like.



   e.   Graphic exhibits showing construction methods to include grade
changes, boring, trenching and the like.



   f.   Graphic exhibit showing appropriate pruning practices (per
Appendix F).



2.   All practices which will be employed in meeting the requirements of
this chapter shall be shown graphically on all applicable sheets within the
construction plans.



3.   Documents as required in Appendix D herein.



(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)




APPENDIX F




[Click here to view appendix.]



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         111.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS





         112.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES





         113.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE





         114.   GAS WELL DRILLING AND PRODUCTION





         115.   SEWAGE SLUDGE APPLICATION




CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



Telecommunications Services



   110.01   Telecommunications services exemption from local sales and
use tax repealed



Aluminum Collection Machines



   110.10   Permit required



   110.11   Conditions of permit



Child Care Facilities



   110.25   Minimum standards adopted



   110.26   Definitions



   110.27   Permit required; exceptions



   110.28   Permit application



   110.29   Issuance of permit; inspections



   110.30   Permit suspension and revocation



   110.31   Operation of a child care facility



   110.32   Enforcement



Massage Establishments



   110.45   Definitions



   110.46   License required; conditions; display



   110.47   License fees



   110.48   Registered physical therapist required



 



   110.99   Penalty



TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES



§ 110.01  TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES EXEMPTED FROM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
REPEALED.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, "telecommunications services"
means the electronic or electrical transmission, conveyance, routing or
reception of sounds, signals, data or information utilizing wires, cable,
radio waves, microwaves, satellites, fiber optics or any other method now in
existence or that may be devised, including but not limited to long distance
telephone service. The storage of data or information for subsequent
retrieval or the processing or reception and processing of data or
information intended to change its form and content are not included in this
definition.



   (B)   For the purpose of determining the proper tax, the sale of
telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone
or other telecommunications device from which the call or transmission
originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is
consummated at the address to which the call is billed.



   (C)   The application of the exemption provided by the Local Sales
and Use Tax Act, Art. 1066c, Section 4B, as amended, is hereby repealed with
regard to telecommunication services sold within the city. The rate of the
tax authorized by the act shall be the same as the rate imposed in the city
for all other local sales and use taxes.



   (D)   The tax imposed by this section shall become effective October
1, 1987.



('78 Code, § 10-90) (Ord. 740, passed 5-13-87)



ALUMINUM COLLECTION MACHINES



§ 110.10  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place on premises in the city an
aluminum collection machine unless the person shall have permission of the
owner and first obtain a permit from the city in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter and pay the fee herein provided. The permit
shall be issued annually after approval of the city health officer, the
payment of an annual fee of $100 and the finding by the City Manager that the
conditions in § 110.11 are satisfied. The permit may be revoked at any time
by the City Manager for breach of the conditions or upon objection of
neighboring landowners.



('78 Code, § 10-40) (Ord. 603, passed 4-22-85) Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.11  CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.



   The following are conditions of a permit for an automatic aluminum
collection machine:



   (A)   The automatic aluminum collection machine is placed only on
the parking lot of a building site containing 20,000 square feet or more of
floor area or within a retail food store building as an accessory use.



   (B)   The automatic aluminum collection machine does not occupy
required off-street parking spaces.



   (C)   The flattening of aluminum is being conducted wholly within an
automatic aluminum collection machine.



   (D)   The owner of the property and the owner of the aluminum
collection machine shall remove the stored aluminum at least once a week.



   (E)   The owner of the property and the owner and operator of the
aluminum collection machine shall keep same in proper repair, and the
exterior shall have a clean and neat appearance.



   (F)   The owner of the property and the owner and operator of the
aluminum collection machine shall keep the building site clean and in a neat
appearance and shall dispose of aluminum cans and other litter from the
building site where the aluminum collection machine is located.



   (G)   The owner and operator of the aluminum machine shall comply
with all other applicable laws of the state and codes and ordinances of the
city.



('78 Code, § 10-41) (Ord. 603, passed 4-22-85) Penalty, see § 110.99



CHILD CARE FACILITIES



§ 110.25  MINIMUM STANDARDS ADOPTED.



   There is adopted the "Minimum Standards for Day Care Centers" as
published and promoted by the State Department of Human Resources, as amended
from time to time. The provisions thereof shall be incorporated herein and
made a part hereof the same as if fully copied herein, except as modified by
this subchapter. A true copy of the minimum standards shall be kept on file
in the office of the City Secretary and available for inspection during all
regular business hours.



('78 Code, § 10-50) (Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01)



§ 110.26  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHILD CARE CENTER.



      (1)   Care, training, education, custody, treatment or
supervision is provided for more than six  children, exclusive of persons
who are related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of
the facility;



      (2)   Care, training, education, custody, treatment or
supervision is provided for all or part of a 24-hour day on a regular basis
of at least two days a week;



      (3)   The facility is intended to provide child care at least
26 weeks per year; and



      (4)   More than one-quarter of the children cared for at the
facility are under 11 years of age.



   CHILD CARE STAFF.  Any person whose primary duty includes direct care,
supervision or guidance of children in a child care center.



   GUARDIAN.  A child's parent or other person who has legal care,
custody and control of a child through natural or court appointed rights.



   HEALTH INSPECTOR.  An employee of the city appointed by the City
Manager as his/her representative to inspect and enforce the provisions of
this subchapter.



   PERMIT.  A complete document issued to the approved applicant of a
child care center authorizing operation at a specific location in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter.



   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS.  A church, synagogue or other religious
institution whose purpose is to support and serve the propagation of truly
held religious beliefs.



   SCHOOL.  A child care center offering an educational program in one or
more grades for children from the ages of five through 13 during the
customary public school day.



('78 Code, § 10-51) (Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01)



§ 110.27  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall operate a child care
center within the city unless a permit for such purpose has been approved by
the City Manager, or his/her designated representative, and issued by the
Fire Department.



('78 Code, § 10-52)



   (B)   The term "child care" shall not apply to, nor shall a permit
be required for, the following facilities:



      (1)   A state operated facility;



      (2)   An agency foster home or agency foster group as
designated by the Texas Human Resources Code, § 42.002(11) and (12);



      (3)   A facility that is operated in connection with a
shopping center business, religious organization or establishment where
children are cared for during short periods while parents or persons
responsible for the children are attending religious services, or engaging in
other activities on or near the premises, including, but not limited to
retreats or classes for religious instructions;



      (4)   A school or class for religious instruction that does
not last longer than two weeks that is conducted by a religious organization
during the summer months;



      (5)   A youth camp licensed by the State Department of Health;



      (6)   A hospital licensed by the State Department of Health;



      (7)   An education facility accredited by the Texas Education
Agency or the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools that operates
primarily for educational purposes in grades kindergarten and above or after
school program operated directly by an accredited educational facility or an
after school program operated by another entity under contract with the
educational facility, if the Texas Education Agency or Southern Association
of Colleges and Schools has approved the curriculum content of the after
school program operated under the contracts;



      (8)   An educational facility that operates solely for
educational purposes in grades kindergarten through at least grade two, that
does not provide custodial care for more than one hour during the hours
before or after the customary school day and is a member of an organization
that promulgates, publishes and requires compliance with health, safety, fire
and sanitation standards equal to standards required by state, county or
municipal codes;



      (9)   A kindergarten or preschool educational program that is
operated as part of a public school or private school accredited by the Texas
Education Agency and offers educational programs through grade six and does
not provide custodial care during the hours before or after the customary
school day;



      (10)   A registered family home as defined by Texas Human
Resources Code, § 42.002(9);



      (11)   An educational facility that is integral to and
inseparable from its sponsoring religious organization and which does not
provide custodial care for more than two hours maximum, per day, and that
offers educational programs for children ages five and above one or more of
the following:



         (a)   Kindergarten through grade three;



         (b)   Upper elementary or secondary grades, provided
however, that a religious organization such as that described in division
(3), where children are cared for during short periods while parents or
persons responsible for the children are attending religious services or
engaged in other activities on or near the premises, may provide custodial
care for more than two hours per day;



      (12)   The Mansfield Independent School District and schools
accredited by the Texas Education Agency;



      (13)   A facility licensed, operated, certified, or registered
by a state agency other than the Department of Human Services; or



      (14)   A juvenile detention facility certified under Tex. Fam.
Code §§ 51.12 or 141.042(d), a juvenile facility providing services solely
for the Texas Youth Commission, or any other correctional facility for
children operated or regulated by another state agency or by a political
subdivision of the state.



('78 Code, § 10-55) 



(Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01)



§ 110.28  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Application for an annual permit to operate a child care
center shall be submitted by the operator on a form specified by the Fire
Department.



   (B)   A permit application shall state the name, address and
telephone number of the permit applicant and the name, driver's license
number and date of birth of all employees and staff members of the child care
center. This information is necessary to allow background checks to be
conducted on employees of the center.



   (C)   A site plan shall be submitted with the application, drawn to
an accurate scale, indicating the legal description of the property, and
showing the indoor and outdoor areas to be used for the child care center.



   (D)   Any permit issued under this subchapter is nontransferable.



   (E)   The applicant is responsible for complying with all zoning,
building, fire and health ordinances of the city.



   (F)   The permit application shall include a certificate of
liability insurance coverage showing the minimum policy limits on coverage
for bodily injury or death of any person entrusted to the care of the child
center.



   (G)   Any person currently operating a child care center without a
permit under existing ordinances shall, within 30 days after the effective
date hereof, make application under the provisions of this subchapter.



   (H)   An annual permit fee of $75 shall be payable upon application
to the Fire Department, and thereafter, no later than the thirtieth of
January of each year. No refund or proration of any fee required hereunder
shall be made.



   (I)   The City Manager, or his designated representative, shall have
authority to grant or refuse a permit to operate a child care center under
the provisions of this subchapter. Upon approval, the Fire Department shall
issue the permit for operation of the child care center. All permits will be
due for renewal on or before the thirtieth of January of each succeeding year.



('78 Code, § 10-53) (Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01)



§ 110.29  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The City Manager, or his/her designated representative, is
authorized to issue a permit when he/she finds that the permit applicant has
complied with the requirements of this subchapter and other applicable
sections of this Code. The permit shall be refused in the event the applicant
has not complied with the requirements of this subchapter or any other
applicable section of this Code, or if it is determined that any false
statement has been made in the permit application.



   (B)   The permitted premises shall be inspected not less frequently
than semiannually to assure that the facilities, grounds and equipment are
maintained in compliance with this subchapter, with the minimum standards
adopted hereby, and in a safe and sanitary condition for the welfare of the
occupants and patrons. Reports of the inspections shall be kept on file with
the city and copies issued to the permit holder, along with appropriate
directives to resolve any deficiencies observed in the inspection. The City
Manager, or his/her designated representative, shall have authority to
enforce all provisions of this subchapter and to issue citations for any
violation of any of its provisions.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any permit holder to
operate any facility permitted under the provisions of this subchapter in
violation with any of the provisions hereof, the minimum standards adopted
hereby or any other applicable section of this Code, or to fail to respond to
any noted deficiency or violation within the time specified by the Inspector
for correction.



('78 Code, § 10-54) (Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01)
Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.30  PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   The City Manager, or his/her designee, is authorized to
suspend or revoke a child care center permit for violation of any provision
of this subchapter. Suspension or revocation of a permit shall be effected by
notice in writing setting forth the reasons therefor and specifying any
requirements or schedules of time for further action related to the
suspension or revocation.



   (B)   The following actions shall constitute cause for suspension:



      (1)   Failure to respond within the specified limits of time
regarding violations observed during a city inspection of the premises and
operation.



      (2)   Violation by the operator or any employee or staff
member of the requirements for permit as contained herein.



      (3)   Any violation of this subchapter which poses a danger to
any child entrusted to the care of the child care center.



      (4)   Failure to keep continually in force the liability
insurance required by this subchapter.



   (C)   A permit that has been suspended may be reactivated only after
a city inspection has confirmed that the condition causing the suspension has
been corrected. Request for activation shall be made to the Fire Marshal, or
his/her designee, and shall be evaluated as if for the initial application.



   (D)   The following actions shall constitute cause for revocation:



      (1)   Failure to correct a violation for a period of six
months following suspension of the permit.



      (2)   Knowingly submitting false information, or allowing
false information to be submitted, in the application for a permit.



      (3)   Failure to comply with the requirements of this
subchapter.



('78 Code, § 10-56) (Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01)



§ 110.31  OPERATION OF A CHILD CARE FACILITY.



   (A)   The child care center permit shall be conspicuously posted on
an inside wall of the main facility and shall be continuously displayed for
public view.



   (B)   A child care center shall be operated in accordance with all
ordinances of the city and state and federal statutes where applicable.



   (C)   Health records maintained by the facility shall be available
for inspection at all times. Records of the facility shall include
immunization schedules and emergency care permission slips from a parent and
guardian for emergency medical treatment of children.



   (D)   The child care staff, employees and/or drivers shall not be
permitted to work while afflicted with infectious diseases or other illnesses
which would adversely affect their work or the health of the children.



   (E)   Unanchored mobile homes and upstairs apartments shall not be
eligible sites for child care operations.



   (F)   Child care facilities may not be used in connection with any
other operation when the other operation is using the same space
concurrently. The child care facility shall not have an interrupted food
schedule if a common kitchen is used.



   (G)   The child care facility shall maintain adequate toilet
facilities for the children, including tissue, paper towels, clean cloths or
mounted, approved hand dryer blowers and soap.



   (H)   Each facility shall have a fire evacuation plan posted in each
room used by the children. The first priority in the event of fire shall be
immediate evacuation of the children. Each facility shall have an annual fire
inspection with a written report submitted to the permittee and the city. Any
corrections or deficiencies noted shall be promptly corrected by the
permittee. All staff members shall be instructed in emergency procedures as
well as the fire evacuation plan. Fire drills shall be held quarterly at
different times of the day to test the fire evacuation plan. The building
shall be constructed so as to permit fast and safe exit within three minutes
in any emergency. The facility shall have at least two exits to the outside
located on different sides of the building. Doors opening into a fenced yard
shall be able to be easily opened from the inside by the children. Doors
between rooms shall not be locked while children are present. Doors and
pathways shall not be blocked. Heating devices and their nearby areas shall
not be allowed to present any fire hazards. Gas appliances shall have metal
tubing and connections unless otherwise approved by the Fire Marshal. Open
flame space heaters are prohibited. All gas heaters are to be vented to the
outside. Gas pipes shall be tested annually for leaks. Floor furnaces shall
be enclosed to keep children away. A copy of the test report shall be
available at the facility. Smoke detectors shall be installed to provide an
effective warning to the building occupants of a fire. The detectors shall be
placed as required by the Fire Marshal. Stand alone single station smoke
detectors are permitted in mothers day out programs that operate less than
three days per week and in facilities that have less than 50 children in
care. After school care programs providing care for students at a school
after normal school hours are not required to provide smoke detectors under
this chapter.



   (I)   The facility shall have an annual sanitation inspection. A
written report shall be submitted to the city and a copy furnished to the
permittee. Any corrections called for in the report shall be made promptly by
the permittee. The requirements of this division (I) shall not apply to a
mothers day out or after school care program when the facility is not
eligible for a health inspection under the policies of the Tarrant County
Health Department.



   (J)    The buildings, grounds and equipment of the facility shall be
kept in repair and maintained to protect the health and safety of the
children. Playgrounds shall be supervised at all times by a teacher or staff
in the same ratio required to be maintained in classrooms. Play areas shall
be surrounded by a fence with a minimum height of six feet, provided that
fences at existing child care facilities which are under six feet, but at
least four feet in height are declared to be in compliance herewith. Any
pool, pond or other body of water greater than ten inches in depth shall be
separated from the playground by a fence with a minimum height of six feet.
Permittee shall keep all toxic substances, both indoors and outdoors, secure
from access by the children. All emergency telephone numbers required by the
minimum standards shall be posted by a telephone which is accessible to all
staff members.



   (K)   Animals are prohibited at all times from food preparation
areas, as well as child care areas and child play areas, when children are
present, when the animal may present a danger to the children.



   (L)   Bathtubs or showers shall be made available for children
staying overnight in a facility. Bathtubs or showers used by preschool
children shall be supervised at all times when in use. Privacy shall be
assured for school age children. Tubs or showers shall be cleaned out after
each use. Children shall be provided fresh wash cloths and towels.



   (M)   All reasonable safeguards must be utilized by a permittee to
protect against release of a child or removal of a child by anyone other than
the child's parent or legal guardian, unless such release is specifically
authorized by the parent or legal guardian. The child care facility must have
previous written approval from the parent or legal guardian if the child is
to be released to a third person. This approval may be in the form of an
authorized release list maintained as a part of the facility's enrollment
procedures and updated quarterly. In the event the child is under the care,
custody and control of a guardian as defined herein, the guardian shall be
the only person authorized to designate a third person or other parent to
remove the child from the facility. The facility shall maintain a four digit
code for release of a child to a third person. The code shall consist of the
last four digits of the guardian's social security number and shall be
maintained as a portion of the enrollment records of the facility. Prior to a
child being released to a third person, that person must be on a current
authorized release list, tell the child care operator the child's full name
and four digit code and provide the child care operator with a photo driver's
license or I.D. card issued by a state agency. The permittee must verify that
the third person knows the child's full name and four digit code. The child
care operator must also verify the identity of the person picking up the
child and verify that the person is authorized to pick up the child. The
permittee will further obtain and record the name, birth date, driver's
license number and if feasible, license plate number of any third person
picking up the child. The records must be maintained for a period of 48 hours.



('78 Code, § 10-57) (Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01)
Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.32  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The City Manager, or his/her designated representative, shall
have authority to enforce all provisions of this subchapter together with
other applicable laws regarding child care facilities. The authority shall
include the authority for inspection or visitation of all facilities required
to be permitted under the provisions of this subchapter at all reasonable
times.



   (B)   The City Manager, or his/her designated representative, shall
have authority to revoke a permit as provided in this subchapter, provided
that permittee shall be given notice in writing, certified mail, of the
particulars of the revocation and may be given reasonable additional time,
not to exceed six months, within which to correct the condition. If the
permittee fails to correct the deficiency within the time specified, the City
Manager, or his/her designated representative, shall give notice in writing
that the permit is revoked. The notice of revocation or notice of denial of a
permit shall become final after the expiration of ten days from the date of
service on the permittee or applicant unless before the expiration of such
time the permittee or applicant has filed with the City Manager a written
appeal requesting a hearing before the City Manager on the question of
whether or not the permit should be revoked or denied. The revocation shall
be stayed or postponed until such time as the City Manager shall grant a
hearing and make a final adjudication. The hearing shall be held within ten
calendar days after the date of filing the appeal and the action of the City
Manager after hearing all the evidence and facts shall be final and
conclusive as to all parties. Following revocation or denial, the permittee
or applicant shall not be eligible to apply or reapply for a permit for a
period of one calendar year from the date of the revocation or denial. Any
such revocation or denial shall be reported to the Texas Department of
Protective and Regulatory Services. The city shall also report any violation
notices or illegal operations to the department.



('78 Code, § 10-58) (Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01)



MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



§ 110.45  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MASSAGE.  Any process consisting in kneading, rubbing, tapping or
manipulating the skin of the body of a human being, either with the hand or
by means of electrical instruments or apparatus, or other special apparatus,
but shall not include massage by duly licensed physicians, nor massage of the
face practiced by duly licensed beauty parlors or barbershops, nor massage
administered by athletic trainers to bona fide athletic team members.



   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any building, room, place or establishment
other than a regularly licensed hospital where manipulated massage or
manipulated exercise are practiced upon the human body by anyone not a duly
licensed physician, whether with or without use of mechanical, therapeutic or
bathing devices and shall include Turkish bathhouses. This term shall not
include, however, beauty parlors or barbershops duly licensed under the
statutes of the state, nor registered physical therapists who treat only
patients recommended by a licensed physician and who operate only under the
physician's direction.



('78 Code, § 10-30) (Ord. 327, passed 3-28-77)



§ 110.46  LICENSE REQUIRED; CONDITIONS; DISPLAY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment
in the city without first having obtained a license therefor from the City
Secretary in accordance with the provisions of this section and paying the
fee herein provided. The license shall only be issued upon the approval in
writing of the city health officer and the Chief of Police and the securing
of a certificate of occupancy from the building official. The license shall
be exhibited at all times in the establishment.



('78 Code, § 10-31) (Ord. 327, passed 3-28-77) Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.47  LICENSE FEES.



   The annual license fee shall be $25 for each establishment. If the
license is obtained between January first and June thirtieth, inclusive, of
any year, the full amount of the fee shall be paid; if the license is
obtained between July first and December thirty-first, inclusive, of any
year, the fee shall be one-half of the amount. No refund shall ever be made
of any license fee.



('78 Code, § 10-32) (Ord. 327, passed 3-28-77)



§ 110.48  REGISTERED PHYSICAL THERAPIST REQUIRED.



   A registered physical therapist duly licensed by the state shall be on
duty at all times during which the establishment shall be open for business.



('78 Code, § 10-33) (Ord. 327, passed 3-28-77) Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter who which no
specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in § 10.99.



   (B)   A violation of the conditions of § 110.11 is declared to be
unlawful, and any person found guilty of any such act shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined as provided in § 10.99.



('78 Code, § 10-42)



(Ord. 603, passed 4-22-85)



CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



General Provisions



   111.01   Entry of solicitor without invitation or without permit



   111.02   Refusal to leave premises after notice



Permits



   111.15   Permit application



   111.16   Bond



   111.17   Fee



   111.18   Issuance of permit



   111.19   Suspension and revocation of permit



   111.20   Display of permit



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 111.01  ENTRY OF SOLICITOR WITHOUT INVITATION OR WITHOUT PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, salesman, peddler, vendor,
merchant, of orders for or sale of goods, wares, books, magazines, materials,
supplies, services or merchandise of any sort to go in or upon the premises
of a private residence in the city for the purpose of soliciting, peddling,
selling, merchandising goods, wares, books, magazines, materials, supplies,
services or merchandise unless the person shall have permission of the owner
to enter the premises or first obtain a permit as directed in §§ 111.15
through 111.18 of this chapter.



('78 Code, § 10-20) (Ord. 178, passed 3-9-65; Ord. 449, passed 9-28-81)
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.02  REFUSAL TO LEAVE PREMISES AFTER NOTICE.



   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant
merchant or transient vendor who enters upon premises owned or leased by
another to refuse willfully to leave the premises after having been notified
by the owner or possessor of the premises, or by his/her agent, to leave the
premises.



('78 Code, § 10-23) (Ord. 179, passed 3-9-65) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Trespass, see Tex. Penal Code, § 30.05



PERMITS



§ 111.15  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Any person desiring to engage in any of the activities named in §
111.01 of this chapter shall file a written application with the Chief of
Police, verified by affidavit as to the truthfulness of its contents and
containing the following information.



   (A)   The name, residence and post office address and telephone
number of the applicant, and if the applicant is not a permanent resident of
the city, the applicant's permanent residence and post office address and
telephone number.



   (B)   A specific description of the occupation in which the
applicant desires to engage and for which the permit is desired.



   (C)   A full and complete description of the merchandise or services
which the applicant desires to sell.



   (D)   Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order shall demand,
accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery or
rendition of the merchandise or services sold.



   (E)   The source of supply, location and proposed method of delivery
of the merchandise or services to be sold.



   (F)   The names, residences and post office addresses and telephone
numbers of three individuals who will act as character and business
references for the applicant and will provide such information concerning the
applicant as may be requested by the city.



   (G)   Whether or not the applicant has engaged in any of the
activities named in the preceding section in other cities, and if so, the
names of the last three cities and the dates of the applicant's activities in
the cities.



   (H)   If the applicant is an individual, the applicant's age, sex,
height, weight, complexion, color of hair, color of eyes and fingerprints.



   (I)   If the applicant is an individual, a full and complete
statement of the applicant's criminal record, if any, including a detailed
account of all arrests, charges filed, offenses committed, convictions,
sentences received, time served, paroles or pardons received and the date,
place and jurisdiction relating to each item.



   (J)   If the applicant is an individual, there shall be attached to
the application a recent photographic likeness of the applicant.



   (K)   If the applicant is the agent of another, the name, address
and telephone number of the applicant's principal and the attachment of
credentials issued by the principal to the applicant which set forth the
extent of the applicant's authority to act for and bind the principal.



   (L)   If the applicant is a partnership, association or joint
venture, the full names, addresses and telephone numbers of all partners,
associates or joint venturers.



   (M)   If the applicant is a corporation, the state of incorporation,
the principal place of business, the name and addresses and telephone numbers
of its officers and, if the applicant is a foreign corporation, whether it
has a permit to do business in the state.



('78 Code, § 10-24) (Ord. 404, passed 2-11-80)



§ 111.16  BOND.



   (A)   At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall also
file with the Police Chief a bond in the penal sum of $1,000, signed by the
applicant as principal and by a corporate surety company authorized to do
business in the state as surety, conditioned upon the final delivery of the
merchandise or performance of the services in accordance with the terms of
any contract or order obtained prior to delivery or performance, and also
conditioned to indemnify any and all purchasers for any and all defects in
material or workmanship that may exist in the merchandise sold or the
services performed by the principal at the time of delivery or performance,
or that may be discovered within 30 days after delivery or performance. The
bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons who may make any
purchase, give any order or enter into any contract with the principal on the
bond or the principal's agents. The surety may terminate its liability the
such bond by giving ten days written notice to the Police Chief, after which
time the surety will not be liable for any subsequent act of the principal.
There shall be attached to the bond a certified copy of the surety company's
resolution authorizing the person signing for the surety company to act as
its attorney in fact.



   (B)   In the event the applicant is acknowledged to be an agent of a
person holding a permit hereunder who has on file with the Police Chief a
blanket bond conditioned as provided in the preceding section and covering
the activities of all the person's agents. No individual bond shall be
required so long as the applicant acts solely as the agent of the permittee.
Acknowledgment of the agent shall be made in writing by the permittee and
mailed directly to the Police Chief.



('78 Code, § 10-25) (Ord. 404, passed 2-11-80)



§ 111.17  FEE.



   At the time the application is filed with the Police Chief, the
applicant shall pay to the city a fee in the sum of $10, which sum shall be
compensation to the city for the services herein required of it and to enable
the city to partially defray the expenses of investigation, surveillance and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. If the applicant is a
corporation, partnership, association, joint venturer or individual having
more than one agent engaging in any of the activities named in § 111.01 of
this chapter on behalf of the applicant, a fee of $10 shall be charged for
the first ten of such agents and a fee of $5 per agent shall be required for
each agent of the applicant in excess of ten.



('78 Code, § 10-26) (Ord. 404, passed 2-11-80)



§ 111.18  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Within ten days after the applicant has fully complied with
the provisions of this chapter, the Police Chief shall issue to the applicant
a permit to engage in the activities named in § 111.01 for a period of one
year from the date of issuance. Provided, however, no permit shall be issued
to an applicant whose application contains one or more statements or answers
which are false in whole or in part, nor shall a permit be issued to any
applicant who has been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral
turpitude.



   (B)   The permit provided for in this chapter shall not be
transferrable, nor shall it give authority to anyone other than the permittee
named thereon to engage in the activities named in § 111.01 hereof.



('78 Code, § 10-27) (Ord. 404, passed 2-11-80)



§ 111.19  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
be automatically suspended when the surety terminates its liability on the
permittee's bond, or the principal's bond if the permittee is the agent of
another or upon expiration of the permittee's bond or the principal's bond if
the permittee is the agent of another, and the permittee shall be reinstated
only upon filing with the Police Chief a new bond meeting the requirements of
§ 111.16.



   (B)   Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
be automatically revoked and canceled upon the holder's conviction of a
felony or a crime involving moral turpitude, and the City Council may revoke
and cancel the permit of any holder who is convicted in the Municipal Court
of this city of a violation of a provision of this chapter or whose agents
are convicted in the Municipal Court of this city of a violation of the
provisions of this chapter, and they may provide that no permit shall
thereafter be issued to the holder for a period of 12 months. Revocation of
any permit, for whatever cause, shall automatically revoke the permit of all
agents of the permittee.



('78 Code, § 10-28) (Ord. 404, passed 2-11-80)



§ 111.20  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   When engaged in door-to-door selling, the permit required by this
chapter shall be carried by the salesperson and shall upon request be given
to any law enforcement personnel or customer for examination. Otherwise, the
permit shall be prominently displayed upon the premises or place where the
business authorized thereunder is being carried on or conducted.



('78 Code, § 10-29) (Ord. 404, passed 2-11-80) Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 112: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



General Provisions



   112.01   Adoption of preamble



   112.02   Purpose and intent



   112.03   Definitions



   112.04   Locations of establishments



   112.05   Nonconforming uses



   112.06   Defenses to prosecution



Licenses



   112.20   License required



   112.21   License application



   112.22   License issuance



   112.23   Inspection and maintenance of records



   112.24   License expiration



   112.25   License suspension



   112.26   License revocation



   112.27   Appeal



   112.28   License transfer



Regulations



   112.40   Adult cabaret



   112.41   Escort agency



   112.42   Nude model business



   112.43   Adult theater and adult motion picture theater



   112.44   Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos



   112.45   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores and adult video
stores



   112.46   Hours of operation



   112.47   Prohibition against children in an adult entertainment
establishment



   112.48   Prohibition of nudity in certain commercial establishments



   112.49   Additional regulations for adult entertainment
establishments



   112.50   Employee permits



Other Provisions



   112.60   Location Appeal Board; exemptions from location restrictions



   112.61   Amendments to chapter



 



   112.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 112.01  ADOPTION OF PREAMBLE.



   The findings contained in the preambles of Ordinance Nos. 969 and 1486
are determined to be true and correct and are adopted as a part of this
chapter.



('78 Code, § 2.5-1)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed
10-23-06)



§ 112.02  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult entertainment
establishments to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations
to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of adult entertainment
establishments within the city.  The provisions of this chapter have neither
the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the
content of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented, adult
materials.  Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented, adult materials
protected by the First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors or
exhibitors of sexually-oriented, adult materials to their intended market. 
Neither is it the intent nor the effect of this chapter to condone or
legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.



('78 Code, § 2.5-2)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed
10-23-06)



§ 112.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT.  This term includes the following:



      (1)   An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store,
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult theater, adult motion
picture theater, escort agency, nude model business or sexual encounter
center.



      (2)   Any establishment whose principal business is the
offering of a service or the selling, renting or exhibiting of devices or any
other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to
its customers, and which is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, or whose employees or customers appear in a state
of nudity.



      (3)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS are also commonly
known and referred to as sexually-oriented businesses.



      (4)   The term ADULT ENTERTAINMENT shall not be construed to
include the following:



         (a)   Any business operated by or employing licensed
psychologists, licensed physical therapists, registered nurses or licensed
athletic trainers.



         (b)   Any business operated by or employing licensed
physicians or licensed chiropractors engaged in practicing the healing arts.



         (c)   Any activity conducted or sponsored by any state
independent school district, licensed or accredited private school or public
or private college or university.



   ADULT ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."



   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.  A
commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of
the following:



      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter,
or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations, or any combination
thereof, which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas."



      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed
for use in connection with "specified sexual activities."  This does not
include items used for birth control or for prevention of sexually
transmitted diseases.



   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features the following:



      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or



      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities."



   ADULT MOTEL.



      (1)   A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which
does the following:



         (a)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form
of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;"
and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions;



         (b)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of
time that is less than ten hours; or



         (c)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.



      (2)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or
similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more
times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable
presumption that the business is an adult motel.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A commercial establishment where, for
any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
similar photograph reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized
by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas."



   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a
state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure
of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities."



   CHURCH.  A building, whether situated within the city or not, in which
persons regularly assemble for religious worship, intended primarily for
purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of
religious belief.



   CUSTOMER.  Any person who meets one or more of the following
conditions:



      (1)   Is allowed to enter an adult entertainment establishment
in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of
consideration or gratuity.



      (2)   Enters an adult entertainment establishment and
purchases, rents or otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods,
entertainment or other services offered therein.



      (3)   Is a member of and on the premises of an adult
entertainment establishment operating as a private club.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person who renders any service whatsoever to the
customers of an adult entertainment establishment or who works in or about an
adult entertainment establishment and who receives compensation for the
service or work from the operator or owner of the adult entertainment
establishment or from the customers therein.



   ESCORT. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.



   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business association who, as one of its
principal business purposes, furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to
furnish escorts for a fee, tip or other consideration.



   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate an adult
entertainment establishment has been issued, as well as any and all
individuals listed as applicants on the application for a license.



   LICENSED DAY CARE CENTER. A facility licensed by the state, whether
situated within the city or not, that provides care, training, education,
custody treatment or supervision for more than six children under 14 years of
age, where the children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the
owner or operator of the facility, for less than 24 hours a day, regardless
of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the
services if offers.



   NUDE MODEL BUSINESS.  Any place where a person who appears in a state
of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided or allowed to
be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.



   NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY. 



      (1)   This term means less than completely and opaquely
covered:



         (a)   Human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair;



         (b)   All portions of a female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola continuing downward to the lowest
portion of the breast;



         (c)   Human buttock, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage; or



         (d)   Any combination of the above.



      (2)   This term also includes human male genitals in a
discernible turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.



   OPERATED or CAUSES TO BE OPERATED.  To cause to function or to put or
keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be
operated an adult entertainment establishment whether or not that person is
an owner, part owner, licensee or manager of the establishment.



   OPERATOR. An individual who is in control of the operations of an adult
entertainment establishment, including, but not limited to, a person
designated by the licensee under § 112.40(H).  This control can be either
on an hourly basis, daily basis, weekly basis, or shift basis, or any
combination thereof.  An OPERATOR includes, but is not limited to, manager,
assistant manager, house mother, floor manager, or shift manager.



   PERSON.  An individual, firm, association, organization, partnership,
trust, foundation, company, corporation or other legal entity.



   PRINCIPAL.  Over 25% of customers, volume of sales, stock in trade,
display areas or presentation time devoted to or generated from material
depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" in any three-month increment period.  Stock in trade shall
be measured with all titles or objects available on the premises for sale or
rental including those that are identical, considered a separate title or
object.



   REGULARLY. Featuring, promoting or advertising a happening or
occurrence on a recurring basis.



   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.  A residentially zoned district as defined in
the Zoning Ordinance of the city.



   RESIDENTIAL USE.  A single-family home, townhouse, duplex, mobile
home, manufactured home or multiple-family use as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance of the city.



   SECONDARY FREEWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT.  The Secondary Freeway Overlay
District as established by the Zoning Ordinance of the city.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.  A business or commercial enterprise that, as
one of its principal business purpose, offers for any form of consideration
the following:



      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex.



      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or
persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of
nudity.



   SIMULATED NUDITY.  A state of dress in which any device or covering is
worn and exposed to view that simulates any part of the genitals, buttocks,
anus, pubic region, or areola of the female breast.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. This term includes any of the following:



      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, buttocks, anus or female breasts.



      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy or bestiality.



      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated.



      (4)   Excretory functions.



('78 Code, § 2.5-3)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed
7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)



§ 112.04  LOCATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   An adult entertainment establishment shall be located within a
specific zoning district as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the city.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if he/she establishes, operates or
causes to be operated or expanded an adult entertainment establishment within
1,000 feet of the following:



      (1)   A church.



      (2)   A public or private elementary or secondary school.



      (3)   A boundary of a residential district.



      (4)   A boundary of the Freeway Overlay District as defined in
this chapter.



      (5)   A boundary of the Secondary Freeway Overlay District as
defined in this chapter.



      (6)   A licensed day care center.



      (7)   A public park, recreation center or water park.



      (8)   The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use
as defined in this section.



      (9)   A public library.



   (C)   A person commits an offense if he/she establishes, operates or
causes to be operated or expanded an adult entertainment establishment within
1,000 feet of any other adult entertainment establishment.



   (D)   A person commits an offense if he/she establishes, operates or
causes to be operated or expanded an adult entertainment establishment in any
building, structure or portion thereof containing another adult entertainment
establishment.



   (E)   For the purposes of division (B) of this section, measurement
shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as tenant
space occupied for an adult entertainment establishment to the nearest
property line of the premises of a church, public or private elementary or
secondary school, licensed day care center, public library, or to the nearest
boundary of an affected public park, recreation center, water park,
residential district, residential lot or use, Freeway Overlay District or
Secondary Freeway Overlay District.



   (F)   For purposes of division (C) of this section, the distance
between any two adult entertainment establishments shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located or
from the wall of the tenant space occupied as applicable.



   (G)   For purposes of divisions (B), (C) and (D) of this section,
"expanded" shall mean an increase by 25% or more in floor areas occupied by
the business.



('78 Code, § 2.5-20)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed
10-23-06)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.05  NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   Any adult entertainment establishment lawfully operating prior
to the effective date of this chapter that is in violation of § 112.04 shall
be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to
continue for a period not to exceed three years from the effective date of
this chapter, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily
discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. The nonconforming uses shall
not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be
changed to a conforming use. If two or more adult entertainment
establishments are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a
permissible location, the adult entertainment establishment which was first
established and continually operating at a particular location is the
conforming use, and the later-established business(es) is nonconforming.



   (B)   Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the
City Council may extend the amortization period herein provided to a
reasonable period of time for any nonconforming adult entertainment
establishment upon a showing by a particular business that without an
extension it will be unable to recoup its investment in the nonconforming
structure.



      (1)   Any nonconforming adult entertainment establishment
which desires an extension must register with the City Council as a
nonconforming use no later than September 1, 1993, and must file an
application for an extension of the amortization period not later than
December 1, 1993.  Requests for an extension of the amortization period
shall be limited to one application with the City Council.



      (2)   This division (B) shall not apply to any establishment
which has undergone a change in ownership since the effective date of this
chapter.



   (C)   An adult entertainment establishment lawfully operating as a
conforming use after the effective date of this chapter is not rendered a
nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the commencement of
operation of the adult entertainment establishment, of a church, public or
private elementary or secondary school, public park, recreation center, water
park, licensed day care center, Freeway Overlay District, Secondary Freeway
Overlay District, residential use or residential zoning district within 1,000
feet of the adult entertainment establishment.



('78 Code, § 2.5-21)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed
10-23-06)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.06  DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION.



   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution under §§ 112.04, 112.20 and
112.42 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a structure
which meets the following conditions:



      (1)   Which has no sign or other advertising visible from the
exterior of the structure indicating a nude person is available for viewing;



      (2)   Where in order to participate in a class, a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and



      (3)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at
any one time.



   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under §§ 112.04 and 112.20
that the item of descriptive, printed, film or video material offered for
sale or rental taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value; and when taken as a whole, does not appeal to
the prurient interest in sex.



('78 Code, § 2.5-51)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed
10-23-06)



LICENSES



§ 112.20  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he/she operates or causes to
operate an adult entertainment establishment without a valid license issued
by the city for the particular type of business.



   (B)   Application for a license must be made on a form provided by
the Director of Public Safety. The application must be accompanied by a
sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a
statement of total floor space occupied by the business.  The sketch or
diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated
scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches.



   (C)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
this subchapter.



   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate an adult entertainment
establishment is an individual, he/she must sign the application for a
license as applicant.  If a person who wishes to operate an adult
entertainment establishment is other than an individual, each individual who
has a 10% or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a
license as applicant.  If a corporation is listed as owner of an adult
entertainment establishment or as the entity that wishes to operate such a
business, all corporate officers and directors must sign the application for
an operator's license as applicant.  Each applicant must be qualified under
§ 112.22, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.



   (E)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city
permits does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining a license
for an adult entertainment establishment.



   (F)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to existing
adult entertainment establishments beginning 90 days after the effective date
of this chapter.



('78 Code, § 2.5-30)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed
10-23-06)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.21  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain an adult entertainment
establishment license shall make application on a form provided by the
Director of Public Safety or his/her designee.



   (B)   All applications for a license under this subchapter shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $750.  An application
shall not be considered to have been filed until the fee is paid and all
information required by the application form has been submitted.



('78 Code, § 2.5-31)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed
10-23-06)



§ 112.22  LICENSE ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Director of Public Safety shall approve the issuance of a
license to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless
the Director of Public Safety finds one or more of the following to be true.



      (1)   The location of the adult entertainment establishment is
or would be in violation of this chapter.



      (2)   The applicant failed to supply all of the information
requested on the application.



      (3)   The applicant gave false, fraudulent or untruthful
information on the application.



      (4)   An applicant is under 18 years of age.



      (5)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in
payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or
imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to an adult
entertainment establishment.



      (6)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted
of a violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of
operating an adult entertainment establishment without a license, within two
years immediately preceding the application.  The fact that a conviction is
being appealed shall have no effect.



      (7)   The license application fee required by this chapter has
not been paid.



      (8)   The applicant has not demonstrated that the owner of the
adult entertainment establishment owns or holds a lease for the property or
the applicable portion thereof upon which the adult entertainment
establishment will be situated or has a legally enforceable right to acquire
the same.



      (9)   An applicant or the proposed establishment is in
violation of or is not in compliance with of this chapter.



      (10)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse or employee has
been convicted of a crime involving the following:



         (a)   Any of the following offenses as described in the
Tex. Penal Code, Ch. 43:



            1.   Prostitution.



            2.   Promotion of prostitution.



            3.   Aggravated promotion of prostitution.



            4.   Compelling prostitution.



            5.   Obscenity.



            6.   Obscene display or distribution.



            7.   Sale, distribution or display of harmful
material to a minor.



            8.   Sexual performance by a child.



            9.   Employment harmful to children.



            10.   Possession of child pornography.



         (b)   Any of the following offenses as described in the
Tex. Penal Code, Ch. 21:



            1.   Public lewdness.



            2.   Indecent exposure.



            3.   Indecency with a child.



            4.   Improper photography or visual recording.



         (c)   Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as
described in the Tex. Penal Code, Ch. 22.



         (d)   Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a
runaway child as described in the Tex. Penal Code, Ch. 25.



         (e)   Any felony as described in the Texas Penal Codes.



         (f)   Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to
commit any of the foregoing offenses.



         (g)   Any similar sex-related offense to those described
above under the criminal or penal code of any state or country.



            1.   For which less than two years have elapsed
since the date of conviction or the date of release from the terms of
probation, parole or deferred adjudication or the date of release from
confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; or



            2.   For which less than five years have elapsed
since the date of conviction or the date of release from the terms of
probation, parole or deferred adjudication or the date of release from
confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a felony offense; or



            3.   For which less than five years have elapsed
since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement
for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are
of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses
occurring within any 24-month period.



   (B)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse.



   (C)   An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been
convicted of an offense listed in this section may qualify for an adult
entertainment establishment license only when the time period required by
this section has elapsed.



   (D)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the
address of the adult entertainment establishment.



   (E)   The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near
the entrance to the adult entertainment establishment so that it may be
easily read at any time.



('78 Code, § 2.5-32)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed
10-23-06)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.23  INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.



   (A)   A licensee, operator or employee of an adult entertainment
establishment shall be subject to the regulations under this chapter and
shall permit representatives of the Department of Public Safety, Health
Authority, and Building Services Department to inspect all portions of the
premises open to the public and the records required to be maintained under
this chapter by the adult entertainment establishment for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with this chapter at any time it is occupied by a
customer(s) or open for business.



   (B)   A licensee or operator of an adult entertainment establishment
commits an offense if the person operates the establishment without
maintaining a current list of all employees of the business, along with a
complete updated employment application for each employee.  A legible copy
of a valid driver's license, state identification card or passport, with a
photograph, together with an original photograph accurately depicting the
employee as the person appears at the time the person is hired, shall be
required and maintained on the premises with the employee's application.



   (C)   A licensee or operator of an adult entertainment establishment
commits an offense if the person refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the
records and premises by a representative of the Police Department at any time
the adult entertainment establishment is occupied by a customer(s) or open
for business.



   (D)   The licensee or operator of an adult entertainment
establishment shall maintain all records required to be maintained under the
provisions of this chapter on the licensed premises.



   (E)   The licensee or operator of an adult entertainment
establishment commits an offense if the person does not maintain the required
records on the premises of the licensed establishment.



   (F)   A licensee, operator or employee of an adult entertainment
establishment shall permit representatives of the Police Department to take
photographs of the premises, and the licensee, operator or employees of the
adult entertainment establishment for the purpose of ensuring compliance with
this chapter at any time it is occupied by a customer(s) or open for business.



   (G)   A licensee, operator or employee of an adult entertainment
establishment commits an offense if the person does not permit
representatives of the Police Department to take photographs of the premises,
or the licensee, operator or employees of the adult entertainment
establishment for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter at any
time it is occupied by a customer(s) or open for business.



   (H)   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an
adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a
permanent or temporary habitation.



('78 Code, § 2.5-33)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed
7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.24  LICENSE EXPIRATION.



   (A)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance.



   (B)   A license may be renewed by submission to the Director of
Public Safety, or his/her designee, of an application on the form prescribed
by the official and payment of a nonrefundable renewal processing fee of $750.



   (C)   Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before
the expiration date.



('78 Code, § 2.5-34)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed
10-23-06)



§ 112.25  LICENSE SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Subject to division (C) below, the Director of Public Safety
shall suspend an adult entertainment establishment license if the Director of
Public Safety determines that a licensee(s) or employee(s) of a licensee (or
any combination thereof) has/have:



      (1)   (a)   On two or more occasions within any 12-month
period of time been cited for a violation of §§ 112.04, 112.23, 112.28 or
112.40 through 112.50; and



         (b)   Been convicted or placed on deferred disposition
or probation for the violations; or



      (2)   (a)   Been cited for any combination of offenses
under division (A)(1) above that total four within any 12-month period of
time; and



         (b)   Been convicted or placed on deferred disposition
or probation for the violations; or



      (3)   Engaged in public intoxication on the premises of an
adult entertainment establishment or knowingly permitted gambling by any
person on the premises of the adult entertainment establishment.



   (B)   A period of suspension will begin the first day after the
decision of the Director of Public Safety becomes final as provided in this
section, unless the licensee appeals to an appropriate court under §
112.27.  If appeal is taken under § 112.27, the period of suspension begins
the day after all appeals are final.



   (C)   The suspension of a license as provided for in division (A)
above shall be as follows:



      (1)   The first suspension of a license shall be for a period
of seven calendar days.



      (2)   The second suspension of a license shall be for a period
of 30 calendar days.



      (3)   On the third cause of suspension, the Director of Public
Safety shall revoke a license according to § 112.26.



   (D)   Each day in which a violation is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate violation for the purposes of suspension.



('78 Code, § 2.5-35)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed
7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)



§ 112.26  LICENSE REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Director of Public Safety shall revoke a license if a
license has been suspended under the provisions of § 112.25(C)(3).



   (B)   The Director of Public Safety shall revoke a license if he/she
determines one or more of the following.



      (1)   The licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted to the Director of Public Safety during the application
process.



      (2)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises.



      (3)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises.



      (4)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the adult
entertainment establishment during a period of time when the licensee's
license was suspended.



      (5)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in §
112.22(A)(10) for which the time period required has not lapsed.



      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period an
employee of the establishment committed in or on the licensed premises an
offense listed in § 112.22(A)(10) for which a conviction has been obtained.



      (7)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual
contact to occur in or on the licensed premises.  The term "sexual contact"
shall have the same meaning as it is defined in the Tex. Penal Code, § 21.01.



      (8)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for
hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the adult
entertainment establishment.



   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of the license.



   (D)   Division (B)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels
as a ground for revoking the license, unless the licensee or employee
knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public
view.



   (E)   When the Director of Public Safety revokes a license, the
revocation shall continue for five years, and the licensee shall not be
issued an adult entertainment establishment license for five years from the
date revocation became effective.  If the license was revoked under division
(B)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until
the appropriate number of years required under § 112.22(A)(10) has elapsed.



('78 Code, § 2.5-36)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed
7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)



§ 112.27  APPEAL.



   (A)   When the Director of Public Safety is authorized to deny the
issuance of a license, or suspend or revoke a license under this chapter, the
Director of Public Safety shall give written notice to the applicant or
licensee of such intention.



      (1)   The notice shall provide that the denial of issuance,
suspension or revocation shall take effect at the expiration of the tenth
calendar day after notification, unless the licensee provides a written
response to the Director of Public Safety before the expiration of the tenth
calendar day.



      (2)   If a written response from the applicant or licensee is
received by the Director of Public Safety before the expiration of the tenth
calendar day, the denial of issuance, suspension or revocation will be stayed
pending a decision by the Director of Public Safety.  The Director of Public
Safety shall review the response before the rendering of a decision.



      (3)   The Director of Public Safety shall give written notice
of this decision to the applicant or licensee within ten calendar days of
receipt of the written response from the applicant or licensee.



      (4)   The decision by the Director of Public Safety is
effective immediately and final pending any appeal to an appropriate court.



      (5)   Notice shall be deemed delivered by hand delivery to a
licensee, owner or employee of the establishment or by a posting of the
notice at the usual business entrance of the establishment.  Notice may also
be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested.  The notice shall be
mailed to the address listed in the license application for receipt of notice.



   (B)   Upon receipt of written notice of the denial of issuance,
suspension or revocation, the licensee whose application for a license has
been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the
right to appeal to an appropriate court.



   (C)   An appeal to the appropriate court must be filed within 30
days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the Director of Public
Safety.



   (D)   The licensee or applicant shall bear the burden of proof in
court.



('78 Code, § 2.5-38)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed
10-23-06)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.28  LICENSE TRANSFER.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he/she transfers his/her
license to another person or operates an adult entertainment establishment
under the authority of a license at any place other than the address
designated in the application.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if he/she counterfeits, forges,
changes, defaces or alters a license.



('78 Code, § 2.5-38)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed
10-23-06)  Penalty, see § 112.99



REGULATIONS



§ 112.40  ADULT CABARET.



   (A)   An employee of an adult cabaret, while appearing in a state of
nudity, commits an offense if he/she touches a customer or the clothing of a
customer.



   (B)   A customer at an adult cabaret commits an offense if the
customer touches an employee appearing in a state of nudity or the clothing
of an employee appearing in a state of nudity.



   (C)   Each adult cabaret shall have a manager's station, which shall
not exceed 32 square feet of floor area.  A licensee, operator or employee
commits an offense if the licensee permits any customer access to an area of
the premises not visible from the manager's station without entering a
private, exclusive, closed, curtained, or otherwise screened area, excluding
restrooms.  The view required in this division shall be by direct line of
sight.  The view shall be deemed insufficient if clear visibility of such
line of sight must be attained by utilizing flashlights or spotlights in
addition to overhead house lighting.



   (D)   A licensee, operator or employee commits an offense if the
licensee, operator or employee appears in a state of nudity or knowingly
allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of the adult cabaret
premises that can be viewed from a public right-of-way.



   (E)   A person commits an offense if the person employs at an adult
cabaret any person under the age of 18 years.



   (F)   An employee of an adult cabaret must attend training given by
the licensee concerning the requirements of this chapter as they pertain to
adult cabarets, including, but not limited to, §§ 112.23, 112.25, 112.26,
112.40, 112.46, 112.47, 112.48, 112.49, 112.50 and 112.99 before the employee
receives any compensation for the employee's services.  The licensee shall
provide this training to all employees at the beginning of the employment
before the employee receives any compensation for services; and, at least
once a year thereafter.  The licensee shall maintain written records of the
training provided to each employee pursuant to this division. These records
shall include a signed and dated statement from each employee verifying the
employee's attendance at and participation in training provided by the
licensee identifying the date on which the training was provided and the
specific topics discussed.



   (G)   A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals
to manage, direct and control the premises and operations of the adult
cabaret.  At least one person so appointed shall be on the premises at any
time the adult cabaret is occupied by a customer(s) or open for business. A
manager or a person appointed under this division shall have the duty to
remain in the manager's station at all times the adult cabaret is occupied by
a customer(s).



   (H)   An operator or a person appointed under division (G) above
shall at all times have the duty to ensure that each employee in the adult
cabaret has received the training required by division (F) above and each
employee is instructed to commit no act which would constitute a violation of
this chapter or which would provide grounds, or part of the grounds, for
suspension or revocation of a license issued under this chapter.



   (I)   No employee of an adult cabaret may appear in an area of the
business visible to customers unless the employee completely and opaquely
covers his or her genitals, pubic region, and pubic hair; anus; and, if
female, her areola.



   (J)   No licensee, owner, operator, or manager of an adult cabaret
shall permit an employee to violate division (I).



   (K)   A licensee, operator, or employee commits an offense if the
licensee, operator, or employee appears in a state of nudity or knowingly
allows another to appear in a state of nudity, in an adult cabaret, unless
the person is an employee who, while in a state of nudity, is on a stage (on
which no patron or customer is present) that is at least 18 inches above the
floor, and that is at least six feet from any customer.



   (L)   It is an offense for an employee, while in a state of nudity
in an adult cabaret, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any customer or to
receive directly any pay or gratuity from any customer, or for any customer
to pay or give any gratuity directly to any employee, while that employee is
in a state of nudity in an adult cabaret.  Such gratuity or pay may be
provided to such an employee through a tip receptacle, located more than six
feet from the nearest point of the performance stage where the employee is in
a state of nudity, or may be paid to an employee that is not in a state of
nudity, as part of the customer's bill.



   (M)   (1)   A licensee or operator commits an offense if the
licensee or operator fails to display a sign on the interior of the premises
notifying customers and employees of the prohibitions described in this
section.  The sign must be prominently and continuously displayed where
customers enter the premises, and immediately adjacent to each performance
stage, and must state in letters at least two inches high:



   TOUCHING OR TIPPING AN EMPLOYEE WHO IS IN A STATE OF NUDITY IS A CRIME
(MISDEMEANOR) PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF UP TO $2,000.  CUSTOMERS SHALL REMAIN
AT LEAST SIX FEET FROM ALL PERFORMANCE STAGES.



      (2)   The Director of Public Safety may also require, at the
time of issuance or renewal of the license, the licensee to display the sign
in a language other than English if he or she determines that a substantial
portion of the expected customers speak the other language as their familiar
language.  Upon notification, a licensee commits an offense if the sign does
not contain this language in the required language, in addition to English.



   (N)   A licensee or operator commits an offense if the licensee or
operator fails to prominently and continuously display a glow-in-the-dark
line on the floor of the adult cabaret, at least two inches wide, marking a
distance of six feet from each performance stage on which an employee in a
state of nudity may appear in accordance with divisions (K) and (L).



   (O)   An adult cabaret shall also comply with the requirements of
§§ 112.23, 112.49, and 112.50.



('78 Code, § 2.5-41)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed
7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.41  ESCORT AGENCY.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he/she employs at an escort
agency any person under the age of 18 years.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if he/she acts as an escort or
agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.



   (C)   An employee of an escort agency must attend training given by
the licensee concerning the requirements of this chapter as they pertain to
escort agencies, including, but not limited to, §§ 112.23, 112.25, 112.26,
112.41, 112.46, 112.47, 112.48, 112.49, 112.50 and 112.99 before the employee
receives any compensation for the employee's services.  The licensee shall
provide this training to all employees at the beginning of the employment
before the employee receives any compensation for services; and, at least
once a year thereafter.  The licensee shall maintain written records of the
training provided to each employee pursuant to this division.  These records
shall include a signed and dated statement from each employee verifying the
employee's attendance at and participation in training provided by the
licensee identifying the date on which the training was provided and the
specific topics discussed.



   (D)   A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals
to manage, direct and control the premises and operations of the escort
agency.  At least one person so appointed shall be on the premises at any
time the escort agency is open.



   (E)   An operator or a person appointed under division (D) above
shall at all times have the duty to ensure that each employee in the escort
agency has received the training required by division (C) above and each
employee is instructed to commit no act which would constitute a violation of
this chapter or which would provide grounds, or part of the grounds, for
suspension or revocation of a license issued under this chapter.



('78 Code, § 2.5-42)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed
7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.42  NUDE MODEL BUSINESS.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he/she employs at a nude model
business any person under the age of 18 years.



   (B)   A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if
he/she appears in or on the premises of a nude model business.



   (C)   A person commits an offense if he/she appears in a state of
nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area
of a nude model business premises which can be viewed from the public
right-of-way.



   (D)   A person commits an offense if he/she places or permits a bed,
sofa or mattress in any room on the premises of a nude model business; except
that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.



   (E)   Each nude model business shall have a manager's station, which
shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area.  A licensee, operator or
employee commits an offense if the licensee, operator or employee permits any
customer access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager's
station without entering a private, exclusive, closed, curtained or otherwise
screened area, excluding restrooms.  The view required in this division
shall be by direct line of sight.  The view shall be deemed insufficient if
clear visibility of such line of sight must be attained by utilizing
flashlights or spotlights in addition to overhead house lighting.



   (F)   An employee of a nude model business, while appearing in a
state of nudity, commits an offense if the employee touches a customer or the
clothing of a customer.



   (G)   A customer at a nude model business commits an offense if the
customer touches an employee or the clothing of an employee while the
employee is appearing in a state of nudity.



   (H)   An employee of a nude model business commits an offense if
that employee allows, asks, directs, or suggests that a customer disrobe to a
state of nudity.



   (I)   An employee of a nude model business must attend training
given by the licensee concerning the requirements of this chapter as they
pertain to nude model businesses, including, but not limited to, §§ 112.23,
112.25, 112.26, 112.42, 112.46, 112.47, 112.48, 112.49, 112.50 and 112.99
before the employee receives any compensation for the employee's services. 
The licensee shall provide this training to all employees at the beginning of
the employment before the employee receives any compensation for services;
and, at least once a year thereafter.  The licensee shall maintain written
records of the training provided to each employee pursuant to this
division.  These records shall include a signed and dated statement from
each employee verifying the employee's attendance at and participation in
training provided by the licensee identifying the date on which the training
was provided and the specific topics discussed.



   (J)   A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals
to manage, direct and control the premises and operations of the nude model
business.  At least one person so appointed shall be on the premises at any
time the nude model business is occupied by a customer(s) or open for
business.  A manager or a person appointed under this division shall have
the duty to remain in the manager's station at all times the nude model
business is occupied by a customer(s).



   (K)   An operator or a person appointed under division (J) above
shall at all times have the duty to ensure that each employee in the nude
model business has received the training required by division (I) above and
each employee is instructed to commit no act which would constitute a
violation of this chapter or which would provide grounds, or part of the
grounds, for suspension or revocation of a license issued under this chapter.



   (L)   A licensee, operator, or employee commits an offense if the
licensee, operator, or employee appears in a state of nudity or knowingly
allows another to appear in a state of nudity, in an adult cabaret, unless
the person is an employee who, while in a state of nudity, is on a stage (on
which no patron or customer is present) that is at least 18 inches above the
floor, and that is at least six feet from any customer.



   (M)   It is an offense for an employee, while in a state of nudity
in a nude model business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any customer or
to receive directly any pay or gratuity from any customer, or for any
customer to pay or give any gratuity directly to any employee, while that
employee is in a state of nudity in a nude model business.  Such gratuity or
pay may be provided to such an employee through a tip receptacle, located
more than six feet from the nearest point of the performance stage where the
employee is in a state of nudity, or may be paid to an employee that is not
in a state of nudity, as part of the customer's bill.



   (N)   (1)   A licensee or operator commits an offense if the
licensee or operator fails to display a sign on the interior of the premises
notifying customers and employees of the prohibitions described in this
section.  The sign must be prominently and continuously displayed where
customers enter the premises, and immediately adjacent to each performance
stage, and must state in letters at least two inches high:



   TOUCHING OR TIPPING AN EMPLOYEE WHO IS IN A STATE OF NUDITY IS A CRIME
(MISDEMEANOR) PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF UP TO $2,000.  CUSTOMERS SHALL REMAIN
AT LEAST SIX FEET FROM ALL PERFORMANCE STAGES.



      (2)   The Director of Public Safety may also require, at the
time of issuance or renewal of the license, the licensee to display the sign
in a language other than English if he or she determines that a substantial
portion of the expected customers speak the other language as their familiar
language.  Upon notification, a licensee commits an offense if the sign does
not contain this language in the required language, in addition to English.



   (O)   A licensee or operator commits an offense if the licensee or
operator fails to prominently and continuously display a glow-in-the-dark
line on the floor of the nude model business, at least two inches wide,
marking a distance of six feet from each performance stage on which an
employee in a state of nudity may appear in accordance with divisions (L) and
(M), above.



   (P)   A nude model business shall also comply with the requirements
of §§ 112.23, 112.49, and 112.50.



('78 Code, § 2.5-43)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed
7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.43  ADULT THEATER AND ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he/she knowingly allows a
person under the age of 18 years in or on the premises of an adult theater or
adult motion picture theater.



   (B)   A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if
he/she knowingly appears in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult
motion picture theater.



   (C)   Adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters shall also
comply with the requirements of §§ 112.23, 112.44, 112.49, and 112.50,
except that adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters are not required
to comply with § 112.49(C) in a viewing room while a film, photograph,
picture, video cassette or other video reproduction is being shown.  Viewing
rooms shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access
at an illumination of not less than five footcandles as measured at floor
level while a film, photograph, picture, video cassette or other video
reproduction is being shown.



   (D)   An employee of an adult theater or adult motion picture
theater must attend training given by the licensee concerning the
requirements of this chapter as they pertain to adult theaters or adult
motion picture theaters, including, but not limited to, §§ 112.23, 112.25,
112.26, 112.43, 112.44, 112.46, 112.47, 112.48, 112.49, 112.50 and 112.99
before the employee receives any compensation for the employee's services. 
The licensee shall provide this training to all employees at the beginning of
the employment before the employee receives any compensation for services;
and, at least once a year thereafter.  The licensee shall maintain written
records of the training provided to each employee pursuant to this
division.  These records shall include a signed and dated statement from
each employee verifying the employee's attendance at and participation in
training provided by the licensee identifying the date on which the training
was provided and the specific topics discussed.



   (E)   Each adult theater or adult motion picture theater shall have
at least one manager's station, which shall not exceed 32 square feet of
floor area.  The interior of the premises shall be configured to allow an
unobstructed view from a manager's station of the entire area of the premises
to which any patron is permitted access, excluding the restroom.  The view
required by this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the
manager's station.  It shall be the duty of the operator and any agents or
employees present in the premises to ensure that the view remains
unobstructed at all times.  It shall also be the duty of the operator and
any agents or employees present in the premises to ensure that no customer is
permitted access to any area of the premises that has not been designated as
an area in which customers will be permitted.



   (F)   A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals
to manage, direct and control the premises and operations of the adult
theater or adult motion picture theater.  At least one person so appointed
shall be on the premises at any time the adult theater or adult motion
picture theater is occupied by a customer(s) or open for business.  A
manager or a person appointed under this division shall have the duty to
remain in the manager's station at all times the adult theater or adult
motion picture theater is occupied by a customer(s).



   (G)   An operator or a person appointed under division (E) above
shall at all times have the duty to ensure that each employee in the adult
theater or adult motion picture theater has received the training required by
division (D) above and each employee is instructed to commit no act which
would constitute a violation of this chapter or which would provide grounds,
or part of the grounds, for suspension or revocation of a license issued
under this chapter.



('78 Code, § 2.5-44)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed
7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.44  EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS.



   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult
entertainment establishment, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the
premises, in a viewing room, a film, photograph, picture, video cassette or
other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, shall also comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   An application for an adult entertainment establishment
license shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which customers will not be permitted.  A manager's station may
not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the
place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's
blueprint shall not be required; however each diagram should be oriented to
the north, or to some designated street or object, and should be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The Director of Public Safety may waive
the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a
diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of
the premises has not been altered since the previously submitted diagram was
prepared.



      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by
the applicant.



      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the Director of
Public Safety.



      (4)   An operator or manager shall have a duty to remain in
the manager's station(s) at all times a customer is present on the premises.



      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every
area of the premises to which any customer is permitted access for any
purpose, excluding restrooms.  If the premises has two or more manager's
stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in
such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises
to which any customer is permitted access for any purpose from at least one
of the manager's stations.  The view required in this division must be by
direct line of sight from the manager's station.



      (6)   The licensee commits an offense if the licensee permits
customer access to any area of the premises that is not visible from the
manager's station for any purpose, excluding restrooms.



      (7)   The licensee, operator and any agents and employees
present on the premises shall ensure that the view area specified in division
(A)(5) above remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any customer
is present on, in or about the premises, and that no customer is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in
which customers will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to
division (A)(1) above.



      (8)   The licensee commits an offense if the licensee permits
illumination of any area of the premises to which customers have access to be
less than five footcandles as measured at the floor level.



      (9)   No viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet
may be occupied by more than one person at any time.



      (10)   No licensee shall allow openings or holes of any kind
to exist between adjacent or adjoining viewing rooms or booths.



      (11)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening or
hole of any kind between adjacent or adjoining viewing rooms or booths.



      (12)   The licensee or operator shall, during each business
day, regularly inspect the walls of all viewing rooms or booths to determine
if any openings or holes exist.



      (13)   The walls of any viewing room or booth of less than 150
square feet shall be no more than 48 inches tall.  At least one wall of any
viewing room or booth shall be visible in a direct unobstructed line of sight
from the manager's station.  Each wall or door of any viewing room or booth
shall be constructed of clear transparent glass, plastic or substantially
equivalent materials that allow an unobstructed view of the entire interior
of the viewing room or booth.



      (14)   Live entertainment is prohibited in any viewing room or
booth of less than 500 square feet of floor space, as well as any other room
adjacent to or visible from any such viewing room or booth.



      (15)   The licensee or operator commits an offense if the
licensee or operator knowingly allows a person to appear in a state of nudity
in, on or about the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, other
than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less
than 500 square feet of floor space, a film, photograph, picture, video
cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (16)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly
appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult entertainment
establishment, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than 500 square feet of floor space, a film, photograph,
picture, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (17)   It is a defense to prosecution under divisions (A)(15)
and (A)(16) above if the person was in a restroom not open to public view or
persons of the opposite sex.



   (B)   A person having a duty under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(17)
above commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.



   (C)   An employee of an adult entertainment establishment that
exhibits sexually explicit films, photographs, pictures or videos must attend
training given by the licensee concerning the requirements of this chapter as
they pertain to such a business, including, but not limited to, §§ 112.23,
112.25, 112.26, 112.43, 112.44, 112.46, 112.47, 112.48, 112.49, 112.50 and
112.99 before the employee receives any compensation for the employee's
services.  The licensee shall provide this training to all employees at the
beginning of the employment before the employee receives any compensation for
services; and, at least once a year thereafter.  The licensee shall maintain
written records of the training provided to each employee pursuant to this
division.  These records shall include a signed and dated statement from
each employee verifying the employee's attendance at and participation in
training provided by the licensee identifying the date on which the training
was provided and the specific topics discussed.



   (D)   A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals
to manage, direct and control the premises and operations of the adult
entertainment establishment as described in this section.  At least one
person so appointed shall be on the premises at any time the adult
entertainment establishment as described in this section is open.



   (E)   An operator or a person appointed under division (D) above
shall at all times have the duty to ensure that each employee in the adult
entertainment establishment as described in this section has received the
training required by division (C) above and each employee is instructed to
commit no act which would constitute a violation of this chapter or which
would provide grounds, or part of the grounds, for suspension or revocation
of a license issued under this chapter.



('78 Code, § 2.5-45)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed
7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.45  ADULT BOOKSTORES, ADULT NOVELTY STORES AND ADULT VIDEO STORES.



   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult
bookstore, adult or adult video store shall comply with the following
requirements:



      (1)   An application for an adult entertainment establishment
license shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which customers will not be permitted.  A manager's station may
not exceed 32 square feet of floor area.  The diagram shall also designate
the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted.  A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's
blueprint shall not be required; however each diagram should be oriented to
the north, or to some designated street or object, and should be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The Director of Public Safety may waive
the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a
diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of
the premises has not been altered since the previously submitted diagram was
prepared.



      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by
the applicant.



      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the Director of
Public Safety.



      (4)   The licensee commits an offense if the licensee permits
a manager's station to be unattended by an employee at any time a customer is
present on the premises.



      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every
area of the premises to which any customer is permitted access for any
purpose, excluding restrooms.  If the premises has two or more manager's
stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in
such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises
to which any customer is permitted access for any purpose from at least one
of the manager's stations.  The view required in this division must be by
direct line of sight from the manager's station.



      (6)   The licensee commits an offense if the licensee permits
a customer access to any area of the premises that is not visible from the
manager's station for any purpose, excluding restrooms.



      (7)   The licensee, operator and any agents and employees
present on the premises shall ensure that the view area specified in division
(A)(5) above remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any customer
is present on, in or about the premises, and that no customer is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in
which customers will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to
division (A)(1) above.



      (8)   No viewing room or reading room may be occupied by more
than one person at any time.



      (9)   No licensee shall allow openings or holes of any kind to
exist between adjacent or adjoining viewing rooms, reading rooms or booths.



      (10)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening or
hole of any kind between adjacent or adjoining viewing rooms, reading rooms
or booths.



      (11)   The licensee or operator shall, during each business
day, regularly inspect the walls of all viewing rooms, reading rooms or
booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.



      (12)   The walls of any viewing room, reading room or booth
shall be no more than 48 inches tall.  At least one wall of any viewing
room, reading room or booth shall be visible in a direct unobstructed line of
sight from the manager's station.  Each wall or door of any viewing room,
reading room or booth shall be constructed of clear transparent glass,
plastic or substantially equivalent materials that allow an unobstructed view
of the entire interior of the viewing room, reading room or booth.



      (13)   Live entertainment is prohibited in any viewing room,
reading room or booth as well as any other room adjacent to or visible from
any viewing room, reading room or booth.



      (14)   The licensee or operator commits an offense if the
licensee or operator knowingly allows a person to appear in a state of nudity
in, on or about the premises of an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or
adult video store, that contains a viewing room or reading room of less than
500 square feet of floor space.



      (15)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly
appears in a state of nudity in, on, or about the premises of an adult
bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store that contains a viewing
room or reading room of less than 500 square feet of floor space.



      (16)   It is a defense to prosecution under divisions (A)(14)
and (A)(15) above if the person was in a restroom not open to public view or
persons of the opposite sex.



   (B)   A person having a duty under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(16)
above commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.



   (C)   An employee of an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or
adult video store must attend training given by the licensee concerning the
requirements of this chapter as they pertain to such a business, including,
but not limited to, §§ 112.23, 112.25, 112.26, 112.43, 112.44, 112.45,
112.46, 112.47, 112.48, 112.49, 112.50 and 112.99 before the employee
receives any compensation for the employee's services.  The licensee shall
provide this training to all employees at the beginning of the employment
before the employee receives any compensation for services; and, at least
once a year thereafter.  The licensee shall maintain written records of the
training provided to each employee pursuant to this division.  These records
shall include a signed and dated statement from each employee verifying the
employee's attendance at and participation in training provided by the
licensee identifying the date on which the training was provided and the
specific topics discussed.



   (D)   A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals
to manage, direct and control the premises and operations of the adult
bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store.  At least one person so
appointed shall be on the premises at any time the adult bookstore, adult
novelty store or adult video store is open for business.  An operator or
manager shall have a duty to remain in the manager's station(s) at all times
a customer is present on the premises.



   (E)   An operator or a person appointed under division (D) above
shall at all times have the duty to ensure that each employee in the adult
bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store has received the training
required by division (C) above and each employee is instructed to commit no
act which would constitute a violation of this chapter or which would provide
grounds, or part of the grounds, for suspension or revocation of a license
issued under this chapter.



(Ord. 1486, passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)  Penalty, see §
112.99



§ 112.46  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No adult entertainment establishment, except for an adult motel, may
remain open at any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on
weekdays and Saturdays.  Adult entertainment establishments, except for
adult motels, must remain closed on Sundays.



(Ord. 1486, passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)  Penalty, see §
112.99



§ 112.47  PROHIBITION AGAINST CHILDREN IN AN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
ESTABLISHMENT.



   A licensee, operator or employee commits an offense if the licensee,
operator or employee knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years on
the premises of an adult entertainment establishment.



(Ord. 1486, passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)  Penalty, see §
112.99



§ 112.48  PROHIBITION OF NUDITY IN CERTAIN COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to prohibit certain acts of
commercial exploitation of human sexuality in commercial establishments where
alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the
premises, or permitted to be consumed on the premises, and to reduce the
likelihood of criminal activity, moral degradation and disturbances of the
peace and good order of the community, to prohibit lewd and unlawful
activity, such as prostitution and the proliferation of controlled
substances, all of which may occur when such commercial exploitation is
permitted in such places, and to promote the preservation of property values
of neighborhoods and adjacent properties.



   (B)   No person shall appear in a state of nudity in any commercial
establishment at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for
consumption on the premises, or permitted to be consumed on the premises.



   (C)   No licensee, owner, operator, or manager of any commercial
establishment at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for
consumption on the premises, or are permitted to be consumed on the premises,
shall permit any person to appear in the premises in a state of nudity.



(Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.49  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   Public and employee restrooms in an adult entertainment
establishment shall not, at any time, contain or be used for adult sexually
oriented activity, video reproduction equipment, or sexually oriented
merchandise.



   (B)   An adult entertainment establishment shall at all times
maintain at least one legible sign posted in a conspicuous place at each
public entrance easily visible by all persons prior to entry into the
establishment with lettering of at least one inch in height in English and
Spanish which contains the following statement:



   "THIS IS AN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT WHICH REGULARLY FEATURES
[description of the type of activity licensed to be conducted].  IF NUDITY
OR ACTIVITY OF A SEXUAL NATURE OFFENDS YOU DO NOT ENTER.  NO PERSONS UNDER
EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE ALLOWED ENTRY [or "NO PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF
AGE ALLOWED ENTRY," if alcohol is served].



   (C)   The premises of any adult entertainment establishment shall be
equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an
illumination of not less than 20 footcandles, excluding the limited exception
for adult theaters as contained in § 112.43(C), above.



   (D)   During hours of darkness when an adult entertainment
establishment is in operation, all required parking and all outdoor areas to
which pedestrians have access on the premises of the adult entertainment
business shall be lighted to an intensity of not less than five footcandles
measured at ground level.



   (E)   No models, mannequins, pictures, drawings, sketches, or other
live or simulated, pictorial or graphic displays of nudity shall be allowed
in a manner that is visible to the public from any street, sidewalk, or other
public place.



   (F)   The licensee or operator commits an offense if he violates any
portion of this section.



(Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.50  EMPLOYEE PERMITS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person who does not hold a permit
to act as a manager, operator, or employee of an adult entertainment
establishment.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the licensee, operator, manager, and
owners of each adult entertainment establishment to ensure that no person
acts as a manager, operator, or employee of an adult entertainment
establishment unless that person holds a permit.



   (C)   Any person who desires to obtain an original or renewal permit
shall make application in person at the offices of the police department
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
city-observed holidays excepted.  The application shall be made under oath
upon a form prescribed by the Director of Public Safety and shall include:



      (1)   The name, home street address and mailing address (if
different) of the applicant;



      (2)   Proof of the date of birth of the applicant and the
identity of the applicant, including at least one photographic identity card
issued by a governmental agency;



      (3)   A list of any criminal charges pending, convictions, and
time of service in jail or prison as related to any violation of this chapter
or any applicable offense that is specified in § 112.22(A)(10) of this
chapter; and



      (4)   One passport-type photograph of the applicant of a size
specified by the Director of Public Safety, which shall become part of the
photographic identity cards if a permit is issued.  If an on-site card is
required under division (F) of this section, then the application must
contain a second photograph of the same type.



   (D)   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
processing fee of $60.  Each applicant shall be required to provide
fingerprints to be used to verify the applicant's identity and criminal
history information.  Each applicant shall sign a waiver and authorization
form authorizing the Director of Public Safety to request on behalf of the
applicant criminal history reports from the Texas Department of Public Safety
and any appropriate federal agency.



   (E)   The Director of Public Safety shall issue the permit within
ten days from the date of filing of the application unless he finds that the
application is incomplete or that the applicant has been convicted of or
spent time in jail or prison for a violation of this chapter or an offense
specified in § 112.22(A)(10) of this chapter within the time specified
therein.  If the application is not granted, then the applicant shall be
given written notice of the grounds and of his right to provide a written
response as provided by § 112.27 of this chapter, within ten days from the
date of filing of the application.



   (F)   Each permit issued by the Director of Public Safety shall
consist of either one or two photographic identification cards.



      (1)   Each employee of an adult entertainment establishment
shall have an identification card, called a personal card.



      (2)   If an adult entertainment business is required by this
chapter to have an on-site manager, then each employee of such a business
shall have a second identification card, called an on-site card.



   (G)   Upon the applicant's completion of all requirements in
division (C) of this section, then the applicant may, upon written request,
be immediately issued a temporary permit which shall be valid until the third
day after the applicant is given notice of the decision of the Director of
Public Safety.



   (H)   If any personal card or on-site card is lost or stolen, the
holder thereof shall immediately notify the Director of Public Safety and
request a replacement, which shall be issued for a fee of $35. within three
days following verification of the identity of the holder.



   (I)   No permit application shall be accepted nor shall a permit be
issued to any person who does not provide proof that he or she is at least 18
years old.  Any permit issued by virtue of any misrepresentation or error to
any person under age 18 shall be void.



   (J)   A permit is valid for two years from the date of its issuance.



   (K)   A permit is personal to the named permit holder and is not
valid for use by any other person.



   (L)   Each permit holder shall notify the Police Department of his
or her new address within ten days following any change of his or her address.



   (M)   Each manager or employee shall conspicuously display his or
her personal card upon his or her person at all times while acting as a
manager or employee of an adult entertainment business.



   (N)   Each manager or employee who is required under this chapter to
have an on-site card shall provide his or her on-site card to the manager or
on-site manager in charge of the adult entertainment business to hold while
the manager or employee is on the premises.



   (O)   In any prosecution under this section, it shall be presumed
that the actor did not have a permit unless the permit was in display as
required under division (M) of this section.



   (P)    In the event that the Director of Public Safety has
reasonable grounds to believe that any permit holder has been convicted of or
spent time in jail or prison for a violation of this chapter or an offense as
specified in the applicable provisions of § 112.22(A)(10) of this chapter
within the time specified therein, then the Director of Public Safety may
revoke the permit under the procedures set out in § 112.26 of this chapter.



   (Q)   If the Director of Public Safety is authorized to deny the
issuance of a permit, or revoke a permit as provided in this section, the
applicant or permittee may appeal the decision of the Director of Public
Safety in accordance with the procedures in § 112.27 of this chapter.



(Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)  Penalty, see § 112.99



OTHER PROVISIONS



§ 112.60  LOCATION APPEAL BOARD; EXEMPTIONS FROM LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall serve as a location
appeal board, and shall have the power to rule on the appropriate disposition
of applications for exemptions from the location restrictions for adult
entertainment establishments set forth § 112.04 of this chapter.  The
Location Appeal Board shall follow the rules and procedures set forth in this
section.



   (B)   If the Director of Public Safety denies the issuance of a
license to an applicant because the location of the adult entertainment
establishment is in violation of § 112.04, then the applicant may, not later
than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the
city secretary a written request for an exemption from the location
restrictions.



   (C)   If the written request is filed with the city secretary within
the ten-day limit, a location appeal board shall consider the request.  The
city secretary shall set a date for the hearing within 60 days from the date
the written request is received.



   (D)   A hearing by the Board may proceed only if five of the board
members or alternates are present. The Board shall hear and consider evidence
offered by any interested person.  The formal rules of evidence do not apply.



   (E)   The Location Appeal Board may grant an exemption from the
location restrictions of § 112.04 if it makes the following findings:



      (1)   That the location of the adult entertainment
establishment will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be
contrary to the public safety or welfare;



      (2)   That the location of the adult entertainment
establishment will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in
the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight;



      (3)   That the location of the adult entertainment
establishment in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood
conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or
restoration; and



      (4)   That all other applicable provisions of this chapter
will be observed.



   (F)   In making the findings specified above, the Board shall take
into account, among other things:



      (1)   Crime statistics of the location and its 1,000-foot
radius, without regard to city boundaries, maintained by the appropriate law
enforcement agency for the previous six-month period;



      (2)   Tarrant Appraisal District appraisals for the location
and its 1,000-foot radius, without regard to city boundaries, taking into
account any decline or increase in property values;



      (3)   Vacancy rates of residential, commercial, or office
space within the surrounding 1,000-foot radius, without regard to city
boundaries; and



      (4)   Any evidence regarding the award or denial of any public
or private grants for neighborhood conservation, urban renewal, or
restoration for any property located within a 1,000-foot radius, without
regard to city boundaries.



   (G)   The Board shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority
vote.  Failure to reach a majority vote approving the exemption shall result
in denial of the exemption.  Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis
of a preponderance of the evidence.  The decision of the Location Appeal
Board is final.



   (H)   If the Board grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for
one year from the date of the Board's action.  Upon the expiration of an
exemption, the adult entertainment business is in violation of the locational
restrictions of § 112.04 until the applicant applies for and receives
another exemption.



   (I)   If the Board denies the exemption, the applicant may not
reapply for an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date
of the Board's action.



   (J)   The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from
any provisions of this chapter other than the locational restrictions.



(Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)



§ 112.61  AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER.



   Section 112.04 may be amended only after compliance with procedures
required to amend a zoning ordinance.  All other sections of this chapter
may be amended by an ordinance approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not to exceed $2,000 for
each offense affecting zoning, fire safety or public health and sanitation,
and $500 for all other offenses.  Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.



('78 Code, § 2.5-50)  (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed
10-23-06)



CHAPTER 113: VEHICLES FOR HIRE



Section



Taxicabs



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Certificate, permits required; exceptions



   113.03   Certificate of necessity and convenience



   113.04   Application for certificate



   113.05   Filing fee for certificate



   113.06   Driver's permit required



   113.07   Application for driver's permit



   113.08   Issuance of driver's permit



   113.09   Standards of operation



Wreckers



   113.25   Definitions



   113.26   Permit required



   113.27   Application for license



   113.28   Permit issuance; term; fee



   113.29   Vehicle requirements



   113.30   Record-keeping; inspection



   113.31   Permit denial; suspension; revocation



   113.32   Appeal



   113.33   Insurance



   113.34   Vehicle removal



   113.35   Removal of a towed vehicle



   113.36   Regulations



   113.37   Solicitation of wrecker business



   113.38   City employee shall not refer



   113.39   Wrecker service agreement authorized



   113.40   Notification of changes



   113.41   Administrative fee



   113.42   Impound storage fees



 



   113.99   Penalty



TAXICABS



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  The person, partnership or corporation that applies for a
certificate or permit hereunder.



   CERTIFICATE.  A permit in the form of a certificate of public
convenience and necessity, authorizing the operation of taxicabs over the
streets of the city pursuant to certain terms, regulations and conditions.



   CERTIFICATE HOLDER.  Any person, firm, corporation, association,
partnership or society who holds a valid and current certificate of
convenience and necessity and who has the control, direction, maintenance and
the benefit of the collection of revenue derived from the operation of one or
more taxicabs on or over the streets or public ways of the city, whether as
owner or otherwise.



   DRIVER.  The person actually driving a taxicab or a person who has
been hired or contracted with another to drive, whether he/she is the owner
or is an agent, servant or employee of the owner.



   FOR HIRE.  For money or other thing of value, gratuities, tips and
free-will offerings, whether paid directly or indirectly, as compensation or
consideration for services rendered.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every motor-propelled vehicle used for the
transportation of persons over the public streets of the city.



   PASSENGERS FOR HIRE.  Passengers that pay a fee or fare for
transportation. The term does not include guests of hotels or motels that
offer transportation without charge, students of private and public schools
where transportation is not offered to the general public, nor individuals
engaged in pooling or share the expense arrangement and the number of
passengers is not in excess of eight.



   SPECIAL SERVICE TRANSPORTATION.  Tour vehicle service, charter
service, limousine service, bus service and door-to-door service using
vehicles carrying passengers for hire.



   TAXICAB.  Every motor vehicle used for carrying passengers for hire
other than those motor vehicles used as special service transportation.



('78 Code, § 18-50) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)



§ 113.02  CERTIFICATE, PERMITS REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall operate any taxicab service within the
jurisdiction of the city without first having obtained from the City Council
a certificate declaring that the public convenience and necessity require
such an operation. No person shall drive or operate a taxicab within the city
without first having obtained a driver's permit from the City Manager.



('78 Code, § 18-51)



   (B)   The following vehicles shall be exempt from the certificate or
permit requirements of this subchapter:



      (1)   Vehicles that are leased or rented without drivers.



      (2)   Ambulances and special vehicles used exclusively in
connection with funerals.



      (3)   Vehicles operated by the city or its agents.



      (4)   Taxicabs licensed by another governmental entity
transporting a passenger from a point outside the city to a destination
inside the city, provided that the taxicabs may not receive a passenger
inside the city.



      (5)   Special service transportation vehicles.



('78 Code, § 18-52)



(Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.03  CERTIFICATE OF NECESSITY AND CONVENIENCE.



   Upon authorization by the City Council, a certificate of convenience
and necessity shall be signed by the City Manager, or person designated by
the City Manager, and shall contain the name and address of the applicant, a
declaration that the public convenience and necessity require the services of
the applicant and the terms and conditions of the certificate. The applicant
shall be required to sign the certificate and agree to the terms thereof. No
certificate shall be transferable without the written consent of the City
Council. Transfer of a majority interest in the company to which the
certificate is issued, change of ownership or change in partnership shall be
considered a transfer under this section. Any taxicab owner or operator
licensed under the provisions of this code as of the enactment of this
section shall not be required to reapply until the expiration of the existing
license. A certificate issued under this section and a driver's permit issued
pursuant to this subchapter shall be in effect for one year from the date of
the certificate or permit unless suspended or revoked pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter. A certificate or permit issued under this
subchapter shall be renewed annually unless the City Manager notifies the
applicant in writing of his/her intention to deny renewal due to a failure of
the certificate or permit holder to abide by the provisions of this
subchapter. The applicant may file notice of appeal in writing with the City
Manager, and the appeal shall be heard within 30 days by the City Council.
The City Council shall affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the City
Manager with regard to renewal of a certificate or permit, and its decision
on the appeal shall be final.



('78 Code, § 18-53) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)



§ 113.04  APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE.



   Application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity for
the operation of taxicabs shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the
applicant and shall be filed with the City Manager, or person designated by
the City Manager. The application shall be on a form provided by the City
Manager, or person designated by the City Manager, and shall contain at least
the following:



   (A)   The name, date of birth and address of the applicant; if a
partnership, the name, date of birth and address of each partner; if a
corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, the address of its
principal place of business, the names and addresses of all officers and
directors and a certified copy of its permit to do business in the state; the
trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business.



   (B)   The address of each place of business from which the applicant
proposes to operate.



   (C)   Whether or not the applicant, or any partner or any officer or
director in the organization, if a corporation, of the applicant has been
finally convicted of any felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.



   (D)   Whether or not the applicant, or any partner or any officer or
director in the organization, if a corporation, of the applicant, has any
suit filed against him/her or it or judgment based upon an unpaid debt or
negligent operation of a motor vehicle.



   (E)   A financial statement showing the assets, properties and
capital of the applicant.



   (F)   The nature and character of the service that the applicant
proposes to render, the facts showing the demand for the service, the
experience that the applicant has had in rendering the service and the period
of time that he/she has rendered the service.



   (G)   The proposed fares, rates and charges and operating procedures
of the applicant.



   (H)   A list of all drivers who will operate by authority of the
certificate, to be updated as new drivers are added, and a certification
signed by the applicant that each driver has a current Texas driver's
license, is physically fit to chauffeur passengers, is able to communicate in
the English language, is not addicted to drugs or intoxicating liquors so as
to render him/her unfit to perform the duties of a driver and is a person of
good moral character.



   (I)   A description of the proposed insignia and color scheme for
the taxicabs and description of any distinctive item of apparel to be worn by
the service's drivers.



   (J)   A letter from a duly authorized agent of applicant's insurance
carrier, stating that the insurance required by law for a motor vehicle is
available to applicant and that the coverage is or will be provided prior to
the issuance of the certificate.



('78 Code, § 18-54) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)



§ 113.05  FILING FEE FOR CERTIFICATE.



   The application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity
to operate a taxicab service shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing
fee of $100 to cover administrative costs.



('78 Code, § 18-55) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)



§ 113.06  DRIVER'S PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for a certificate holder to permit any person to
drive a taxicab under authority of the certificate unless the person shall
have been issued a permit in accordance with this subchapter. Every person
employed by a certificate holder and desiring to drive a taxicab in the city
shall apply for and obtain a permit from the City Manager, or the person
designated by the City Manager.



('78 Code, § 18-56) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.07  APPLICATION FOR DRIVER'S PERMIT.



   To obtain a permit to operate a taxicab in the city, an applicant shall
make a sworn written application to the City Manager, or the person
designated by the City Manager, which application shall contain the following
information:



   (A)   The name, date of birth and address of applicant.



   (B)   The name of the certificate holder by whom the applicant
expects to be or is employed.



   (C)   The applicant's place of residence for the past five years.



   (D)   A full description of the applicant, including height, weight,
color of eyes and hair, distinguishing body features or marks, an impression
of the applicant's fingerprints taken by the Police Department and three
prints of the applicant's photograph.



   (E)   Whether the applicant has had experience driving a taxicab in
a related type of work.



   (F)   Whether applicant has been finally convicted of any or
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.



   (G)   A medical report, dated not more than 30 days prior to the
date of application, from a physician certifying that applicant has been
examined and does not suffer from any disease or disability which would
impair his/her ability to operate a taxicab. The medical report shall
specifically state the condition of hearing and eyesight of the applicant.



   (H)   The number and date of expiration and issuance of applicant's
Texas Class A, B or C license.



   (I)   The most recent date of completion of a certified defensive
driving course, if any.



   (J)   A list of all traffic offenses with which the applicant has
been charged since receiving his/her driver's license, including offense,
approximate date and disposition.



('78 Code, § 18-57) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)



§ 113.08  ISSUANCE OF DRIVER'S PERMIT.



   A permit shall be issued to an applicant who has truthfully and
correctly submitted the required sworn application, whose medical report
reveals no physical condition which would impair his/her ability to safely
operate a vehicle, who can communicate in the English language, who is at
least 18 years of age, is licensed by the State Department of Public Safety
to operate a taxicab and whose criminal history does not require denial of a
permit pursuant to this subchapter. Upon approval and issuance of a permit,
the applicant shall receive an identification card which shall contain a
photograph of the applicant, identification number, physical description of
driver and residence address. The driver's identification card shall be
posted in any vehicle driven by the driver in such a manner as to be visible
to all passengers.



('78 Code, § 18-58) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.09  STANDARDS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Every certificate holder shall purchase and keep in full force
and effect public liability insurance in the amounts required by state law,
or shall obtain a certificate of self insurance as provided by state law, to
secure payment of all lawful and proper claims arising out of the operation
of taxicabs pursuant to the certificate. A written statement from an
authorized agent of the certificate holder's insurance carrier verifying the
issuance of the insurance shall be filed with the City Manager, or the person
designated by the City Manager, before any certificate may be issued. All
verifications of insurance shall provide for a 30-day cancellation notice to
the City Manager, or the person designated by the City Manager.



   (B)   Neither the city, nor any officer, agent or employee thereof
shall be held for the pecuniary responsibility or solvency of any certificate
holder or insurer or in any manner liable on account of any act or omission
relating to the operation of a taxicab.



   (C)   The certificate holder shall furnish the City Manager, or the
person designated by the City Manager, with the original application or as
new vehicles are purchased or rented, the number of vehicles in operation by
model, size, year, make, design, color scheme, motor vehicle identification
number and state license registration number. The certificate holder shall
further furnish a statement that each vehicle is currently licensed and
inspected by the state, that it is satisfactory and in safe mechanical
condition, that it has the color scheme and is identified and marked as
represented in the application.



   (D)   The City Manager's representative shall have the right to
inspect during regular business hours any of the operations, equipment or
premises of the certificate holder used in conducting the taxicab services.



   (E)   Each taxicab shall conform to all the state minimum safety
standards. No part of the body of any taxicab shall be missing or visibly
rusted. Each taxicab shall be equipped with two-way radio communication
equipment in proper operating condition capable of transmitting and receiving
vocal communication between the taxicab and the dispatching office of the
certificate holder. Each taxicab shall conform to the description of the
insignia and color scheme proposed in the certificate holder's application.
Rips, tears, stains, thread-bare portions of floors, seats, backs and
armrests shall be repaired. No vehicle shall be used as a taxicab if it is
more than 60 months old.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to consume or be
under the influence of any alcoholic beverages or use any form of controlled
substances or dangerous drugs while on duty as a taxicab driver.



   (G)   A driver of a taxicab employed to carry passengers to a
definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the
passengers safely and expeditiously to their destination.



   (H)   Should the City Manager receive a complaint about the
operations of a certificate holder, he/she shall reduce the complaint to
writing and forward it to the certificate holder. The certificate holder
shall reply in writing within ten days. If the complaint is not resolved to
the satisfaction of the City Manager, he/she is authorized to initiate steps
to revoke the certificate by giving notice to the certificate holder and the
City Council that a complaint involving a violation of this subchapter has
occurred and his/her proposal that the certificate be suspended or revoked.
The City Council shall set the complaint for public hearing and shall give
notice to the certificate holder of the hearing. The City Council shall hear
the matter within 30 days after the complaint is presented to them and shall
make a determination as to whether the certificate holder should be suspended
or revoked or no action taken.



   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to solicit
passengers upon any public street of the city. The prices to be charged by
all taxicab operations in the city shall be fair and reasonable for the
services. Each taxicab shall have its rates posted in a conspicuous place in
view of the passengers being conveyed. Each taxicab operated under the
authority of a certificate shall be equipped with a meter fastened in front
of the passengers, visible to them at all times, day and night. After
sundown, the face of the taxi meter shall be illuminated. The meters shall be
operated mechanically or electronically by a mechanism of standard design and
construction, driven either from the transmission or from one of the front
wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. They shall
be sealed at all points and connections which, if manipulated, would affect
their correct reading and recording. Each taxi meter shall have thereon a
flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not employed, and
it shall be the duty of the driver to throw the flag of the taxi meter into a
nonrecording position at the termination of each trip. All meters shall be
subject to inspection from time to time by the City Manager, or his/her
designated representative.



('78 Code, § 18-59) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87) Penalty, see § 113.99



WRECKERS



§ 113.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCIDENT.  Any occurrence that renders a vehicle wrecked or disabled.



   CHIEF OF POLICE.  The Chief of Police of the city, or his/her
designated representative.



   CONSENT TOW.  The towing of a vehicle at the request of the owner or
operator.



   DISABLED VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle that has been rendered unsafe to be
driven as the result of some occurrence, including, but not limited to
mechanical failure or breakdown, fire or vandalism, or a motor vehicle that
is in a safe driving condition but whose owner or operator is not present,
able or permitted to drive so as to reasonably necessitate that the vehicle
be removed by a wrecker.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle which is self-propelled.



   NONCONSENT TOW.  The towing of a vehicle without the prearranged
knowledge and consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle. Examples
include, but are not limited to vehicles towed when the driver is
incapacitated following an accident, vehicles towed when the driver has been
arrested, vehicles removed from public or private property without
prenotification to the vehicle owner, repossessions and seizures.



   NONRESIDENT WRECKER OR TOW TRUCK OPERATOR.  A wrecker or tow truck
operator registered with the state who does not maintain a place of business
within the corporate limits of the city.



   VEHICLE.  Every mechanical device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   WRECKED VEHICLE.  A discarded, abandoned, junked, wrecked or worn out
motor vehicle that is not in a condition to be lawfully operated on a public
road.



   WRECKER.  A vehicle designed to be used primarily for removing wrecked
or disabled vehicles.



   WRECKER or TOW TRUCK OPERATOR.  A person engaged in the business of
using a wrecker to tow, winch or otherwise move a motor vehicle.



('78 Code, § 18-22) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)



§ 113.26  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Requirements.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or employ
another to drive or operate any wrecker over any street in the city for the
purpose of towing a disabled vehicle within the city without first obtaining
a permit, except as provided by this subchapter.



      (2)   Every person desiring to provide a wrecker or towing
service to provide nonconsent tows within the city shall first obtain a
permit.



      (3)   A person who charges a fee for towing wrecked or
disabled vehicles, whether by the use of a wrecker or by the use of any other
vehicle utilizing ropes, chains or other mechanisms, shall be considered to
be engaging in a wrecker or towing business. This shall not be construed to
include a service car or other vehicle not equipped with mechanical devices
for transporting wrecked vehicles and not used for such purpose, such as
service cars equipped with compressed air containers and tools for performing
minor repairs not involving towing or transportation of wrecked or disabled
vehicles.



('78 Code, § 18-20)



   (B)   Exceptions.  A person shall not be required to obtain a
permit for the following activities:



      (1)   The transportation of a vehicle by a nonresident wrecker
operator from some point outside the city to some destination within the city.



      (2)   The transportation of a vehicle by a nonresident wrecker
operator from some point outside the city and traversing the city to some
other destination outside the city.



      (3)   The transportation of a vehicle by a wrecker operator at
the request of the owner or operator of a vehicle.



('78 Code, § 18-21)



(Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.27  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Each applicant for a wrecker license must file a written application
with the Chief of Police. The application shall be verified by the applicant
and shall be on a form furnished by the Police Department and shall contain
the following minimum information:



   (A)   The business or trade name, address and telephone number of
the wrecker company.



   (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
wrecker business. If the applicant is a corporation, the following
information shall also be included: its name, the date and place of
incorporation, the address of its principal place of business, the names and
residences of all its officers and directors, the names and residences of all
its stockholders owning 10% or more of the total issued capital stock and the
amount of stock owned by each of them, the total amount and nature of its
authorized capital stock, a certified copy of its charter and bylaws and a
certified copy of its authorization to do business in the state. If the
applicant is a partnership, the following information shall also be included:
its name, the type of partnership, the names and residences of all its
partners owning 10% or more of the ownership interest in the partnership and
their percentage of ownership.



   (C)   The name, driver's license number, address and telephone
numbers of the persons who will operate the applicant's wrecker vehicles in
the city and who will have access to the applicant's storage area.



   (D)   The normal hours of operation of the wrecker business.



   (E)   The location and a description of the applicant's storage
facility where all disabled and wrecked vehicles will be stored, including
the number of spaces available for the storage of towed vehicles, whether the
spaces are enclosed or open, the type of security for the protection of the
vehicles and the normal hours of operation of the storage facility.



   (F)   The number of wreckers for which permits are desired.



   (G)   The design and color scheme of each wrecker to be used and the
lettering and logos to be used thereon.



   (H)   The year, make, model, vehicle identification number, license
plate number, State Department of Transportation number and load capacity of
each wrecker to be licensed.



   (I)   A full and complete statement of the experience, if any, the
applicant has had in rendering wrecker service in the city or elsewhere.



   (J)   A list of any unpaid judgments of record against the
applicant, which list shall include the name and address of each owner of a
judgment and the amount of the judgment. If the applicant is a partnership, a
list shall be furnished for each partner, general or limited, owning a 10% or
more interest in the partnership. If the applicant is a corporation, a list
shall be furnished for each of its officers and directors, as well as for
each stockholder owning 10% or more of the total issued capital stock.



   (K)   A list of any convictions of the applicant for violations of
any federal state and municipal laws other than traffic statutes. If the
applicant is a partnership, a list shall be furnished for each individual
partner, general or limited, owning 10% or more interest in the partnership.
If the applicant is a corporation, a list shall be furnished for each of its
officers and directors, as well as for each stockholder owning 10% or more of
the total issued capital stock.



   (L)   An agreement by the applicant to comply with all of the terms
and conditions of this subchapter and any regulations and requirements for
wrecker and towing services which have been promulgated by the city and the
state as well as any conditions or requirements set forth in the permit.



   (M)   The telephone number of the wrecker business and the hours it
will be answered.



   (N)   Any other information as the Chief of Police shall find
reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter and to
arrive at a fair determination of whether the requirements of this subchapter
have been complied with.



('78 Code, § 18-23) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.28  PERMIT ISSUANCE; TERM; FEE.



   (A)   Upon payment of the applicable permit fees, the Chief of
Police shall review an application for a wrecker permit. The Chief shall
issue a wrecker permit to each applicant complying with the provisions of
this subchapter and all regulations and requirements for wrecker and towing
services which have been promulgated by the city and the state. In addition,
the Chief of Police shall issue a permit for each wrecker to be operated by
the permittee.



   (B)   A permit shall expire on the thirty-first of December in the
year in which it is issued.



   (C)   The permit shall not be transferable and no permit shall be
used on any wrecker other than the one for which it was issued.



   (D)   The annual fee for a wrecker permit shall be $15.



('78 Code, § 18-24) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.29  VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Each wrecker for which a permit is issued shall meet the
following minimum requirements.



      (1)   Each wrecker shall not be less than ¾ ton in size.



      (2)   Each wrecker shall be equipped with a power or
hand-operated winch line and boom or lifting device with a factory rated
capacity of not less than 5,000 pounds single capacity.



      (3)   Each wrecker shall carry as standard equipment safety
chains, a fire extinguisher, wrecking bar, broom, ax, shovel, either flares
or traffic control reflectors, a wheel dolly and a container to carry debris.



      (4)   Each wrecker shall have inscribed on each side in
letters not less than three inches in height the name, address and telephone
number of the wrecker business.



      (5)   Each wrecker shall be equipped so as to provide two-way
voice communication by mobile telephone or radio with the permittee's base
station at all times.



      (6)   Each wrecker shall be equipped with overhead flashing
emergency lights visible from 1500 feet.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if he/she operates a wrecker or
uses any equipment within the city that is not in compliance with all of the
requirements of this subchapter.



('78 Code, § 18-25) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.30 RECORD-KEEPING; INSPECTION.



   (A)   Each permittee shall maintain books and records reflecting its
operation in accordance with generally accepted accounting principals as may
be necessary for verification of the permittee's compliance with the terms of
this subchapter. The permittee agrees to make the records available at
reasonable times to the Chief of Police upon request.



   (B)   Members of the Police Department may inspect each wrecker
and/or storage facility used by the permittee at reasonable times during the
application or permit period to ensure compliance with the requirements of
this subchapter.



('78 Code, § 18-26) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.31  PERMIT DENIAL; SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Chief of Police may refuse to approve the issuance or
renewal of a wrecker permit or may suspend or revoke a wrecker permit
previously issued for one or more of the following reasons:



      (1)   The making by the applicant of any false statement or
omission of information as to a material matter in an application for a
permit or permit renewal or in a hearing concerning the permit.



      (2)   Conviction of the applicant, permittee or an employee of
the applicant or permittee for a violation of a provision of this subchapter.



      (3)   Revocation pursuant to this section of a permit issued
to the applicant or any owner, partner or corporate officer of the applicant
within three years preceding the application.



      (4)   Conviction of the applicant or permittee of a felony,
assault, fraud, burglary, theft, DWI or other offense involving moral
turpitude within five years preceding the application.



      (5)   Suspension of a permit on three occasions within the
preceding 12 months, more than three  days on each occasion.



      (6)   Habitual failure to respond to the scene of an accident
within 30 minutes of notification.



      (7)   Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this
subchapter.



   (B)   If the Chief of Police denies an application for a permit,
he/she shall send written notice to the applicant at the address shown on the
application, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall
state the reason for denial.



   (C)   No permit shall be suspended or revoked without notice to the
permittee and an opportunity for a hearing. A permittee who receives notice
of a proposed suspension or revocation may file a written request for a
hearing with the Chief of Police within ten days from the date of the notice.
The Chief of Police shall conduct a hearing and shall thereafter determine
whether to suspend or revoke the permit.



('78 Code, § 18-27) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)



§ 113.32  APPEAL.



   Any person whose application for a wrecker permit has been denied,
suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police shall have the right to appeal,
in writing, the denial, suspension or revocation to the City Manager within
ten calendar days after notification of the denial, suspension or revocation.
The City Manager shall review the matter and may uphold, modify or reverse
the denial, suspension or revocation of the wrecker permit. The decision of
the City Manager shall be final.



('78 Code, § 18-28) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)



§ 113.33  INSURANCE.



   (A)   The city shall not issue a permit unless the wrecker operator
shall procure and keep in full force and effect automobile liability
insurance and garage keepers liability insurance or truck cargo insurance
written by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state and
acceptable to the city and issued in the standard form approved by the State
Board of Insurance. The policies of insurance shall require at least 30 days
written notice to the city of any cancellation or termination or of any
material change in the terms of the insurance coverage. The insurance
policies shall contain appropriate provisions to cover all wreckers and
wrecker operators conducting business under the license.



   (B)   The automobile liability insurance must provide combined
single limits of liability for bodily injury and property damage of not less
than $100,000 for any person killed or injured, $500,000 for more than one
person killed or injured in any one accident and $100,000 for property damage
and theft coverage on all vehicles removed or impounded. The automobile
liability insurance must also meet the minimum requirements under the laws of
the state.



   (C)   The garage keepers liability insurance or tow truck cargo
insurance, whichever is maintained, must provide limits of liability for any
one loss of not less than $50,000.



   (D)   A copy of the required insurance policies shall be submitted
to the city at the time of application for a wrecker permit and a current
copy of the policies shall be maintained with the Chief of Police throughout
the term of the permit.



('78 Code, § 18-29) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.34  VEHICLE REMOVAL.



   No person may drive a wrecker to the scene of an accident on the
streets of the city unless the person has been called to the scene by a
police officer or by the owner or operator of the vehicle.



('78 Code, § 18-30) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.35  REMOVAL OF A TOWED VEHICLE.



   No vehicle, whether or not the vehicle is wrecked or disabled, for
which the owner or operator of the vehicle has not given his/her consent to
tow shall be removed by a wrecker company from its location in the city to
another location without first notifying the Police Department of the
intended removal and the destination of the vehicle.



('78 Code, § 18-31) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.36  REGULATIONS.



   A wrecker permittee shall do the following:



   (A)   Arrive at the accident within a reasonable time after having
been notified to do so. The response time shall generally not exceed 30
minutes.



   (B)   Deliver the wrecked or disabled vehicle to a location
designated by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by the Police
Department.



   (C)   Upon arrival at the scene of an accident, promptly clear the
wreckage and debris from the traveled portion of the roadway and confine it
to the smallest possible portion of the traveled roadway while removal is
taking place and in a manner to minimize the duration of the interference
with normal traffic flow and completely remove from the site of the accident
all resulting wreckage or debris, including all broken glass, but excluding
truck or vehicle cargoes, before leaving the site.



   (D)   To the extent feasible, comply with all traffic regulations in
removing any vehicle from the scene of an accident. Under no circumstances
shall any vehicle be moved or towed in such a manner as to jeopardize the
safety of other vehicles on the roadway.



   (E)   Keep and maintain wrecker vehicles and towing equipment in a
safe and working condition to ensure that the wrecker and equipment are
adequate to perform towing services.



   (F)   Depart the scene of an accident at the request of a police
officer when the wrecker has not been called to the scene in compliance with
this subchapter.



   (G)   Display the permit issued by the city on each wrecker vehicle.



('78 Code, § 18-32) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.37  SOLICITATION OF WRECKER BUSINESS.



   (A)   No person may solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly,
on the streets of the city, the business of towing a vehicle which is wrecked
or disabled regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of
soliciting business of towing, removing, repairing, storing, trading or
purchasing the vehicle.



   (B)   Proof of the presence of a person engaged in the wrecker
business, either as owner, operator, employee or agent, on a street in the
city, at or near the scene of an accident, who has not been called to the
scene by the Police Department or the owner or operator of the vehicle,
within one hour after the happening of an accident is prima facie evidence of
a solicitation in violation of this section.



('78 Code, § 18-33) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.38  CITY EMPLOYEE SHALL NOT REFER.



   No police officer or other employee of the city shall recommend to any
person, directly or indirectly, the name of any particular person engaged in
wrecker business for which solicitation is prohibited, nor shall any police
officer or other city employee attempt to influence in any manner a decision
of a person in selecting a wrecker operator.



('78 Code, § 18-34) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.39  WRECKER SERVICE AGREEMENT AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   The city shall have the right to contract with a single
wrecker service company for the towing of city vehicles or for the towing or
impoundment of any vehicle made necessary in the exercise of the city's
police and governmental functions.



   (B)   The city may call any wrecker company or use any wrecker in
cases where the contractor is unable to respond as required by the agreement,
when there exists an emergency situation or when deemed necessary by the
Chief of Police, or his/her authorized representative. In all cases, a report
will be forwarded to the Chief of Police describing the circumstances
involving the use.



('78 Code, § 18-35) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)



§ 113.40  NOTIFICATION OF CHANGES.



   (A)   A permittee shall notify the Police Department of any and all
personnel changes for those persons who will operate the wrecker vehicles
within ten calendar days of the personnel changes and additional drivers must
first be approved by the Chief of Police prior to operating any wrecker
vehicle within the city limits.



   (B)   The permittee shall notify the Police Department of any change
in ownership of the wrecker company or any change in the number of wreckers,
location of a storage facility or any other material change in the
information provided on the application for a license within ten calendar
days of the change.



('78 Code, § 18-36) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.41  ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.



   To compensate the city for the staff time and expense necessary to
process the release of a vehicle towed and stored without the consent of the
owner or operator, a fee of $10 shall be charged.



('78 Code, § 18-37) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)



§ 113.42  IMPOUND STORAGE FEES.



   No impound fees or storage costs shall be charged for days on which the
operator is not available for vehicle owners to redeem or claim their
vehicle. For example, a wrecker operator who closes his/her office on Sundays
and holidays may not charge impound fees for those days.



('78 Code, § 18-38) (Ord. 704, passed 11-10-86) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in § 10.99.



   (B)   The City Council may, at any time after the issuance of the
certificate provided for in § 113.02,  suspend or revoke the same for a
violation of §§ 113.01 et seq., any other applicable ordinance of the city
or laws of the state by the certificate holder or an operator of any taxicab
operating under the certificate. In addition to taking the action on account
of a complaint forwarded to it by the City Manager as provided, the City
Council may initiate the proceedings based upon any other evidence of
violation. In the event of the complaint or violation, the City Council shall
give the certificate holder notice in writing of the time and place of a
public hearing to be conducted to determine whether or not any action should
be taken to suspend or revoke an existing certificate or to disqualify a
person from receiving a permit to operate a taxicab. A person may be denied a
permit to operate a taxicab or may have an existing permit suspended or
revoked because of his/her conviction of a felony or a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude if the crime directly relates to the duties and
responsibilities of a taxicab driver. Any proceeding to suspend or revoke a
certificate or permit shall be concluded and a decision rendered within 30
days after receipt of the complaint from the City Manager or initiation of
the action by the City Council.



('78 Code, § 18-60) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)



CHAPTER 114: GAS WELL DRILLING AND PRODUCTION



Section



General Provisions



   114.01   Purpose; intent



   114.02   Definitions



   114.03   Compressors



   114.035   Seismic surveys



   114.04   Road repair agreement



   114.045   Operator’s agent



   114.05   Gas well permit required



   114.055   Platting requirements for certain residential developments
adjacent to gas wells



   114.06   Application for and review of gas well permit



   114.07   Insurance; indemnification



   114.08   Security



   114.09   Periodic reports



   114.10   Amended gas well permits



   114.11   Transfer of gas well permits



Operation Requirements



   114.12   On-site operation requirements



   114.13   Operations and equipment practices and standards



   114.14   Pipelines



   114.15   Additional safety and environmental requirements



   114.16   Supplemental drilling



   114.17   Re-working of well; notice



   114.18   Abandonment of wells, pipelines and line compressors



   114.185   Technical advisor



Enforcement



   114.19   Remedies of city



   114.20   Enforcement; right of entry



   114.21   Variance



 



   114.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 114.01  PURPOSE; INTENT.



   The exploration, development and production of gas in the city is an
activity which necessitates reasonable regulation to ensure that all property
owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to peaceably enjoy their
property and its benefits and revenues. It is hereby declared to be the
purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform limitations,
safeguards and regulations for operations related to the exploring, drilling,
developing, producing, transporting and storing of gas and other substances
produced in association with gas within the city to protect the health,
safety and general welfare of the public, minimize the potential impact to
property and mineral rights owners, protect the quality of the environment
and encourage the efficient production of available mineral resources.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)



§ 114.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   All technical industry words or phrases related to the
drilling and production of gas wells not specifically defined shall have the
meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the gas
industry.



   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ABANDONMENT. As defined by the Railroad Commission and includes
the plugging of the well and restoration of the drill site as required by
this chapter.



      AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL. The all-encompassing noise level associated
with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources at the
location, constituting the normal or existing level of environmental noise at
a given location.



      AMERICAN PETROLEUM INSTITUTE (API) STANDARDS. Standards that are
designed to assist energy industry professionals improve the efficiency and
cost-effectiveness of their operations, comply with legislative and
regulatory requirements, safeguard health, and protect the environment.



      APPLICANT. A person to whom a permit or certificate for the
drilling, operation and production of a well, or the installation or
operation of a pipeline, is issued under this chapter, including, but not
limited to, his or her heirs, legal representatives, successors or assigns.



      BLOWOUT PREVENTER. A mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other
device or combination of such devices secured to the top of a well casing,
including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith, which
can be closed around the drill pipe, or other tubular goods which completely
close the top of the casing and are designed for preventing blowouts.



      CLOSED LOOP MUD SYSTEM. An enclosed suite of solids control
equipment used for mud circulation and intended to minimize drilling fluid
dilution to provide for handling of the drilling wastes so that reserve pits
are not used.



      DAYTIME. The period from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.



      DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE. A schedule of development related fees
established by the City Council.



      DRILL SITE. The area used for drilling, completing, or re-working
a well.



      DRILLING. Any digging or boring of a new well to develop or
produce gas or to inject gas, water, or any other fluid or substance into the
earth. DRILLING means and includes the re-entry of an abandoned well.
DRILLING does not mean or include the re-entry of a well that has not been
abandoned.



      ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA. An area under the jurisdiction of
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers where scientific, ecological, cultural or
aesthetic features have been identified by the Corps of Engineers.



      EXPLORATION. Geologic or geophysical activities, including, but
not limited to, surveying and seismic exploration, related to the search for
gas or other sub-surface hydrocarbons.



      FLARE OR FLARING. The burning of unwanted gas through a pipe.
FLARING is a means of disposal used when there is no way to transport the gas
to market and the operator cannot use the gas for another purpose.



      FLOWBACK. The process of flowing a completed/fractured well for
the purpose of recovering water and residual sand from the gas stream prior
to sending gas down a sales pipeline.



      GAS. Gas or natural gas, as such terms are used in the rules,
regulations, or forms of the Railroad Commission.



      GAS WELL. Any well drilled for the production of gas or
classified as a GAS WELL by the Texas Natural Resources Code or the Railroad
Commission.



      GAS WELL PERMIT. A permit applied for and issued or denied
pursuant to this chapter authorizing the drilling, production, and operation
of one or more gas wells.



      HAZARDOUS MATERIALS MANAGEMENT PLAN. The HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
MANAGEMENT PLAN and hazardous materials inventory statements required by the
Fire Code.



      HOLIDAY. Any day recognized as an official HOLIDAY by the City of
Mansfield. The list of official holidays observed by the City of Mansfield
shall be maintained for public viewing on the city's official website.



      HYDRAULIC FRACTURING, FRAC, FRACING, FRACTURE OR COMPLETIONS. All
stages of the treatment of a well by the application of hydraulic fracturing
fluid under pressure that is expressly designed to initiate or propagate
fractures in a target geologic formation to enhance production of oil and
natural gas.



      HYDRAULIC FRACTURING PUMPING. The active pumping of fluid and
sand under pressure with the expressed intent of stimulating the well and
fracturing the underlying hydrocarbon bearing formation.



      INSPECTOR. The Gas Well Inspector and other city personnel who
conduct inspections as needed and as designated by the City Manager.



      LIFT COMPRESSOR. A device that raises the pressure of a
compressible fluid (gas) in order to lift gas from the well.



      LINE COMPRESSOR. A device that raises the pressure of a
compressible fluid (gas) in order for the gas to be transported through a
pipeline.



      LINE COMPRESSOR FACILITY. A facility consisting of one or more
compressors, auxiliary treatment equipment and pipeline installations to pump
natural gas under pressure over long distances, including the land upon which
the facility is located.



      NIGHTTIME. The period between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



      OPERATION SITE. The area used for development and production of
gas and all related operational activities after drilling activities are
complete.



      OPERATOR. For each well, the person listed on the Railroad
Commission Form W-l or Form P-4 for a gas well, that is, or will be, actually
in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or
controlling any well including, without limitation, a unit OPERATOR. If the
OPERATOR, as defined herein, for any gas well is not the lessee of any
premises affected by the provisions of this chapter, then such lessee shall
also be deemed to be an OPERATOR. In the event that there is no gas lease
relating to any premises affected by this chapter, the owner of the fee
mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed the OPERATOR. For each line
compressor facility, OPERATOR shall mean the entity in control of the
facility.



      PIPELINE EASEMENT MAP. A map indicating all gathering line
easements. The easements must be located separately from other utility
easements unless approved by the city.



      PROTECTED USE. A residential structure, public building,
hospital, institution, nursing home, public or private school, day care
center, or commercial building.



      RAILROAD COMMISSION. The Railroad Commission of Texas.



      RE-DRILLING. The re-completion of an existing well by deepening
or sidetrack operations extending more than 150 feet from the existing well
bore.



      REDUCED EMISSION (GREEN) COMPLETION. Techniques or methods that
minimize the release of natural gas and vapors to the environment when a well
is being flowed during the completion or re-completion phase of a Barnett
Shale Well.



      RE-WORKING. The re-completion or re-entry of an existing well
within the existing bore hole or to deepen or perform sidetrack operations
which do not extend more than 150 feet from the existing well bore, or the
replacement of well liners or casings.



      ROAD REPAIR AGREEMENT. A written agreement obligating the
operator to repair damage, excluding ordinary wear and tear, if any, to
public streets, including, but not limited to, bridges, caused by the
operator or its employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors or
representatives in the performance of drilling or production of any gas wells
authorized by the city.



      ROAD DAMAGE REMEDIATION FEE. A fee assessed to repair damage to
public roadways that is based on the projected damage and decreased life
expectancy of roadways in the city caused by the operator's use of the
roadways.



      SPECIFIC USE PERMIT. A zoning classification that provides for
uses that require special consideration in certain settings or are of a
public or semi-public character which without specific consideration may have
possible adverse impact on neighboring properties.



      TANK. A container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with
the drilling or production of gas or other hydrocarbons for holding or
storing fluids.



      TANK BATTERY. A group of tanks that are connected to receive
fluids from a well or a producing lease.



      TECHNICAL ADVISOR. Such persons familiar with and educated in the
gas industry or the law as it relates to gas matters who may be retained from
time to time by the city.



      WELL. A hole or bore to any horizon, formation, or strata for the
purpose of producing gas or other hydrocarbons.



      WORKOVER OPERATIONS. Work performed in a well after its
completion in an effort to secure production where there has been none,
restore production that has ceased or to increase production.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)



§ 114.03  COMPRESSORS.



   (A)   A specific use permit shall be required for the establishment
and operation of a compressor, whether in conjunction with a gas well or as
an independent operation.



   (B)   Lift compressors.



      (1)   Lift compressors shall meet the noise standards in §
114.13(E).



      (2)   A lift compressor installed on a site for less than six
consecutive months shall be classified as a temporary lift compressor and may
employ sound blankets or barriers to meet the noise standards.



      (3)   A lift compressor installed on a site for more than six
months shall be classified as a permanent lift compressor. If located within
600 feet of a protected use or preliminary or final platted residential
subdivision, a permanent lift compressor shall be enclosed in an acoustical
structure constructed of metal, masonry or other materials as approved by the
Director of Planning. The structure must completely screen the equipment from
view, be painted in a non-contrasting neutral earth tone color to match the
nearby surroundings as nearly as possible, and meet all applicable building
and fire codes.



      (4)   If permanent screening has not been installed around a
site, all compressors, associated equipment and buildings shall be enclosed
within a landscaped enclosure in accordance with § 114.12(G) of this chapter
immediately upon installation of the compressor and associated equipment.



      (5)   Secondary containment shall be required around all lift
compressors. All secondary containment shall meet the same requirements for
storage tank facilities in § 114.15(E) of this chapter.



      (6)   All facilities shall be inspected by the Fire Marshal
for compliance with the Fire Code and the Gas Well Inspector prior to
operation of the compressor.



   (C)   Line compressors.



      (1)   Line compressors shall be required to meet all the noise
standards in § 114.13(E).



      (2)   All line compressors and associated equipment exceeding
ten feet in height shall be fully enclosed within a building or structure
that complies with the architectural and community design standards of the
zoning district in which the facility is located and designed in context with
surrounding land uses.



      (3)   A bufferyard with a minimum width of 300 feet shall be
established and maintained around all line compressors, buildings or
structures housing line compressors, and associated equipment. A drill site
or operation site shall be permitted within the bufferyard when such site
abuts a compressor facility.



      (4)   All facilities shall be inspected by the Fire Marshal
for compliance with the Fire Code and the Gas Well Inspector prior to
operation of the compressor.



      (5)   Line compressors and associated equipment shall be
landscaped and screened in the same manner as prescribed for a drill site
according to § 114.12(G).



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.035  SEISMIC SURVEYS.



   (A)   A permit shall be required for seismic surveys conducted on
city-owned property or within city rights-of-way unless such requirement is
waived by the City Manager or his designated representative.



   (B)   No less than 15 days prior to conducting a seismic survey
within the city, the operator must provide written notice to the city, the
owners and occupants of property and any homeowners association in
subdivisions where surveying will occur. The notice must describe the process
of seismic surveying, the date when surveying will begin, the expected
duration of the survey, and include the contact information with the name,
telephone number and an e-mail address of the operator or contractor
performing the survey, and the contact information for the Gas Well Inspector.



   (C)   Seismic surveys shall only be conducted between the hours of
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
Saturday. Seismic surveys shall not be conducted on Sundays or holidays.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)



§ 114.04  ROAD REPAIR AGREEMENT.



   A road repair agreement and road damage remediation fee shall be
submitted in conjunction with the application for a gas well permit. The
agreement must be signed by the operator. The City Manager shall have the
authority to execute the road repair agreement. A road damage remediation fee
shall be charged for each well included in a gas well permit application in
the amount set forth in the approved development fee schedule.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.045  OPERATOR’S AGENT.



   Each operator of a well shall designate an agent upon whom all orders
and notices provided in this chapter may be served in person or by registered
or certified mail. Each operator so designating such agent shall within ten
days notify the City Manager or his designee in writing of any change in such
agent or such mailing address unless operations within the city are
discontinued in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)



§ 114.05  GAS WELL PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the drilling and production of gas
wells within the city without first obtaining a gas well permit.



   (B)   A single gas well permit may be obtained for multiple wells if
approved by the city. An application for a gas well permit may be filed with
the city concurrently with the application for a specific use permit;
provided, however, that the city shall not be required to consider the
application for a gas well permit unless and until a specific use permit is
approved by the City Council.



   (C)   When a gas well permit has been issued covering a well, the
permit shall constitute authority for the following, so long as conducted in
strict accordance with this chapter: drilling, operation, production,
gathering of production, maintenance, repair, re-working, testing, site
preparation consisting of rigs or tank batteries, plugging and abandonment,
and any other activity authorized by this chapter associated with drilling or
production by the operator or its employees, agents, contractors,
subcontractors or representatives. A gas well permit shall also constitute
authority for the construction and use of all facilities reasonably necessary
or convenient in connection therewith by the operator or his or her
employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors or representatives, so long as
constructed and used in strict accordance with this chapter.



   (D)   An original gas well permit shall not, however, constitute
authority for the re-entering and drilling of an abandoned well. Re-entry and
drilling of an abandoned well shall require a new gas well permit.



   (E)   A gas well permit may be issued for any lot, tract, or other
parcel of property, and public utilities may be extended or connected to
serve the drill site, whether or not the lot, tract, or other parcel of
property is part of a recorded plat.



   (F)   In addition to obtaining a gas well permit, each operator must
obtain all other required permits applicable to the proposed operation,
including, but not limited to, above-ground storage tank permits, gas
detection system permits, foam/water line assembly permits, irrigation
permits, and electrical permits, from the applicable city departments and
remit all necessary fees before the work to be permitted may commence.



   (G)   An approved gas well permit shall expire after 180 days from
the date of its issuance unless the drilling of one or more wells under the
permit has commenced. A gas well permit may be extended one time by the Gas
Well Inspector for an additional 180 days upon request by the operator if:



      (1)   The regulatory standards set forth in this chapter have
not changed as applied to the subject permit; and



      (2)   The request is submitted prior to the expiration of the
original permit.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.055  PLATTING REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS
ADJACENT TO GAS WELLS.



   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply to land in the city:



      (1)   That is subject to any zoning designation which allows
for a single family dwelling;



      (2)   Where any portion of the boundary of the land is located
within 300 feet of the boundary of an existing drill site as established by
the applicable specific use permit authorizing the drill site; and



      (3)   Whose owner is required to have a plat prepared and
approved pursuant to the Subdivision Control Ordinance of the City of
Mansfield, Texas.



   (B)   The owner of land meeting the criteria set forth in this
section shall, at the time of platting, include on the face of the plat,
framed in a bold line so as to be distinctly visible, in capital letters and
in a minimum type font size of 14  point, the following note: "LOTS
___________________ARE LOCATED WITHIN 300 FEET OF AN APPROVED GAS WELL DRILL
SITE." The owner of the property shall complete the blank in the plat note to
indicate the lots subject to this section.



   (C)   For the purposes of this section the terms "owner" and "plat"
shall have the meanings ascribed to them by the Subdivision Control Ordinance
of the City of Mansfield. Texas.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)



§ 114.06  APPLICATION FOR AND REVIEW OF GAS WELL PERMIT.



   (A)   Applications for gas well permits shall be submitted in
writing on forms provided by the city and signed by the operator.



   (B)   Applications for gas well permits shall be filed with the
Planning Department. An administration and inspection fee shall be charged
for each application, in the amounts set forth in the approved development
fee schedule. The administration fee is not refundable regardless of the
outcome of the application. Incomplete applications shall be returned to the
applicant. The city shall return any application as incomplete if there is a
dispute pending before the Railroad Commission regarding the determination of
the operator.



   (C)   An application for a gas well permit must be accompanied by
the following documentation:



      (1)   Ten sets of site plans to include:



         (a)   The specific acreage and number of wells included
in the gas well permit application;



         (b)   A drill site exhibit with existing and proposed
wells identified by each well's unit name and number listed on the Texas
Railroad Commission permit;



         (c)   The location, description and distances of all
improvements and structures within 600 feet of the drill site from the edge
of the drill site to nearest property line;



         (d)   The location of the fracturing pit and access road;



         (e)   A vicinity map locating the property in
relationship to existing major thoroughfares;



         (f)   A drill site detail showing the equipment to be
used during drilling, including but not limited to, the drilling rig, pipe
rack, water and sanitary sewer facilities, electrical supply, camper/office
trailers, closed-loop system, and fracturing pits;



         (g)   An operation site detail showing the production
equipment, including but not limited to, wellheads, separators, dehydrators,
tank batteries, compressors, metering stations, the screening wall/device and
landscaping;



         (h)   Any existing and proposed easements;



         (i)   A pipeline routing map showing the anticipated or
existing alignment of the pipeline(s) serving the operation site through the
city;



         (j)   The proposed transportation route and road map for
equipment, chemicals or waste products used or produced by the gas well
operation; and



         (k)   The screening, landscaping and irrigation plans.
The plans for a screening fence or wall must be prepared and sealed by a
Texas registered design professional.



      (2)   Four sets of engineering plans, including a grading
plan, fire hydrant map, a plan showing the public utilities required during
drilling and production operations, and the designation of the water source
to be used;



      (3)   An electronic copy of the site plan in accordance with
city's current established policy;



      (4)   The ambient noise report required by § 114.13(E) hereof
and a noise management plan;



      (5)   A storm water pollution prevention plan;



      (6)   A copy of the approved Texas Railroad Commission permit
to drill including attachments and survey plats that are applicable to the
drill site and operation site;



      (7)   A copy of the determination by the Texas Railroad
Commission of the depth of useable quality groundwater;



      (8)   Evidence of insurance and security required by §§
114.07 and 114.08 hereof;



      (9)   A tree survey;



      (10)   An exhibit showing the placement and coverage of
security cameras on the drill site and operation site;



      (11)   If the operator is a corporation, the state of
incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the name and addresses
of the general partners;



      (12)   The written approval of the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers if the gas well operation is on property within the Corps’
jurisdiction;



      (13)   A hazardous materials management plan prepared in
accordance with the Fire Code:



      (14)   An emergency action response plan in accordance with §
114.15(P) hereof; and



      (15)   Any other information deemed necessary by the city to
verify compliance with this chapter.



   (D)   No gas well permit shall be issued if the proposed activities
are not in conformance with the approved specific use permit and associated
site plan, provisions of this chapter, Building Code, Fire Code and all other
applicable city ordinances.



   (E)   A decision to deny an application for a gas well permit shall
be provided to the operator in writing, including the reason for the
decision. The operator may appeal any such denial to the City Council.



   (F)   If an application for a gas well permit is denied, nothing
herein contained shall prevent a new application from being submitted to the
city for the same well. A new application fee shall accompany each new
application.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)



§ 114.07  INSURANCE; INDEMNIFICATION.



   (A)   The operator shall provide or cause to be provided the
insurance described below for each well for which a gas well permit is
issued. Such insurance must continue until the well is abandoned and the site
restored. The operator may provide the required coverage on a "blanket" basis
for multiple wells if the site of each well is sufficiently identified, the
limits of coverage are sufficient as determined by the city within its sole
discretion, and the blanket policy is otherwise approved by the city. The
operator must provide to the city sufficient documentation that the
operator's insurance complies with the requirements of this section before
the issuance of the gas well permit.



   (B)   General requirements - indemnification and express negligence
provisions.



      (1)   Each gas well permit issued by the city shall include
the following language and regardless of whether such language is actually
included in the gas well permit it shall be deemed to be included therein:



   OPERATOR DOES HEREBY EXPRESSLY AND IRREVOCABLY RELEASE AND DISCHARGE
ALL CLAIMS, DEMANDS, ACTIONS, JUDGMENTS, AND EXECUTIONS OF ANY AND ALL KINDS
WHICH IT OR ITS  SUCCESSORS OR ASSIGNS EVER HAD, OR NOW HAS OR MAY HAVE, OR
CLAIMS TO HAVE, AGAINST THE CITY OF MANSFIELD, TEXAS, ITS DEPARTMENTS,
AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, EMPLOYEES, SPONSORS, OR VOLUNTEERS, THE GAS WELL
INSPECTOR, AND EACH OF THEIR RESPECTIVE HEIRS, PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVES,
SUCCESSORS, AND ASSIGNS (THE CITY OF MANSFIELD, TEXAS AND ALL OTHER FOREGOING
PARTIES BEING HEREIN REFERRED TO COLLECTIVELY AS THE "INDEMNIFIED PARTIES")
CREATED BY OR ARISING OUT OF PERSONAL INJURIES, KNOWN OR UNKNOWN, OR INJURIES
TO PROPERTY, REAL OR PERSONAL, OR IN ANY WAY INCIDENTAL TO OR IN CONNECTION
WITH THE PERFORMANCE OF THE WORK PERFORMED BY THE OPERATOR UNDER A GAS WELL
PERMIT. OPERATOR AGREES TO FULLY DEFEND, PROTECT, INDEMNIFY, AND HOLD
HARMLESS THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES FROM AND AGAINST EACH AND EVERY CLAIM,
DEMAND, OR CAUSE OF ACTION AND ANY AND ALL LIABILITY, DAMAGES, OBLIGATIONS,
JUDGMENTS, LOSSES, FINES, PENALTIES, COSTS, FEES, AND EXPENSES INCURRED BY
THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES CAUSED BY OR ARISING OUT OF, INCIDENTAL TO, OR
OTHERWISE IN CONNECTION WITH ANY WORK PERFORMED BY OPERATOR UNDER A GAS WELL
PERMIT OR ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF THE DRILL SITE, PIPELINE OR ANY OTHER
ASSOCIATED APPURTENANCES THERETO, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, PERSONAL
INJURIES AND DEATH IN CONNECTION THEREWITH WHICH MAY BE MADE OR ASSERTED BY
OPERATOR, HIS AGENTS, ASSIGNS, OR ANY THIRD PARTIES. OPERATOR AGREES TO FULLY
DEFEND, PROTECT, INDEMNIFY, AND HOLD HARMLESS THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES FROM
ANY CLAIMS, LIABILITIES, OR DAMAGES SUFFERED AS A RESULT OF CLAIMS, DEMANDS,
COSTS, OR JUDGMENTS AGAINST THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES, CREATED BY OR ARISING
OUT OF THE ACTS OR OMISSIONS OF THE CITY OF MANSFIELD OR ANY OF THE OTHER
INDEMNIFIED PARTIES, OCCURRING ON THE DRILL SITE OR OPERATION SITE IN THE
COURSE AND SCOPE OF INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE GAS WELLS INCLUDING, BUT
NOT LIMITED TO, CLAIMS, LIABILITIES, AND DAMAGES ARISING IN WHOLE OR IN PART
FROM THE NEGLIGENCE OF ANY OF THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES, INCLUDING THE SOLE
NEGLIGENCE OF ANY INDEMNIFIED PARTY, OCCURRING ON THE DRILL SITE OR OPERATION
SITE IN THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE GAS WELLS. IT
IS UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED THAT THE INDEMNITY PROVIDED FOR IN THIS SECTION IS
AN INDEMNITY EXTENDED BY THE OPERATOR TO INDEMNIFY AND PROTECT THE CITY OF
MANSFIELD, TEXAS AND THE OTHER INDEMNIFIED PARTIES FROM THE CONSEQUENCES OF
THE NEGLIGENCE OF ANY OF THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES, WHETHER THAT NEGLIGENCE IS
THE SOLE OR CONTRIBUTING CAUSE OF THE RESULTANT INJURY, DEATH AND/OR DAMAGE.
THE FOREGOING IS NOT INTENDED TO REQUIRE THE OPERATOR TO INDEMNIFY THE
INDEMNIFIED PARTIES FROM THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES' GROSS NEGLIGENCE OR
INTENTIONAL HARM, IRRESPECTIVE OF WHETHER THAT GROSS NEGLIGENCE OR
INTENTIONAL HARM IS THE SOLE OR CONTRIBUTING CAUSE OF THE RESULTANT INJURY,
DEATH,  AND/OR DAMAGE.



      (2)   All policies shall be endorsed to read: “This policy
will not be cancelled or non-renewed without 30 days’ advanced written
notice to the owner and the City of Mansfield, Texas, except when this policy
is being cancelled for nonpayment of premium, in which case ten days' advance
written notice is required."



      (3)   Liability policies shall be written by:



         (a)   Carriers licensed to do business in Texas and with
companies with A: VIII or better rating in accordance with the current Best
Key Rating Guide; or



         (b)   Non-admitted carriers that have a financial rating
comparable to carriers licensed to do business in Texas and which are
approved by the city.



      (4)   Liability policies shall name as "additional insured"
the city and other indemnified parties. Waivers of subrogation shall be
provided in favor of all indemnified parties.



      (5)   Copies of the pertinent portion of the insurance
policies evidencing all coverages and endorsements required by this section
must be presented to the city before the issuance of the gas well permit, and
the acceptance of a policy without the required limits and/or coverages shall
not be deemed a waiver of these requirements. The city may, in its sole
discretion, accept a certificate of insurance in lieu of a copy of the
pertinent portion of the policy pending receipt of such document by the city.
After the issuance of the gas well permit, the city may require the operator
to provide a copy of the most current insurance coverages and endorsements
for review at any time. An administration fee shall be assessed to cover the
cost of the review, in the amount set forth in the development fee schedule.



      (6)   Claims-made policies shall not be accepted except for
excess policies and environmental impairment (or seepage and pollution)
policies.



   (C)   Required insurance coverage.



      (1)   Commercial or comprehensive general liability insurance.



         (a)   Coverage should be a minimum combined single limit
of $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage, with a
$2,000,000 annual general aggregate. This coverage must include premises,
operations, blowout or explosion, products, completed operations, blanket
contractual liability, underground property damage, underground reservoir (or
resources) damage, broad form property damage, independent contractors
protective liability and personal injury.



         (b)   Underground reservoir (or resources) damage shall
be on an occurrence basis, shall not be limited to sudden and accidental
occurrences, shall not have a discovery or reporting limitation and shall not
exclude damage to water tables, formation or strata.



         (c)   Environmental impairment (or seepage and
pollution) shall be either included in the coverage or written as separate
coverage. Such coverage shall not exclude damage to the lease site. If
environmental impairment (or seepage and pollution) coverage is written on a
"claims made" basis, the policy must provide that any retroactive date
applicable precedes the effective date of the issuance of the permit.
Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting
from the escape or release of smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic
chemicals, liquids, gases, waste material, or other irritants, contaminants
or pollutants. Coverage shall be a minimum combined single limit of
$1,000,000 per occurrence. A discovery period for such peril shall not be
less than 30 days after the occurrence.



      (2)   Automobile liability insurance. Minimum combined single
limit of $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.
Such coverage shall include owned, non-owned, and hired vehicles.



      (3)   Workers' compensation insurance. In addition to the
minimum statutory requirements, coverage shall include employers’ liability
limits of at least $1,000,000 for each accident. $1,000,000 for each
employee, and a $1,000,000 policy limit for occupational disease, and the
insurer agrees to waive rights of subrogation against any of the indemnified
parties for any work performed for the city by the operator.



      (4)   Excess (or umbrella) liability insurance. Minimum limit
of $10,000,000 covering in excess of the preceding liability insurance
policies.



      (5)   Control of well insurance.



         (a)   Minimum limit of $10,000,000 per occurrence, with
a maximum deductible of $250,000 per occurrence.



         (b)   Policy shall cover the cost of controlling a well
that is out of control, re-drilling or restoration expenses, and seepage and
pollution damage. Damage to property in the operator's care, custody, and
control with a sub-limit of $500,000 may be added.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §  114.99



§ 114.08  SECURITY.



   (A)   A security instrument that covers each well must be delivered
to the city before the issuance of the gas well permit for the well. The
instrument must provide that it cannot be cancelled without at least 30
days’ prior written notice to the city.



   (B)   As to each well, the instrument shall secure the obligations
of the operator to:



      (1)   Comply with the road repair agreement and the insurance
provisions set forth in this chapter; and



      (2)   Pay fines and penalties imposed upon the operator by the
city for any breach of the gas well permit, this chapter or the applicable
specific use permit.



   (C)   The security instrument may be in the form of an irrevocable
letter of credit issued by a bank located in the City of Mansfield, Texas and
approved by the city or a payment bond issued by a surety approved by the
city. The instrument shall run to the city for the benefit of the city, shall
become effective on or before the date the gas well permit is issued, and
shall remain in force and effect for a period not less than six months after
the expiration or termination of the gas well permit or after the well is
plugged and abandoned and the site restored.



   (D)   A certificate of deposit may be substituted for the letter of
credit or payment bond. The certificate shall be issued by a bank located in
the City of Mansfield, Texas and approved by the city, shall be payable to
the order of the city to secure the obligations of the operator described
above, and shall be pledged to the city with evidence of delivery provided to
the city and an appropriate control agreement signed by the issuing bank
sufficient to perfect the city's interest in the deposit. Interest on the
certificate of deposit shall be payable to the operator.



   (E)   The amount of the security shall be $100,000 for any single
well and $200,000 for multiple wells on a "blanket" basis under the same gas
well permit.



   (F)   The form and substance of the documents evidencing the
security instruments described above must be acceptable to the city within
its sole discretion.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.09  PERIODIC REPORTS.



   (A)   The operator shall notify the Director of Planning of any
change to the following information within one business day after the change
occurs:



      (1)   The name, address, or phone number of the operator;



      (2)   The name, address, or 24-hour phone number of the
person(s) with supervisory authority over drilling or operations activities;



      (3)   The name, address, or phone number of the person
designated to receive notices from the city, which person must be a resident
of Texas that can be served in person or by registered or certified mail;



      (4)   The air quality monitoring plan as required by §
114.15(R) hereof; or



      (5)   The operator's site specific emergency action response
plan. In addition, each operator shall meet with the City's Fire Department
personnel at least once a year, or more frequently if deemed necessary by the
Fire Marshal, to conduct a review of the operator's emergency action response
plan, incident command system, and on-site familiarization that may be deemed
necessary by the Fire Marshal or Gas Well Inspector.



   (B)   The operator shall provide a copy of any incident reports or
written complaints submitted to the Railroad Commission or any other state or
federal agency within 30 days after the operator has notice of the existence
of such reports or complaints.



   (C)   Beginning on December 31 after each well is completed, and
continuing on each December 31 thereafter until the operator notifies the
city that the well has been abandoned and the site restored, the operator
shall prepare a written report to the city identifying any changes to the
information that was included in the application for the applicable gas well
permit that have not been previously reported to the city.



   (D)   Beginning on December 31 and annually thereafter each operator
shall provide an operational status report to the city for every well
permitted by the city. The report shall include the well name, API number,
lease name, city case number, Railroad Commission permit number, Railroad
Commission lease ID number and current status whether pending, drilling,
completing, producing, plugged or abandoned.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.10  AMENDED GAS WELL PERMITS.



   (A)   An operator must submit an application to the Planning
Department to amend an existing gas well permit, to commence drilling from a
new drill site that is not shown on (or incorporated by reference as part of)
the existing permit, to relocate a drill site or operation site that is shown
on (or incorporated by reference as part of) the existing permit, or to
otherwise amend the existing permit.



   (B)   Applications for amended gas well permits shall be in writing
on forms provided by the city and signed by the operator, and shall include
the following:



      (1)   An application fee in the amount set forth in the
development fee schedule. The application fee is not refundable regardless of
the outcome of the application;



      (2)   A description of the proposed amendments;



      (3)   Any changes to the information submitted with the
application for the current gas well permit (if such information has not
previously been provided to the city);



      (4)   Such additional information as is reasonably required by
the Gas Well Inspector or city staff to demonstrate compliance with the
applicable specific use permit and associated site plan and the provisions of
this chapter; and



      (5)   Such additional information as is reasonably required by
the Gas Well Inspector or city staff to prevent imminent destruction of
property or injury to persons.



   (C)   If, in the judgment of the city or the Gas Well Inspector, the
activities proposed by the amendment require an inspection, an inspection fee
in the amount set forth in the development fee schedule shall be assessed.
The operator must pay the fee before the amended gas well permit will be
issued.



   (D)   Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant.
The city shall return any application as incomplete if there is a dispute
pending before the Railroad Commission regarding the determination of the
operator.



   (E)   If the activities proposed by the amendment are materially
different and, in the judgment of the city or the Gas Well Inspector, might
create a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons that
was not associated with the activities covered by the existing permit or that
was not otherwise taken into consideration by the current permit, the
amendment must be processed as a new gas well permit application under the
provisions of § 114.05.



   (F)   A decision to deny an amendment to a gas well permit shall be
provided to the operator in writing, including an explanation of the basis
for the decision. The operator may appeal any such denial to the City Council.



   (G)   No amended gas well permit shall be issued if the proposed
activities are not in conformance with the approved specific use permit and
associated site plan, provisions of this chapter, Building Code, Fire Code,
and all other applicable city ordinances.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.11  TRANSFER OF GAS WELL PERMITS.



   (A)   A gas well permit may be transferred upon written request by
the operator with the consent of the city:



      (1)   If the transferee agrees to be bound by the terms and
conditions of the current gas well permit and road repair agreement:



      (2)   If all information previously provided to the city as
part of the current gas well permit application is updated to reflect any
changes; and



      (3)   If the transferee provides the insurance and security
required by this chapter.



   (B)   The insurance and security provided by the transferor shall be
released if a copy of the written transfer is provided to the city. The
transfer shall not relieve the transferor from any liability to the city
arising out of any activities conducted prior to the transfer.



   (C)   Applications for the transfer of gas well permits shall be
filed with the Planning Department. An administration fee shall be charged
for each application, in the amount set forth in the approved development fee
schedule.



   (D)   Within five days of the issuance of a transferred gas well
permit, the new operator shall send notice, in a form acceptable to the city,
to the occupants of all protected uses within 1,000 feet of a drill site or
operation site of such a change. The notice shall include the new operator's
name and emergency and non-emergency telephone numbers.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)



OPERATION REQUIREMENTS



§ 114.12  ON-SITE OPERATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Erosion control for each drill and operation site or line
compressor facility shall comply with the storm water pollution prevention
plan approved by the City Engineering Department.



   (B)   No drill site, operation site, or line compressor facility may
be located in a floodplain without the approval of the city and, where
applicable, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.



   (C)   There shall be a locked entrance gate to the drill site,
operation site or line compressor facility.



   (D)   The following signs shall be required on all drill sites and
operation sites:



      (1)   Address sign. An address sign shall be immediately and
prominently displayed at the entrance of the access road. The numbers and
letters of the address must be at least six inches in height and having a
one-half inch brush-stroke.



      (2)   911 sign. A 911 sign shall be immediately and
prominently displayed at the entrance to a drill site or operation site.
Unless otherwise required by the Railroad Commission, the sign shall have a
surface area of not less than two square feet or more than four square feet,
and shall be lettered with the following:



         (a)   The emergency 911 number;



         (b)   The well name and number;



         (c)   Name of the operator;



         (d)   The address of the site and city pad ID number, as
assigned by the city;



         (e)   A 24-hour emergency telephone number of the
operator; and



         (f)   City of Mansfield jurisdiction.



      (3)   No smoking sign. Signs reading "DANGER NO SMOKING
ALLOWED" in both English and Spanish as shown in the figure below shall be
posted at the entrance of each site and tank battery and in any other
location approved or designated by the Fire Marshal. Sign lettering shall be
four inches in height and shall be red on a white background or white on a
red background.







      (4)   The appropriate National Fire Prevention Association
fire diamond hazard placard is required on each tank.



      (5)   Non-potable water signs shall be displayed on all tanks
containing non-potable water.



      (6)   The operator shall post a sign at the entrance of a
drill site to notify the public whenever flaring will take place on the drill
site.



      (7)   All signs required under this division shall be made of
waterproof, durable materials and shall be maintained in a good condition at
all times.



   (E)   All facilities used for parking, loading, unloading, driveways
and all other vehicular access to each drill site, operation site, and line
compressor facility shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt or an
alternative equivalent strength surface which complies with all Fire Code
standards, provided that the drive approach from the street be constructed of
concrete. The surface for such facilities and drive approach must always be
maintained in good condition and repair.



   (F)   All gates into a drill site or operation site shall remain
locked at all times when the operator's personnel are not present. Unless
otherwise approved by the Fire Marshal, each gate shall be equipped with a
Knox Box with a key or a Knox Lock for emergency access to the site.



   (G)   The permanent screening of a site shall consist of a
landscaped enclosure with a minimum height of eight feet and a maximum height
of ten feet. The enclosure must be installed along the perimeter of the site.
Low-profile equipment or facilities shall be used on the site and shall not
exceed the height of the enclosure. Permanent screening shall comply with the
following:



      (1)   A site shall be enclosed with a) a wrought iron fence
with double row of dense evergreen plantings, each row staggered, to form a
solid screen that is at least eight feet tall at the time of planting; or b)
with a screening wall constructed of at least two complimentary masonry
construction materials with non-dwarf variety shrubs planted three feet on
center, with a minimum height of three feet at planting and reaching a mature
height of at least six feet. The type and dimensions of fence or wall, its
dimensions, and plantings for the enclosure shall be approved as proposed by
the applicant or may be modified as deemed appropriate by the City Council as
part of the specific use permit and associated site plan. For the purpose of
this Division (G)(1), masonry construction material shall mean brick or
natural or manufactured stone units at least two inches thick, laid up unit
by unit and set in mortar. A fence or wall required under this division shall
meet the following:



         (a)   Fences or walls shall be designed by a Texas
registered design professional licensed based on soil analysis and
geotechnical data. Prior to the construction of the fence or wall, the
operator shall submit plans sealed by the registered design professional
indicating the design specifications of the fence or wall. Upon completion of
the fence or wall, the operator shall provide a letter to the city sealed by
the registered design professional certifying that the fence or wall was
installed according to the design specifications.



         (b)   A fence or wall that is leaning by ten degrees or
more beyond plumb or is missing portions of the fence or wall panels shall be
considered structurally unsafe and a hazard to safety, health and public
welfare. The operator shall commence repairs or replacement of the fence or
wall within 48 hours of receipt of notice from the city.







      (2)   Trees shall be planted around the site in the following
proportion: a maximum of 70% of the trees shall be at least three and
one-half caliper inches, and a minimum of 30% of the trees shall be at least
five caliper inches. Trees shall be of an evergreen variety and container
grown.



      (3)   Trees shall be planted in a manner so as to achieve a
more natural appearance. The number of required trees shall be established at
rate of one tree for each 25 linear feet along each side of the site.



      (4)   The permanent screening, landscaping, and irrigation
shall be installed within 120 days from setting surface casing on the first
well on a drill site. Irrigation shall be designed to ensure that water is
evenly distributed to the soil on the interior and exterior sides of the
screening wall or fence.



      (5)   A temporary chain link fence or other approved type of
fence with a minimum height of six feet shall be required around a drill site
until the permanent screening has been installed in accordance with this
section. The fence shall have slats that provide 90% opaqueness.



      (6)   Other screening and landscaping materials may be
approved by the City Council as established by the approved specific use
permit and associated site plan.



      (7)    A wrought iron or ornamental gate shall be required for
any entrance to the site. The gate shall have no openings greater than four
inches in width.



      (8)   The operator shall be responsible for maintaining all
landscaping in a healthy, neat, orderly and live-growing condition at all
times.



   (H)   The raw soil in disturbed areas or embankments around each
drill site, operation site, line compressor facility, fracturing pit or open
reserve pit, where permitted, shall be seeded or covered with grass to be
maintained in a healthy and live-growing condition.



   (I)   No refining process, or any process for the extraction of
products from gas, shall be carried on at a drill site or operation site,
except that a dehydrator and separator may be maintained for the separation
of liquids from gas. Any such dehydrator or separator may serve more than one
well. All production equipment on an operation site shall be maintained at
all times.



   (J)    No person shall place, deposit, or discharge or cause or
permit to be placed, deposited, or discharged any oil, naphtha, petroleum,
asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substance, refuse, wastewater, brine or hazardous
substance from any gas well or line compressor operation or the contents of
any container used in connection with any gas well or line compressor
operation in, into, or upon any public right-of-way, storm drain, ditch or
sewer, sanitary drain or sewer, any body of water, or any private property.



   (K)   Electric lines to the drill site, operation site or line
compressor facility shall be located underground.



   (L)   All fire suppression and prevention equipment required by any
applicable federal, state, or local law at each drill site, operation site
and line compressor facility shall be provided by the operator, at the
operator's cost, and the maintenance and upkeep of such equipment shall be
the responsibility of the operator.



   (M)   No operator shall excavate or construct any lines for the
conveyance of fuel, water, oil, gas or petroleum liquids on, under, or
through the streets, alleys or other properties owned by the city without an
easement or right-of-way license from the city, at a price to be agreed upon,
and then only in strict compliance with this chapter, other city ordinances,
and the specifications established by the Department of Public Works.



   (N)   The digging up, breaking, excavating, tunneling, undermining,
breaking up, or damaging of any public street or leaving upon any public
street any earth or other material or obstruction, is prohibited unless the
operator has first obtained written permission from the city, and then only
in compliance with specifications established by the city.



   (O)   No gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled
within any of the public street or alley rights-of-way of the city and/or
future streets shown on the master thoroughfare plan. No street shall be
blocked or encumbered or closed due to any exploration, drilling, or
production activities unless prior consent is obtained from the city, and
then only temporarily.



   (P)   In all cases, blowout prevention equipment shall be used on
all wells being drilled, worked-over or in which tubing is being changed.
Protection shall be provided to prevent blowout during gas operations as
required by and in conformance with the requirements of the Railroad
Commission and the recommendations of the American Petroleum Institute. The
operator must equip all drilling wells with adequate blowout preventers, flow
lines and valves commensurate with the working pressures involved as required
by the Railroad Commission.



   (Q)   All unpaved access roads or unpaved drill sites or operation
sites shall be treated with an approved polymer based emulsion agent,
magnesium chloride, or other city-approved equivalent agent prior to the
commencement of drilling operations. Operators shall follow manufacturer's
application and maintenance schedule or re-apply agent as directed by the
Inspector.



   (R)   All production equipment shall be painted and maintained in
proper working condition at all times, including, but not limited to,
wellheads, pumping units, tanks, and buildings or structures. When requiring
painting of such facilities, the Inspector shall consider the deterioration
in the quality of the material of which such facility or structure is
constructed, the degree of rust, and its appearance. Paint shall be of a
neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include
sand, gray and unobtrusive shades of brown, or other neutral colors approved
by the Inspector. Except as approved by the city in writing, pipes in the
tank battery shall be elevated off the ground.



   (S)   Upon completion of the construction of a drill site,
fracturing pit, access road and other surface appurtenances, an operator
shall provide to the city a survey, prepared by a licensed professional
surveyor, depicting the existing conditions of the drill site, fracturing
pit, access road, in a format acceptable to the city, to demonstrate that all
surface facilities are within the boundaries established by the applicable
specific use permits and associated site plans. The cost of said surveys
shall be borne by the operator. A survey shall be required whenever a change
is made to the existing conditions of a drill site, fracturing pit, or access
road as depicted on the previous survey.



   (T)   Explosive charges shall be prohibited within the city limits
unless an appropriate permit has first been obtained from the Fire Department.



   (U)   Operators shall keep drill sites and operation sites free of
debris, pools of water or other liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush,
trash, or other waste material and an area outside ten feet of the entrance
to a drill site or operation site. The area around signage required by the
city must be maintained so as to provide clear visibility to the signage.



   (V)   The operator shall provide notice as follows:



      (1)   Any operator who intends to perform the following
activities shall give written notice to the designated city official and the
Gas Well Inspector at least 48 hours before the activities begin:



         (a)   Drill a well, including site construction and/or
preparation; mobilization and demobilization of drilling equipment, and
operations related to advancing the well bore such as spudding, setting
surface casing, and cementing;



         (b)   Re-work a well using a drilling rig;



         (c)   Fracture stimulate a well;



         (d)   Perform flow back operations;



         (e)   Plug a well; or



         (f)   Perform any other maintenance at a drill site or
operation site.



      (2)   An operator shall send notice, in a form acceptable to
the city, to the occupants of all dwellings within 1,000 feet of a drill site
or operation site in accordance with the following provisions:



         (a)   Notice shall be sent at least ten days prior to
the commencement of any of the following activities:



            1.   Site construction or preparation;



            2.   Mobilization or demobilization of drilling
equipment;



            3.   Drilling operations;



            4.   Hydraulic fracturing operations;



            5.   Flowback operations, together with a
disclaimer that flaring may or may not occur;



            6.   Re-working a well; and



            7.   Plugging and abandoning a well.



         (b)   The notice shall identify the above activities
that will be conducted and shall include the number of wells to be drilled
and the estimated duration of the activities. If the activities are to be
conducted continuously, they may be listed on one notice. Separate notices
shall be required if an activity does not occur within 90 days of the last
activity on the drill site or operation site.



         (c)   The notice shall provide the address and-24 hour
phone number of the person conducting the activities, and the telephone
numbers to file complaints with the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
and the Texas Railroad Commission.



         (d)   The operator shall provide an affidavit certifying
that notice has been sent to the above-referenced dwellings.



   (W)   After hydraulic fracturing or re-fracturing, an operator shall
employ appropriate equipment and processes to prevent natural gas and
associated vapor releases to the environment. All salable gas shall be
directed to the sales pipeline or shut-in and conserved. All wells that have
a sales pipeline shall be required to employ Reduce Emission Completion
techniques and methods. If authorized by the city, flaring may be used in
some instances as a temporary alternative to venting. In such a case, open
flames shall not be located closer than 300 feet from any building not used
in operations on the drill site and such open flame shall be screened in such
a way as to minimize nuisance and detrimental effects to surrounding
properties.



   (X)   At all times after the permanent screening is in place around
a drill site, operation site or compressor station, a minimum of one security
camera shall be mounted inside the enclosure for drill sites located within a
1,000 foot radius of any protected use, residential subdivision or public
park. Signs shall be posted on the fence or wall of the site to indicate that
activity on the site may be recorded by video surveillance. Camera systems
shall be maintained in proper operating condition and shall be designed and
located so as to meet the following requirements:



      (1)   Capture clear video images (day and night) of all
traffic entering and exiting the gate(s);



      (2)   Capture clear video images (day and night) of all
production equipment located on the site;



      (3)   Be equipped with motion detection technology;



      (4)   Be equipped with panning technology to pan immediately
to any motion detected on the site;



      (5)   Show the date and time of all activity on the footage;
and



      (6)   Be capable of being viewed at the monitoring facility.



      (7)   Operator shall maintain video data for a period of 72
hours. At the request of the city, the operator shall provide to the city any
recorded views of the enclosed area. Data from videos may only be requested
by the City Manager, his designee, or law enforcement officials.



   (Y)   No construction activities including, but not limited to, the
erection, excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair of any access road,
fracturing pit, drill site, operation site, or any structure or flatwork on
such sites shall occur during nighttime hours.



   (Z)   Drill stem testing shall be done during daytime hours. Drill
stem tests may be conducted only if the well effluent during the test is
produced through an adequate gas separator to storage tanks and the effluent
remaining in the drill pipe prior to the time the tool is closed is flushed
to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the
drill pipe.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.13  OPERATIONS AND EQUIPMENT PRACTICES AND STANDARDS.



   (A)   Adequate nuisance prevention measures shall be taken to
prevent or control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and vibration at each
drill site, operation site and line compressor facility.



   (B)   Electric power.



      (1)   An operator shall only use electricity to power a
drilling rig and all permanent compressors, excluding temporary lift
compressors as described in § 114.03(B) hereof. The electricity shall be
provided by the electric delivery utility company using a ground-mounted
transformer located on the drill site or operation site.



      (2)   The city may approve an alternative power source or
equipment such as diesel generators if the drill site or operation site is
located more than 1,000 feet from a property with a protected use, or if the
electric delivery utility company reports that there is insufficient capacity
to serve a drill site or operation site.



      (3)   An operator may use temporary diesel generators during a
disruption of electric service until such service is restored, provided that
noise produced by such equipment does not exceed the maximum limits
established for the drill site or operation site.



   (C)   No person shall permit any lights located on any drill site,
operation site or line compressor facility to be directed in such a manner so
that they shine directly on public streets, adjacent property or property in
the general vicinity of the drill site, operation site or line compressor
facility. Site lighting shall be shielded and directed downward and
internally so as to avoid glare on public streets and buildings within 300
feet.



   (D)   The operator shall at all times comply with all applicable
federal, state and city requirements.



   (E)   Noise.



      (1)   Prior to the issuance of a gas well permit, the operator
shall report to the city ambient noise readings taken over a 72 hour period,
including at least one 24 hour reading during a Saturday or Sunday. During
the 72 hour period, readings shall be taken from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m. to establish the pre-drilling or pre-installation ambient noise
level for daytime operations and from the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. to
establish the pre-drilling or pre-installation ambient noise level for any
nighttime operations.



      (2)   The exterior noise level generated by any operations
(including, but not limited to, drilling, re-drilling, production, hydraulic
fracturing, and flowback) or any line compressor facility shall not exceed
the pre-drilling or pre-installation ambient noise level by more than five
decibels for daytime operations and shall not exceed the pre-drilling or
pre-installation ambient noise level by more than three decibels for
nighttime operations when measured at the nearest boundary of a property
occupied by a protected use or 100 feet from the nearest structure occupied
by a protected use (as measured to the closest exterior point of the
structure), whichever is closer to the protected use.



      (3)   Adjustments to the noise standards as set forth above in
division (D)(2) of this section may be permitted in accordance with the
following:



 


Permitted Increase (dBA)

 
Duration of Increase (minutes*)


10
 
5


15
 
1


20
 
Less than 1


   * Cumulative minutes during any one hour



 



      (4)   During workover operations, all activities shall be
restricted to daytime hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
and 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Saturday and Sunday.



      (5)   During hydraulic fracturing, all activities shall be
restricted to hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays. Hydraulic fracturing shall be prohibited
on Sundays and holidays. Notwithstanding the foregoing, hydraulic fracturing
pumping shall be prohibited on Saturdays for drill sites or operation sites
located within 1,000 feet of a protected use as measured from the edge of the
drill site or operation site to nearest property line of the protected use.



      (6)   An operator shall not drill or re-drill a well or
operate any equipment in such a manner so as to create pure tones where
one-third octave band sound-pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds
the arithmetic average of the sound-pressure levels of two contiguous
one-third octave bands by five dB for center frequencies of 500 Hertz and
above, and by eight dB for center frequencies between 160 and 400 Hertz, and
by 15 dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hertz.



      (7)   An operator shall not drill or re-drill a well or
operate any equipment in such a manner so as to create low-frequency outdoor
noise levels that exceed the following decibel levels:



 


16 Hertz octave band:

 
65 dB


32 Hertz octave band:
 
65 dB


64 Hertz octave band:
 
65 dB



 



      (8)   The exterior noise level generated by the drilling,
re-drilling or other operations on a drill site or an operation site located
within 600 feet of a property occupied by a protected use shall be
continuously monitored to ensure compliance. The continuous noise monitoring
equipment shall be capable of wireless transmission of real-time noise and
audio data. Access to this real-time data shall be made available to the
city's Inspectors. The cost of such monitoring shall be borne by the
operator. Where continuous monitoring is not required, and a complaint is
received by the city from the occupants of any protected use on property
located more than 600 feet from a drill site or operation site, the operator
shall, if required by the city, and within 24 hours of notice of the
complaint, continuously monitor the exterior noise level generated by the
drilling, re-drilling or other operations for a 72 hour period to ensure
compliance. At the request of the city, the operator shall monitor the
exterior noise level at the source of the complaint.



      (9)   Acoustical blankets, sound walls or other alternative
methods as approved by the Gas Inspector may be used to ensure compliance.
All soundproofing shall comply with accepted industry standards and be
subject to approval by the city.



      (10)   The sound level meter, instrument, or analyzing device
used in conducting noise evaluations shall meet the American National
Standard Institute's Standards.



      (11)   Prior to the issuance of a gas well permit and the
commencement of operations, the operator shall submit a noise management
plan, approved by the city, detailing how the equipment used in the drilling,
completion, transportation, or production of a well complies with the maximum
permissible noise levels of this section. The operator shall be responsible
for verifying compliance with this section and the noise management plan
after the installation of any noise generating equipment.



      (12)   A citation may be issued immediately for failure to
comply with the provisions of this section. However, if the operator is in
compliance with the approved noise management plan, and a violation still
occurs, the operator will be given 24 hours from notice of non-compliance to
correct the violation from an identified source before a citation is issued.
Additional extensions of the 24-hour period may be granted in the event that
the source of the violation cannot be identified after reasonable diligence
by the operator.



      (13)   Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or
compressor, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the
drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be
discharged into the open unless equipped with a hospital grade exhaust
muffler or mufflers.



   (F)   An operator is allowed to construct, use, and operate such
storage equipment and separation equipment as shown on the applicable
specific use permit and associated site plan and gas well permit. The use of
centralized tank batteries is permitted only as shown on the applicable
specific use permit and associated site plan and gas well permit.



   (G)   In parallel to gas gathering pipeline, a flow back line may be
installed to handle water and gas flow back following well fracture treatment.



   (H)   All surface facilities used for drilling, production or
compression, including, but not limited to, a drill site, operation site,
line compressor facility, fracturing pit, access road, and areas disturbed by
grading or other means to accommodate such facilities shall be constructed
within the boundaries established by the applicable specific use permit and
associated site plan. All equipment, machinery, vehicles shall be stored and
drilling and production operations shall be conducted within such boundaries
as established by the applicable specific use permit and associated site plan
and gas well permit. The use of public rights-of-way or property outside of
the established boundaries for drilling, production or compression operations
is prohibited.



   (I)   Except in the case of an emergency, well servicing operations
and any deliveries to the site or to a line compressor facility shall be
scheduled to occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Saturday and Sunday, only. The
time limits set forth herein do not apply during the drilling of a well,
except that the mobilization and demobilization of any equipment used for
drilling and related operations, trailers, and vehicles shall be permitted
only during daytime hours.



   (J)   Air, gas, or pneumatic drilling shall not be permitted.



   (K)   The operator shall immediately notify the city of any
substantial accumulations of dirt, dust, mud or other debris deposited on
city thoroughfares by vehicles involved in the well drilling or servicing or
pipeline installation process. If for safety or other reasons, the city
elects to perform the removal, the cost of such removal shall be paid by the
operator.



   (L)   Within 60 days of the completion of the well or within 60 days
of re-working a well, the area around the well shall be cleaned up and
cleared of all material and equipment, holes or excavations filled, and the
land graded and returned to its original condition including replanting of
vegetation to match the surrounding area.



   (M)   An operator shall connect to a city water supply line or
outlet for water used in the preparation, drilling, completion, production,
and operation of gas wells, drill sites, operation sites and line compressor
facilities when such facilities are located within 1,500 feet of a city water
supply line or outlet. This provision shall not apply if above-referenced
facilities are located more than 1,500 feet from a city water supply line or
outlet, or if the city's Water Department reports that there is insufficient
capacity to serve a drill site, operation site or line compressor facility.



   (N)   No vehicle, equipment, materials or other similar items shall
be placed or stored on a drill site or operation site when not in use or are
not necessary for the operation of such site, as determined by the Inspector.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.14  PIPELINES.



   (A)   A natural gas pipeline permit shall be required for natural
gas pipelines and an application shall be submitted to the Planning
Department on forms provided by the city. Incomplete applications shall be
returned to the applicant. The city shall return any application as
incomplete if there is a dispute pending before the Railroad Commission
regarding the determination of the operator. In addition to the application,
the following must be submitted:



      (1)   An electronic copy of the pipeline easement map in
accordance with current established policy;



      (2)   A pipeline easement map indicating the location of the
destination transmission pipeline or line compressor, where applicable, and
the alignment of the pipeline(s) connecting the operation site to the
transmission pipeline or line compressor;



      (3)   A copy of any easement agreements, leases or other
documentation required by the city to verify the route shown on the pipeline
easement map;



      (4)   A nonrefundable application fee for each natural gas
pipeline permit in the amount set forth in the city's most recent fee
schedule;



   (B)   Where a pipeline is being installed to serve a drill site, no
natural gas pipeline permit shall be issued if the proposed pipeline and its
related facilities are not in conformance with the approved specific use
permit and associated site plan for that drill site, the provisions of this
section, building code, fire code and all other applicable city ordinances;



   (C)   A decision to deny an application for a natural gas pipeline
permit shall be provided to the operator in writing, including the reason for
the decision. The operator may appeal any such denial to the City Council;



   (D)   If an application for a natural gas pipeline permit is denied,
nothing herein contained shall prevent a new application from being submitted
to the city for the same pipelines. A new application fee shall accompany
each new application;



   (E)   An approved natural gas pipeline permit shall expire on the
one year anniversary of its date of issuance unless installation of the
pipeline authorized by the permit has commenced;



   (F)   All surface appurtenances, excluding pipeline markers, serving
a pipeline, including, but not limited to, valve stations, metering stations,
pig launchers and other similar equipment, shall be screened in accordance
with § 114.12(G) of this chapter. A landscape and irrigation plan must be
submitted with the application for a natural gas pipeline permit;



   (G)   An operator shall place a pipeline marker, in English and
Spanish, at each point where the operator has constructed or caused to be
constructed a pipeline across a public street or road;



   (H)   An operator shall place a pipeline marker, in English and
Spanish, over pipelines carrying hydrogen sulfide (H2S) gas as required by
the Railroad Commission;



   (I)   Pipelines shall be limited to the maximum allowable operating
pressure applicable to the pipes installed and shall be installed with at
least the minimum cover or backfill specified by the American National Safety
Institute Code, as amended;



   (J)   Structures shall not be built over pipelines;



   (K)   Pipelines shall be located underground. The location of all
pipelines must be marked with warning signs in accordance with industry
standards. Within the City of Mansfield, the distance between such signs
shall not exceed 500 feet. In addition, during backfill of pipeline
excavations, "buried pipeline" warning tape shall be buried one foot above
the pipeline to warn future excavators of the presence of buried pipeline;



   (L)   Each pipeline operator shall maintain a public education
program as mandated by state and federal law.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.15  ADDITIONAL SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The drilling and production of gas and accessing the drill
site or operation site shall be in compliance with all state and federal
environmental regulations and shall not occur within environmentally
sensitive areas.



   (B)   Gas wells may have a target location or bottom-hole location
that is under an environmentally sensitive area when the gas well is drilled
directionally from a location outside the environmentally sensitive area.



   (C)   Emergency shutdown controls:



      (1)   Each producing well shall be equipped with an automated
valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in operating
pressure. All wellheads shall contain an emergency shut off valve to the well
distribution line.



      (2)   Each drill site, operation site, or line compressor
facility must have an emergency shutdown switch installed in a location
approved by the Fire Marshal. The device shall have a sign or label
identifying the switch as the emergency shutdown control.



      (3)   At least once a year, or as required by the Fire
Marshal, the operator shall test the emergency shutdown switch and monitoring
system to ensure that the equipment is working properly.



   (D)   Each storage tank shall be equipped with a level control
device that will automatically activate a valve to close the well or
automatically call the operator's response personnel to manually close the
well in the event of excess liquid accumulation in the tank.



   (E)   Storage tank facilities shall be equipped with a secondary
containment system including lining with an impervious material. The
secondary containment system shall be of a sufficient height to contain one
and one-half times the contents of the largest tank, and the impervious liner
shall be covered with at least one foot of sand. Drip pots shall be provided
at pump out connections to contain the liquids from the storage tank.



   (F)   Tank battery facilities shall be equipped with a remote foam
line utilizing a two and one-half inch national standard hose thread female
inlet connection in locations approved by the Fire Department. A lightning
arrestor system or lightning grounding system shall be installed according to
the most current edition of the National Electrical Code.



   (G)   An approved Hazardous Materials Management Plan shall be on
file with the Fire Department. The costs of cleanup operations due to hazards
associated with a well site or a line compressor facility shall be the
responsibility of the operator.



   (H)   No salt- or waste-water disposal wells shall be located within
the city.



   (I)   A closed loop mud system shall be used in conjunction with all
drilling and reworking operations for all gas well permits.



   (J)   The following inspections shall be required:



      (1)   Surface casing. An operator must set and cement
sufficient surface casing to protect all usable-quality water strata, as
defined by state law. The operator shall notify the Gas Well Inspector in
writing at least 72 hours prior to setting and cementing surface casing. In
addition, the following shall be required:



         (a)   Centralizers must be used at an interval of one
centralizer per 100 feet, or ten centralizers per 1,000 feet.



         (b)   New surface casing is required.



         (c)   Proper floating equipment shall be used.



         (d)   Class "H" or Class "C" cement with accelerators
shall be used.



         (e)   The operator shall circulate cement to surface; if
not, the operator shall cement with one-inch tubing and top off.



         (f)   The operator shall wait on cement a minimum of
8-12 hours prior to commencing further drilling operations.



         (g)   The operator shall test the blowout preventer
before drilling out of surface casing to 1,000 psi.



      (2)   Completion. The operator shall notify the Gas Well
Inspector in writing at least 72 hours prior to starting completion
procedures such as hydraulic fracturing and perforating. The well must be
equipped with a blowout preventer before this operation is commenced. If a
bridge plug is set over a producing formation prior to additional completion,
it must be pressure-tested to a sufficient pressure to ensure that it is not
leaking.



      (3)   Pipeline. The operator shall notify the Gas Well
Inspector in writing at least 72 hours prior to the first sale.



      (4)   Final inspection. After the site has been cleaned up and
screened, the operator shall notify the Gas Well Inspector for a final
inspection. Prior to the final inspection, the operator must provide the city
with geographic coordinates of the well bore, using the North American Datum
1983 (NAD 83), Texas State Plane - North Central Zone (4202), in United
States feet.



      (5)    Line compressor facility not part of an operation site.
The Gas Well Inspector shall inspect each line compressor facility
established independently of an operation site for compliance with all
applicable regulations of the State of Texas and city ordinances.



   (K)    The Gas Well Inspector shall conduct regular inspections at
least once a year of all permitted wells in the city to determine that the
wells are operating in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and
all regulations of the Railroad Commission. If a violation of the applicable
specific use permit and associated site plan or the gas well permit is found
during an annual inspection, a reinspection fee shall be assessed in the
amount set forth in the development fee schedule.



   (L)   If a gas field in the city is identified as a hydrogen sulfide
(H2S) gas field, the operator shall immediately cease operation.



   (M)   The following shall be required for all fracturing pits:



      (1)   All fracturing pits, excluding pre-existing water
features, must be filled in and the surface revegetated and returned to a
state prior to the creation of the pit after the drilling of all wells
identified in the application have been completed.



      (2)   Notwithstanding division (M)(1) above, the filling of
the fracturing pit shall not be required where the approved specific use
permit indicates an intent to convert the fracturing pit into a permanent
water feature to serve as a neighborhood amenity and includes plans detailing
the design and conversion dale for the intended water feature. The city shall
determine whether a water feature is suitable for its intended location and
that the design of the water feature complements the surrounding present or
future development. Once a fracturing pit has been converted to a community
water feature, the water contents may no longer be used to fracture a well.
The permanent water feature must also comply with the landscape requirement
in § 7300 of the Mansfield Zoning Ordinance for detention and retention
ponds.



      (3)   No pre-existing body of surface water may be used as a
fracturing pit or a source of water for the hydraulic fracturing process
without the approval of the City Engineer. In addition, any detention or
retention pond used as a fracturing pit must be engineered and sized to
accommodate both the water for the hydraulic fracturing process and any
drainage from surrounding development or properties.



      (4)   Each new fracturing pit shall be enclosed with a chain
link black or dark green fencing on all four sides during drilling operations.



   (N)    Drill sites, operation sites, line compressor facilities and
the installation of natural gas pipelines shall not be exempt from the tree
protection and tree replacement requirements of the Natural Resources
Management Ordinance. Trees removed to accommodate drill sites, operation
sites, line compressor facilities or natural gas pipelines shall be mitigated
in accordance with the Natural Resources Management Ordinance (Chapter 99 of
this code).



   (O)   In the event of an emergency or incident at a well site that
necessitates or involves emergency provider response by the city, the city
may assess the reasonable cost of the emergency response services to the
operator. The operator shall be required to remit payment for services
rendered within three business days of receipt of the invoice.



   (P)   The operator shall submit an emergency action response plan.
At a minimum, the plan shall provide for:



      (1)   Prompt and effective response by the operator to
emergencies regarding leaks or releases that can affect public health, safety
and welfare; fire or explosions at or near a gas well; and natural disasters
and severe weather;



      (2)   Effective means to notify and communicate required and
pertinent information to local fire, police and public officials during an
emergency;



      (3)   The availability of personnel, equipment, tools and
materials as necessary at the scene of an emergency;



      (4)   Measures to be taken to reduce public exposure to
injury, accidental death or exposure;



      (5)   Emergency shutdown of a gas well and related site;



      (6)   The safe restoration of service and operations following
an emergency or incident;



      (7)   A follow-up incident investigation to determine the
cause of the incident and require the implementation of corrective measures;



      (8)   An emergency notifications page that indicates all
emergencies must be reported to the Fire Department at 911 and to the Gas
Well Inspector;



      (9)   Drive-to-maps from public rights-of-way to the drill
site;



      (10)   The name, address, and 24-hour phone number of the
operator's representative with supervisory authority over drilling or
operations activities; and



      (11)   The name, address and 24-hour phone number of the
person to be notified in case of an emergency.



   (Q)    Each operator shall maintain a master services agreement with
applicable third party service providers dedicated to spill response, well
control, explosion, fire or other emergencies. As part of the emergency
response action plan, the operator shall provide a current list of each
service provider's name, a description of service(s), telephone number,
anticipated response time and business location.



   (R)   Within 30 days of receipt of a written request from the City
Manager or his designated representative, an operator of a drill site or
operation site within the city shall provide an air quality management plan.
The air quality management plan shall include a description of the air
quality monitoring techniques and equipment the operator will use to comply
with all applicable federal and state law, which may include the use of FLIR
cameras, hand-held or other air emission detection equipment, activities
conducted during regular inspections, operation and maintenance schedules for
equipment checks, on-site daily or weekly visual inspections, and use of
third party leak detection or air monitoring consultants, and frequency of
monitoring.



   (S)   Within 30 days of receipt of a written request from the City
Manager or his designated representative, an operator of a drill site or
operation site within the city shall provide an extended gas analysis of raw
produced gas from a single well on a designated drill site, operation site or
a line compressor facility. The extended gas analysis must include testing
for the following: NITROGEN (N2); CARBON DIOXIDE (C02); METHANE; ETHANE;
PROPANE; ISO-BUTANE; BUTANE; ISO-PENTANE; PENTANE; ISO-HEXANES; HEXANE:
BENZENE; CYCLOHEXANE; ISO-HEPTANES; HEPTANE; TOLUENE; ISO-OCTANES; OCTANE;
ETHYLBENZENE; META-, ORTHO- and PARA-XYLENE; ISO-NONANES; NONANE;
ISO-DECANES; DECANE; and ISO-UNDECANES. The city may request an extended gas
analysis no more than once every five years; provided, however, should the
city receive a written complaint regarding emissions at a drill site,
operation site or a line compressor facility, the city may evaluate the
complaint and may request additional analyses as necessary within such five
year period. All laboratory analyses shall be performed by a third-party
laboratory with National Environmental Laboratory accreditation, where a
method of accreditation is available and all samples shall be collected,
handled, and transported following proper chain-of-custody protocol. If after
reviewing an operator's extended gas analysis and air quality management plan
deficiencies or violations of federal or state law are identified, the city
may, as its sole remedy, notify the TCEQ, Railroad Commission, the EPA or any
other applicable state or federal regulatory agencies to request enforcement.



   (T)   Within 30 days of receipt of a written request from the City
Manager or his designated representative, an operator of a drill site or
operation site within the city shall provide a produced water flash analysis
for each drill site or operation site. The analysis shall conform to the
emission modeling requirements promulgated by the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality. The city may request a produced water flash analysis
no more than once every five years; provided, however, should the city
receive a written complaint related to the produced water from a drill site
or operation site, the city may evaluate the complaint and may request
additional samples as necessary within such five year period. All laboratory
analyses shall be performed by a third-party laboratory with National
Environmental Laboratory accreditation, where a method of accreditation is
available and all samples shall be collected, handled, and transported
following proper chain-of-custody protocol.



   (U)   The operator of a gas well shall provide the Gas Well
Inspector with a pre-drilling and post-drilling water analysis for total
petroleum hydrocarbons from any existing fresh water well registered by the
state within 500 feet of the gas well if requested by the owner(s) of those
fresh water wells. All laboratory analyses shall be performed by a
third-party laboratory with National Environmental Laboratory accreditation,
where a method of accreditation is available and all samples shall be
collected, handled, and transported following proper chain-of-custody
protocol.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.16  SUPPLEMENTAL DRILLING.



   (A)   Supplemental drilling to deepen or directional drill a well
that has not been abandoned shall be conducted in accordance with the
conditions of the applicable specific use permit and associated site plan and
the gas well permit for the well.



   (B)   The operator shall provide the city with a copy of additional
Railroad Commission permits that allow drilling to a deeper depth.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.17  RE-WORKING OF WELL; NOTICE.



   Any person who intends to re-work a well using a drilling rig, to
fracture stimulate a well after initial completion, or to conduct seismic
exploration involving explosive charges shall give written notice to the city
at least 20 days before the activities begin. The notice shall identify where
the activities will be conducted and shall describe the activities in
reasonable detail, including but not limited to the duration of the
activities and the time of day they will be conducted. The notice must also
provide the address and 24-hour phone number of the person conducting the
activities. The person conducting the activities shall post a sign, in
English and Spanish, on the property giving the public notice of the
activities, including the name, address, and 24-hour phone number of the
person conducting the activities. No well shall be re-worked without the
approval of the Gas Well Inspector. If the Gas Well Inspector determines that
an inspection is necessary, the operator must pay an inspection fee in the
amount set forth in the development fee schedule.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.18  ABANDONMENT OF WELLS, PIPELINES AND LINE COMPRESSORS.



   (A)   Upon abandonment of a well or well site, within 60 days, the
well shall be plugged in accordance with Railroad Commission standards, the
site shall be cleaned and cleared of all material and equipment, holes or
excavations filled, and the land graded and returned to its original
condition including replanting of vegetation to match the surrounding area.
All well casings shall be cut and removed to a depth of at least ten feet
below the surface.



   (B)   No structures shall be built within ten feet of an abandoned
well.



   (C)   Upon abandonment of a pipeline, within 60 days of abandonment,
a pipeline must be purged and plugged in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the State of Texas in effect at that time.



   (D)   Within 60 days of abandonment of a line compressor facility,
the equipment at the facility shall be removed in accordance with Railroad
Commission standards, the facility shall be cleaned and cleared of all
material and equipment, holes or excavations filled, and the land graded and
returned to its original condition including replanting of vegetation to
match the surrounding area.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.185  TECHNICAL ADVISOR.



   The city at its own discretion may employ a Technical Advisor for the
purpose of advising, counseling or representing the city relative to an
operator’s unique and particular set of circumstances, case or request
relating to this chapter. The cost for such services of such Technical
Advisor(s) shall be assessed against and paid for by such operator in
addition to any fees or charges assessed pursuant to this chapter. Prior to
the employment of a Technical Advisor, the city shall inform the operator of
the intended scope of work and the estimated costs and expenses. The
employment of a Technical Advisor shall be approved by the City Council.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 114.19  REMEDIES OF CITY.



   (A)   If an operator or his or her officers, employees, agents,
contractors, subcontractors or representatives fails to comply with the
conditions of the applicable specific use permit and associated site plan or
any requirement of a gas well permit (including any requirement incorporated
by reference as part of the permit), or any applicable provisions of this
chapter or any other city ordinances, the city shall endeavor to give written
notice to the operator specifying the nature of the alleged failure and
giving the operator a specified time to cure, taking into consideration the
nature and extent of the alleged failure, the extent of the efforts required
to cure, and the potential impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the
community. If circumstances warrant proceeding without notice, no notice
shall be required. In any case, failure to give such notice shall not
prohibit the city from pursuing any available remedy.



   (B)   If the operator does not cure the alleged failure within the
time specified by the city, the city may notify the Railroad Commission and
request that the Railroad Commission take appropriate action. In addition,
the city may pursue all other remedies allowed by law, including but not
limited to the following:



      (1)   The City Manager may suspend the gas well permit until
the alleged failure is cured;



      (2)   The City Manager may revoke the gas well permit if the
operator fails to initiate and diligently pursue a cure; and



      (3)   The City Manager may seek recourse against the security
delivered pursuant to this chapter.



   (C)   The operator may appeal a decision to suspend or revoke the
gas well permit to the City Council.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.20  ENFORCEMENT; RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   (A)   The City Manager shall designate Inspectors, including a Gas
Well Inspector, who shall be a qualified employee or independent contractor
familiar with and educated in the gas industry, and any other city personnel
deemed necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. An Inspector
shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry
out the intent and purpose of this chapter and its particular provisions.
Failure of any person to comply with any such order or directive shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.



   (B)   The Inspectors are authorized and directed to enforce this
chapter and the provisions of any gas well permit. Whenever necessary to
enforce any provision of this chapter or a gas well permit, to perform
regular inspections of the site, or whenever there is reasonable cause to
believe there has been a violation of this chapter or a gas well permit, the
Gas Well Inspector, Fire Department personnel or the Gas Well Coordinator may
enter upon any property covered by this chapter or a gas well permit to
inspect or perform any duty or requirement imposed by this chapter. To
facilitate entry, the operator shall furnish a key or the combination to the
lock at the entrance to the site. If entry is refused, the city shall have
recourse to every remedy provided by law and equity to gain entry.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.21  VARIANCE.



   (A)   A variance from the requirements of §§ 114.12(W), 114.13(B),
114.13(E)(5), 114.13(M), and 114.15(M) may be sought by submitting a written
request to the Director of Planning. The request must include the following:



      (1)   Description of the requested variance and an explanation
of why it should be granted;



      (2)   Description of alternatives considered and why each is
not the preferred alternative;



      (3)   Description of the economic consequences if the variance
is not granted;



      (4)   Description of how the level of health, safety and
welfare of the public will be maintained if the variance is granted; and



      (5)   A site plan of the site visually depicting the requested
variance if the request for the variance involves the location or orientation
of persons or property.



   (B)   The Director of Planning shall review the application and may
approve or conditionally approve the variance, or may place the variance
request on the City Council agenda for consideration. In considering the
variance, the Director of Planning or the City Council may take into account
the following:



      (1)   Whether the operations proposed are safe and reasonable
under the circumstances and conditions prevailing in the area, considering
the particular location and the character of the improvements located there;



      (2)   How the operations proposed compare to available
alternatives;



      (3)   Whether the operations proposed would conflict with the
orderly growth and development of the city;



      (4)   The economic consequence if the variance is not granted;



      (5)   Whether the operations proposed adequately protect the
health, safety and welfare of the public; and



      (6)   Whether the operations proposed provide acceptable
access for fire personnel and fire fighting equipment.



   (C)   Approval of a variance requires that a minimum of four City
Council members vote in favor of the approval. The details of each action
granting or denying the requested variance shall be recorded and entered in
the files of the City Secretary, and the Director of Planning shall forward a
letter to the applicant stating whether the City Council has approved or
denied the variance request and listing any conditions placed upon an
approval.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $2,000 for each
offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)



CHAPTER 115: SEWAGE SLUDGE APPLICATION



Section



General Provisions



   115.001   Purpose



   115.002   Definitions



   115.003   State regulations



Notification Requirements



   115.020   Notification required



   115.021   Timing of notification



   115.022   Contents of notification



   115.023   Director determination



General Requirements



   115.040   Transport of sewage sludge



   115.041   Posting signs



   115.042   Incorporation



   115.043   Buffer zones



   115.044   Public health nuisances



   115.045   Soil concentration information



Variance Procedure



   115.060   Request for variance



 



   115.999   Penalty



Cross reference:



   Liquid waste haulers, see §§ 51.070 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 115.001  PURPOSE.



   This chapter establishes requirements applicable to those applying
sewage sludge and to the application of sewage sludge in the city to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare of the city.



(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)



§ 115.002  DEFINITIONS.



   All definitions in Tex. Admin. Code Title 30, § 312.8. "General
Definitions," as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out
herein, for any and all purposes, and apply in this chapter. In addition, the
following definitions shall apply in this chapter:



   APPLICATION. The application, beneficial use, disposal, experimental
use, land application, staging, or treatment of sewage sludge.



   APPLICATION SITE. The facility or land where the application of sewage
sludge will be done.



   CITY. The authorized representatives of the City of Mansfield.



   DIRECTOR. The Environmental Manager, or a designated representative,
for the City of Mansfield.



   REGULATORY AUTHORITY. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.



(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)



§ 115.003  STATE REGULATIONS.



   The application of sewage sludge in the city shall comply with all
regulations and requirements of Tex. Admin. Code Title 30, Ch. 312, as
amended, and any other applicable state laws or regulations.



(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)



NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS



§ 115.020  NOTIFICATION REQUIRED.



   The operator shall notify the city prior to the commencement of the
application of sewage sludge at an application site in the city.



(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)



§ 115.021  TIMING OF NOTIFICATION.



   A notification under this chapter must be filed with the city at least
15 days prior to the application.



(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)



§ 115.022  CONTENTS OF NOTIFICATION.



   A notification under this chapter must be made in writing and filed
with the City Secretary. The notification must contain the following:



   (A)   A copy of the application for the permit or registration that
authorizes the application;



   (B)   A copy of the permit or registration that authorizes the
application;



   (C)   Location of the application site;



   (D)   Name, address, and phone number of the owner of the
application site;



   (E)   Name, address, and phone number of the operator;



   (F)   Name, address, and phone number of the applier (if different
from the operator);



   (G)   Name, address, and phone number for the transporter;



   (H)   Approximate date and time of the application;



   (I)   Certification that all sewage sludge will be incorporated into
the soil within six hours of the application;



   (J)   Explanation of the procedures to be followed in the case of
adverse weather during the application; and



   (K)   Explanation of procedures to prevent nuisance odors during the
application. If an operator is required to provide an Odor Control Plan under
§ 115.044(C) of this chapter, a copy of the Odor Control Plan must be
included with the notification.



(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)



§ 115.023  DIRECTOR DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a notification filed under this chapter, the
Director shall determine whether the planned application is in compliance
with the ordinances of the city. The Director shall investigate and determine
whether the planned application is in compliance with the ordinances of the
city. Director shall provide a written determination to the operator within
seven days after the notification is filed.



   (B)   If the Director determines that the planned application is not
in compliance with the ordinances of the city, the Director's written
determination shall state that the planned application is not in compliance
with the ordinances of the city, inform the operator why the planned
application is not in compliance with the ordinances of the city, and inform
the operator of its right to request a variance under this chapter.



(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)



GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



§ 115.040  TRANSPORT OF SEWAGE SLUDGE.



   A transporter shall transport sewage sludge in a manner to prevent the
loss of liquid or solid material during transport.



(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)



§ 115.041  POSTING SIGNS.



   (A)   The operator of an application site shall post a sign on all
publicly accessible roads leading to the application site at a location
within one-half mile of the application site during the application. The
signs shall be posted at least three days prior to and up to 14 days after
the commencement of the application. The sign must include, with minimum two
inch letters, the operator name, the operator telephone number, the
classification of sewage sludge and the TCEQ authorization number (if
applicable).



   (B)   In the event of reasonably unforeseen circumstances, such as
weather conditions or equipment failure, that necessitate a change in a
planned application site, the required signs may be posted on the day on
which the application commences. If signs are posted less than three days
prior to commencement of the application, the operator shall notify the
Director of the change in the application site prior to the commencement of
the application and shall provide a written statement detailing the
circumstances that necessitated the change in the application site to the
Director within three days of the commencement of the application.



(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)



§ 115.042  INCORPORATION.



   Sewage sludge or bulk sewage sludge shall be incorporated into the land
within six hours after application.



(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)



§ 115.043  BUFFER ZONES.



   The application of sewage sludge or bulk sewage sludge shall not be
done at an application site within one mile of any property owned by a school.



(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)



§ 115.044  PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCES.



   (A)   The operator shall operate the application site and perform
all applications in a manner to prevent public health nuisances, including
offensive odors.



   (B)   Upon the discovery of or upon notice from the city of the
existence of a public health nuisance, the operator shall immediately cease
further application until the condition is corrected.



   (C)   If an operator provides an Odor Control Plan to the regulatory
authority pursuant to Tex. Admin. Code Title 30, § 312.44(j)(4), the
operator shall provide a copy of the same to the Director.



(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)



§ 115.045  SOIL CONCENTRATION INFORMATION.



   (A)   The operator shall test the background soil concentration of
metals, nutrients, salinity, and PH at the application site no more than 30
days prior to the application of sewage sludge.



   (B)   The operator shall maintain the results of the test required
in division (A) of this section for five years after the application. The
operator shall provide a copy of the results of the test to the city upon the
city's request.



(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)



VARIANCE PROCEDURE



§ 115.060  REQUEST FOR VARIANCE.



   (A)   The City Council shall hear and render judgment on requests
for variances under this section.



   (B)   An operator that is informed by the Director that a planned
application is in violation of this chapter may appeal to the City Council
for a variance from the regulations in this chapter.



   (C)   To appeal to the City Council for a variance under this
section, an operator must file a request for variance with the City Secretary.



   (D)   In the request for variance, the operator shall set out the
conditions that justify the variance and that warrant a variance that will
not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations.



   (E)   The City Council may authorize a variance to any regulation
set forth in this chapter. In granting a variance under this chapter, the
City Council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or
desirable in the public interest. No variance shall be granted unless the
Council finds that all of the following conditions exist:



      (1)   That the use of the land in the vicinity will not be
adversely affected;



      (2)   That the persons who reside or work in the vicinity will
not be adversely affected;



      (3)   That any school related activities will not be adversely
affected; and



      (4)   That the granting of the variance will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience or welfare of the city.



   (F)   Such findings of the Council, together with the specific facts
upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official
minutes of the Council meeting at which such variance is granted. Variances
may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this chapter so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and
substantial justice done.



   (G)   The City Secretary shall provide a copy of a request for
variance filed under this section to the



Director. The Director shall submit to the City Council a copy of the
notification filed by the operator under this chapter, a copy of the
Director's written determination, and a letter containing all the specific
facts and pertinent data upon which the Director's decision was based and
setting out any conditions relevant to a determination of the effect of the
planned application on the public health, safety, convenience, or welfare in
the vicinity, and such documents shall be entered into the official minutes
of the Council meeting. The decision of the City Council relating to the
approval or disapproval of a variance shall be final.



(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)



§ 115.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   It is an offense for a person, firm, company, or corporation
to violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to comply with or resist the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   An offense under division (A) is a Class C Misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000 for each offense.



   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of the buffer
zone requirement in § 115.043 of this chapter if the defendant presents a
written determination from the Director stating that the application is in
compliance with the ordinances of the city.



   (D)   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter
if a defendant presents a variance from the City Council providing relief
from the requirement of this chapter for which the defendant is being
prosecuted.



(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   GENERAL OFFENSES




CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



General Provisions



   130.01   Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages in public
parks



   130.02   Unlawful conduct in public places



   130.03   Defacing, mutilating or injuring city property



   130.04   Discharging explosives



   130.05   Unauthorized display of block parent sign



   130.06   Interfering with police animals



   130.07   Noises disrupting the peace



   130.08   Urinating and defecating prohibited in certain locations



   130.09   Sexual offender:  residency restrictions



   130.10   Property owners prohibited from renting real property to
sexual offenders



   130.11   Notification of sex offenders residency



Advertising



   130.20   Putting up placards and the like in public places



   130.21   Banners and the like over public streets



   130.22   Obscene advertising and displays



Obscenity



   130.35   Definitions



   130.36   Application of provisions



   130.37   Commission of offense with knowledge



   130.38   Commission of offense in business establishment



Graffiti



   130.50   Definitions



   130.51   Placement of graffiti



   130.52   Failure to remove graffiti



   130.53   Issuance of citation



   130.54   Defense to prosecution



   130.55   Responsibility of parent or guardian for graffiti created
by a minor



 



   130.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 130.01  CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PARKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages
in any public park of the city, or for any person to possess any alcoholic
beverages with intent to consume such alcoholic beverages in any public park
in the city, unless the park area is leased to and operated by a private
entity.



('78 Code, § 4-1) (Ord. 109, passed 5-27-58; Ord. 500, passed 8-1-83; Am.
Ord. 1265, passed 7-13-99; Am. Ord. 1490, passed 7-26-04)  Penalty, see §
130.99



Cross reference:



   Parks and recreation, see Ch. 96



§ 130.02  UNLAWFUL CONDUCT IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any self-propelled vehicle of two or more
wheels, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks and motorcycles.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  For the purpose of preserving public peace,
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, the following are
deemed and hereby declared to a "public place:"



         (a)   The entire premises occupied by any commercial
establishment located in the city and customarily open to the public,
together with the means of ingress thereto and degree therefrom, parking or
storage areas, property appurtenant to the establishment and any buildings or
structures located on the premises.



         (b)   Any property in the city which is owned, used or
maintained by any governmental agency or authority.



('78 Code, § 11-1)



   (B)   Prohibited acts.  The following acts or conduct of any person
entering or on any public place are hereby declared to be unlawful and any
person found guilty of any such act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be fined as provided in § 130.99:



      (1)   To enter upon the premise of a public place in a motor
vehicle of any description and park the vehicle and leave the premises for a
period in excess of two hours without getting the consent of the owner,
operator or custodian of the public place, in which event the vehicle may be
impounded, subject to the usual impounding charges.



      (2)   On the premises of a public place, to race the motor of
any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any motor
vehicle, blow any horn of any motor vehicle or cause to be made any other
loud or unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbance whereby the quiet and good
order of the premises or the neighborhood are disturbed.



('78 Code, § 11-2)



(Ord. 255, passed 10-24-72) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  DEFACING, MUTILATING OR INJURING CITY PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate, deface or injure any
public building, fence, fountain or other kind of public property in the city
owned or controlled by the city.



('78 Code, § 11-3) (Ord. 175, passed 1-26-65) Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Criminal mischief, see Tex. Penal Code, § 28.03



§ 130.04  DISCHARGING EXPLOSIVES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any package or
container containing powder or other explosive or combustible material,
except in accordance with other ordinances of the city, and with the
permission of the governing body.



('78 Code, § 11-4) Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Possession of explosive weapons, see Tex. Penal Code, § 46.05



§ 130.05  UNAUTHORIZED DISPLAY OF BLOCK PARENT SIGN.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to display on or about
premises owned by or under the control of the person a "Block Parent" sign
without proper authorization.



   (B)   In this section, proper authorization means issuance of the
sign from the Parent Teacher Association Chairman of a City Independent
School District school without having the authorization revoked in writing by
the Chairman.



   (C)   In this section, block parent sign means a sign which purports
to be or is an imitation of or resembles the design, regardless of size or
color, set forth in Exhibit A which is available in the office of the City
Secretary.



('78 Code, § 11-51) (Ord. 887, passed 12-11-90) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  INTERFERING WITH POLICE ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly,
recklessly or with criminal negligence do the following:



   (A)   Interfere with a police service dog or police patrol horse by
blocking, tripping, holding, luring or otherwise obstructing or hindering
performance of tasks while the animal is under the supervision of a duly
authorized police officer in the performance of official duties.



   (B)   Harass, agitate or injure a police service dog or police
patrol horse by making physical contact, throwing objects, waving or making
loud noises of any sort, thereby causing the animal to bolt or otherwise
causing the animal's actions to be altered while the animal is under
performance of official duties.



('78 Code, § 11-61) (Ord. 888, passed 12-11-90) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.07  NOISES DISRUPTING THE PEACE.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to control noises and the
nuisance thereby created in such a manner as to cause the least hardship or
offense to the greatest number of people.



('78 Code, § 9-3)



   (B)   The following noises and other noises of the same
characteristics, intensity or annoyance shall be prohibited at all times and
at all places within the city, except as herein authorized.



      (1)   Horns, signaling devices and the like.  The sounding of
any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other
vehicle on any street or public place of the city except as a danger warning;
the creation by means of any signaling device of any unreasonably loud or
harsh sound; the sounding of any device for an unnecessary and unreasonable
period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand
or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by
engine exhaust; and the use of any signaling device when traffic is for any
reason held up.



      (2)   Radios, phonographs and the like.  The use or operation
of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine
or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to
disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any
time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the
person of normal hearing who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which the
machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto or
allowing the use or operation. The operation of any set, instrument,
phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
in a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the
building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section.



      (3)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising and the like. 
The use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for
the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the
public to any building, product, service, merchandise or political candidate
or allowing the use or operation, except as authorized by the City Council.



      (4)   Yelling, shouting and the like.  Yelling, shouting,
hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly, between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy
or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any
dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.



      (5)   Animals, birds and the like.  The keeping of any animal
or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the
comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.



      (6)   Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle
attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin
or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper
city authorities.



      (7)   Exhausts.  The discharge into the open air of the
exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.



      (8)   Defect in vehicle or load.  The use of any automobile,
motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to
create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises.



      (9)   Loading, unloading and opening boxes and the like.  The
creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or
unloading of any vehicle, or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes,
crates and containers on Sundays, Christmas, New Year's Day or Thanksgiving
or before 7:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m.; provided, however, that under
emergency conditions the City Manager may, in his/her discretion, grant
exceptions thereto.



      (10)   Adjacent to schools, courts, churches, hospitals and
the like.  The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school, institution of learning, church or court while the same is in use, or
adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of
the institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the
hospital, provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in the streets indicating
that the same is a school, hospital, church or court street.



      (11)   Hawkers, peddlers and the like.  The shouting or
crying of peddlers, hawkers or vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of
the neighborhood.



      (12)   Drums and the like.  The use of any drum or other
instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of
noise to any performance, show or sale.



      (13)   Firearms and fireworks.  The explosion of
firecrackers, skyrockets, Roman candles, pinwheels or any other form of
fireworks or the shooting of any firearms, air guns, pellet guns, BB guns or
any other type of firearms discharge except as specifically authorized by law
or the proper official.



      (14)   Transportation of metal rails, pillars and columns. 
The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other
material, over and along the streets and other public places upon carts,
drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises
or as to disturb the peace and quiet on or adjacent to the streets or other
public places.



      (15)   Operation of public transportation buses.  The
causing, permitting or continuing any  excessive, unnecessary and avoidable
noise in the operation of a public transportation bus.



      (16)   Pile drivers, hammers and the like.  The operation of
any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric
hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual
noise, except on written permission of the City Manager prescribing the
locality and the hours during which the operation is permissible.



      (17)   Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or
power fan, or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes
noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise
from the blower or fan is muffled and the engine is equipped with a muffler
device sufficient to deaden the noise.



      (18)   Air-conditioning units.  Self-contained, one-room
air-conditioning units, up to one-ton capacity attached to the outside walls
or windows of buildings within the city and operated for the comfort of the
occupants of the buildings shall not be deemed in violation of this section
where proof is established that the units are maintained in good mechanical
condition. Air-conditioning units of more than one-ton capacity may not be
operated within the city except where remote compressors are housed in
soundproof rooms or where attached or immediately adjoining compressors are
sound treated or baffled and cooling coil and condensation water is disposed
of as prescribed by the City Manager.



('78 Code, § 9-4) (Ord. 170, passed 7-28-64; Ord. 422, passed 8-11-80)
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.08  URINATING AND DEFECATING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS.



   (A)   Offense.  A person commits an offense if the person urinates
or defecates:



      (1)   On public property or in a public place, and is reckless
about whether another is present who will be offended or alarmed by the act,
unless the person is in an enclosed restroom or similar facility designed to
handle waste in a sanitary manner; or



      (2)   On private property that the person does not own, unless
the person has permission from the property owner, and is reckless about
whether another is present who will be offended or alarmed by the act; or



      (3)   On private property that the person owns, and is
reckless about whether another is present who will be offended or alarmed by
the act.



(Ord. 1451, passed 10-13-03)  Penalty, see § 130.99(B)



§ 130.09  SEXUAL OFFENDER:  RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Findings and intent.  That repeat sexual offenders, sexual
offenders that use physical violence and sexual offenders who prey on
children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public
safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to
repeat their offenses and most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have
many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a
fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender
victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant. It
is the intent of this section to serve the city's compelling interest to
promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly
congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual offenders and
sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent
residences.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PERMANENT RESIDENCE.  A place where the person abides, lodges or
resides for 14 or more consecutive days.



      SCHOOL.  Shall include any property owned by a school district
which has been designated, defined, platted or identified to the city as a
future site for any school.



      TEMPORARY RESIDENCE.  A place where the person abides, lodges or
resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar
year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the
person routinely abides, resides or lodges for a period of four or more
consecutive or non-consecutive days in any month and which is not the
person's permanent residence.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person who is required to register as a
sex offender under Ch. 62 of the Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, to
establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of a
public or private school, day care facility, playground, public or private
youth center, public swimming pool or video arcade facility, as those terms
are defined in Art. 481.134 of the Tex. Health and Safety Code.



   (D)   For the purpose of determining the minimum distance
separation, the measurement of the distance between the place of the person's
residence shall be:



      (1)   In a direct line from property line of the day care
facility, playground, public or private youth center, public swimming pool or
video arcade facility, to the property line of the person's residence; or



      (2)   In a direct line from the property line of the public or
private school to the property line of the person's residence, and in a
direct line across intersections; or



      (3)   If the person's residence is located on or above the
fifth story of a multi-story building, in a direct line from the property
line of the public or private school to the property line of the person's
residence, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the
building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the person's
residence is located.



   (E)   Exceptions.  A person residing within 1,000 feet of those
places identified in division (C) does not commit a violation of this section
if any of the following apply:



      (1)   The person established the permanent or temporary
residence and has complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the
state prior to the date of the adoption of this section;



      (2)   The person was a minor when he or she committed the
offense and was not convicted as an adult;



      (3)   The person is a minor; or



      (4)   The premises specified in division (C) was opened after
the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with
all sex offender registration laws of the state.



(Ord. 1688, passed 4-28-08)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.10  PROPERTY OWNERS PROHIBITED FROM RENTING REAL PROPERTY TO SEXUAL
OFFENDERS.



   (A)   It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part
thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, with the knowledge
that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any
person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary
residence pursuant to the terms of this section, if such place, structure or
part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, is located
within 1,000 feet of any public or private school, day care facility,
playground, public or private youth center, public swimming pool, or video
arcade facility, as those terms are defined in Art. 481.134 of the Tex.
Health and Safety Code.



   (B)   The determination of the distance between the residence
described in division (A) of this section and the public or private school,
day care facility, playground, public or private youth center, public
swimming pool or video arcade facility shall be the same as described in §
130.09(D) of this code.



(Ord. 1688, passed 4-28-08)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.11  NOTIFICATION OF SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY.



   Upon receipt of notice, that a person subject to registration as a sex
offender pursuant to the terms of this chapter will be establishing a place
of permanent residence within the city, the Police Department will take
reasonable steps to notify the community in the following manner:



   (A)   The Police Department may place information on the identity
and criminal history of the sex offender on the Police Department's internet
website to allow the public to readily secure information on the individual.
The website posting should identify the address where the individual will
reside and provide all information relating to his or her offense that is
available to the public as a matter of law.



   (B)   After the Police Department receives notice of the offender's
permanent residence designation, it will make reasonable efforts in order
that written notice identifying the registered offender, his or her criminal
history and his or her proposed permanent address is mailed to each address
the Department has, other than a post office box, within 1,000 feet of the
boundary of the property upon which the sex offender will reside.



   (C)   Written notice of a sex offender's permanent residence, as set
forth in division (B) above, shall be provided to the school district in
accordance with the law within which the sex offender's residence is located.
Notice to the school district may be provided in the same manner as notice to
adjoining residents and property owners as set forth division (B) above.



(Ord. 1688, passed 4-28-08)



ADVERTISING



§ 130.20  PUTTING UP PLACARDS AND THE LIKE IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fasten, tack, nail,
tie, glue, paste or maintain any placard, poster, banner or any other
material anywhere on the streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, signal light
posts or bases, street light posts or bases, telephone posts or electric
posts in the city or to cause the same to be done.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to any officer of the city, the
state or the United States who may place upon the objects, by tying with
strings or ties, any posters or placards in the interest of public health and
safety.



('78 Code, § 3-1) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.21  BANNERS AND THE LIKE OVER PUBLIC STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct, fasten, tie or
maintain any banners, streamers or other similar materials anywhere in the
city in a manner that the same shall be above, over and across any public
street within the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
charitable organizations or any person engaging in promoting a nonprofit
civic enterprise who has secured approval from the City Manager and has
furnished a bond indemnifying the city from any personal injury or property
damage which might result from the building, constructing, fastening, tying,
disconnecting or maintaining any banners, streamers or other similar material
above, over or across any public street within the city. Upon presenting to
the Chief of Police evidence of approval by the City Manager and evidence of
securing the bond as required above, the Chief of Police shall issue a permit
to the charitable organization or any person engaged in promoting a nonprofit
civic enterprise to engage in the activities otherwise herein prohibited.



('78 Code, § 3-2) Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross reference:



   Streets and sidewalks, see Ch. 98



§ 130.22  OBSCENE ADVERTISING AND DISPLAYS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint or have posted or
painted, or to display or distribute any bill, sign, bulletin, card or banner
containing pictures or illustrations or any other matter of an obscene or
immoral character at any point in the city where the same may be seen by
persons traversing any alley, street or public place.



('78 Code, § 3-3) Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Commercial obscenity, see Tex. Penal Code, § 43.23



OBSCENITY



§ 130.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMUNITY.  The area within the corporate limits of the city.



   MATERIAL.  Anything tangible that is capable of being used or adapted
to arouse interest, whether through the medium of reading, observation, sound
or in any other manner, but does not include an actual three dimensional
obscene device.



   OBSCENE.  Material or a performance that meets the following
conditions.



      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient
interest in sex.



      (2)   Depicts or describes the following:



         (a)   Patently offensive representations or descriptions
of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
heterosexual or homosexual, including sexual intercourse, sodomy and sexual
bestiality.



         (b)   Patently offensive representations or descriptions
of masturbation, excretory functions, sadism, masochism, lewd exhibitions of
genitals, the male or female genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal, covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state or a device
designed and marketed as useful primarily for stimulation of the human
genital organs.



      (3)   Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political and scientific value.



   OBSCENE DEVICE.  A device, including a dildo or artificial vagina
designed or marketed as useful primarily for the stimulation of human genital
organs.



   PATENTLY OFFENSIVE.  So offensive on its face as to affront current
community standards of decency.



   PERFORMANCE.  A play, motion picture, dance or other exhibition
performed before an audience.



('78 Code, § 11-36) (Ord. 484, passed 1-24-83)



Cross reference:



   Sexually-oriented businesses, see Ch. 112



§ 130.36  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.



   It is not innocent but calculated purveyance which is prohibited. This
subchapter shall not apply to persons who may possess or distribute obscene
matter or participate in conduct otherwise proscribed by this subchapter when
the possession, distribution or conduct occurs in the course of law
enforcement activities or in the course of bona fide scientific, educational
or comparable research or study or like circumstances of justification.



('78 Code, § 11-39) (Ord. 484, passed 1-24-83)



§ 130.37  COMMISSION OF OFFENSE WITH KNOWLEDGE.



   A person commits an offense, if he/she knowingly does any of the
following.



   (A)   He/she sells or possesses for sale any obscene material.



   (B)   He/she sells or possesses for sale any obscene device.



   (C)   He/she presents commercially an obscene performance or
participates in that portion of the performance that makes it obscene.



('78 Code, § 11-37) (Ord. 484, passed 1-24-83) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.38  COMMISSION OF OFFENSE IN BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT.



   A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to
persons under the age of 17 years, he/she displays or sells a book, pamphlet,
newspaper or magazine which depicts the following:



   (A)   Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy.



   (B)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breasts.



   (C)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
buttocks or that portion of the female breast under the top of the areola.



   (D)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether
covered or uncovered, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion
for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial
gain.



('78 Code, § 11-38) (Ord. 484, passed 1-24-83) Penalty, see § 130.99



GRAFFITI



§ 130.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GRAFFITI.  An unauthorized inscription, work, signature, symbol,
design, painting or other marking which is etched, written, painted, drawn,
sprayed or applied in any other way to a structure, building or property, or
to any portion or element thereof.



   GUARDIAN.  This term includes the following:



      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the
person of a minor.



      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been
placed by a court.



   MINOR.  Any person under 17 years of age.



   OWNER.  A person who owns or is in control of property.



   PARENT.  A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or
step-parent of another person.



   UNAUTHORIZED.  Without the permission of the owner of property.



('78 Code, § 11-70) (Ord. 1113, passed 3-11-96)



§ 130.51  PLACEMENT OF GRAFFITI.



   A person commits an offense if the person places graffiti on property.



('78 Code, § 11-71) (Ord. 1113, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.52  FAILURE TO REMOVE GRAFFITI.



   (A)   An owner of property commits an offense if the owner fails to
remove graffiti from the owner's property if the graffiti is visible from
public or private property, other than the property on which the graffiti
exists.



   (B)   Before an owner may be issued a citation for failure to remove
graffiti, the city must provide notice of the violation to the owner. Notice
may be given as follows:



      (1)   In writing personally delivered to the owner.



      (2)   By letter addressed to the owner's address as listed on
the most recent ad valorem tax rolls.



      (3)   By publication in an official newspaper or a newspaper
of general circulation in the city at least twice within ten consecutive days
if personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's address is unknown.



('78 Code, § 11-72) (Ord. 1113, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.53  ISSUANCE OF CITATION.



   The city may issue a citation for a violation of § 130.52(A) 21
calendar days after notice of the violation. Notice is deemed to have
occurred as follows:



   (A)   On the day notice is personally delivered to the owner.



   (B)   Three days after written notice was mailed to the owner.



   (C)   If notice is by publication, on the date that the second
notice is published.



('78 Code, § 11-73) (Ord. 1113, passed 3-11-96)



§ 130.54  DEFENSE TO PROSECUTION.



   It is a defense to prosecution under § 130.52(A) if the following
occur.



   (A)   No notice was served on the property owner in compliance with
§ 130.52(B).



   (B)   Before being issued a citation, the property owner gave the
city written authorization to allow persons to enter onto the property and
remove the graffiti pursuant to a volunteer or community service program
approved by the City Council in which the property owner is eligible to
participate.



('78 Code, § 11-74) (Ord. 1113, passed 3-11-96)



§ 130.55  RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN FOR GRAFFITI CREATED BY A
MINOR.



   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he/she knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to create graffiti on
property.



('78 Code, § 11-75) (Ord. 1113, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $500 for each
offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of § 130.08 shall be fined not more than $2,000 for each
offense.



(Ord. 1265, passed 7-13-99; Am. Ord. 1451, passed 10-13-03)



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS





         151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION





         152.   EROSION CONTROL





         153.   IMPACT FEES





         154.   SUBDIVISIONS





         155.   ZONING





         156.   PARK LAND DEDICATION AND DEVELOPMENT FEE




CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   150.001   Bond of permittee; collection of charges



   150.002   National Electrical Code adopted



   150.003   Electrical permits and licenses



   150.004   International Residential Code adopted



   150.005   International Energy Conservation Code adopted



   150.006   Building permit fees



   150.007   International Fuel Gas Code adopted



   150.008   International Building Code adopted



   150.009   International Mechanical Code adopted



   150.010   International Plumbing Code adopted



   150.011   Dangerous and substandard structures



   150.012   International Property Maintenance Code adopted



Construction Codes Board of Adjustments and Appeals



   150.020   Appointment



   150.021   Term of office



   150.022   Quorum



   150.023   Records



   150.024   Procedures and rules



   150.025   Authority of the Board to abate substandard buildings



   150.026   Appeals; time limit



   150.027   Variations and modifications



   150.028   Board decisions; procedure



   150.029   Liability



Moving of Buildings



   150.040   Permit required; fees



   150.041   Exceptions



   150.042   Permit application; plans



   150.043   Inspection before permit issuance



   150.044   Insurance and bond



   150.045   Permit to state condition of moving; expeditions operation



   150.046   Care in operation; revocation of permit



   150.047   Repair of damage



   150.048   Police approval; compliance with regulations



   150.049   Notice to Fire Department



   150.050   Violations



Asbestos Survey



   150.060   Definitions



   150.061   Issuance of permit



   150.062   Residential buildings



   150.063   Costs of survey



 



   150.099   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.001  BOND OF PERMITTEE; COLLECTION OF CHARGES.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation or other entity engaged in
services or contracting for services governed by the Plumbing Code shall be
issued a permit under this chapter until the person has made, executed and
delivered to the City Secretary a good and sufficient bond in an amount at
least equal to the sum shown on the contract for the work by the person, but
in no case for a sum less than $3,000 payable to the city, with corporate
surety authorized to do business in the state and conditioned for the
faithful performance of all work entered upon or contracted for, and in
strict accordance and compliance with the terms, requirements and provisions
of the Plumbing Code; and conditioned further that the person shall without
additional cost to the person for whom the work is done, remedy any defects
therein due to faulty workmanship or material. That the person shall
reconstruct or repair the work to the satisfaction of the Inspector within 72
hours after notice of the inspection and findings by him or her.



   (B)   Upon five days written notice to the principal of the bond and
to the City Secretary, the surety on the bond shall have the privilege of
canceling any such bond. Cancellation of any bond shall not cancel or reduce
the surety's liability on any transaction begun before 12:00 noon on the
effective date of a cancellation. The bond shall contain a provision stating
the substance of this requirement of notice of cancellation.



   (C)   The city may for itself, or for the use and benefit of any
person injured or damaged by reason of failure to repair any defective
installation, fitting or construction in connection therewith, or for failure
or refusal to pay any of the fees required by the plumbing code, maintain
suit on the bond, or suit may be maintained thereon by any person so injured.



   (D)   All bonds shall be for a period ending the next ensuing
December thirty-first, and should the coverage of any such bond be reduced by
recovery, or for any other reason, the surety on the bond shall immediately
notify the City Secretary. The principal will not be issued for any permit
provided for herein until the coverage of the bond is fully restored.



('78 Code, § 6-82) (Ord. 277, passed 5-14-74)



Statutory reference:



   Plumbing License Law, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6243-101



§ 150.002  NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   The 2005 Edition of the National Electrical Code is adopted as the
official electrical code of city.  This electrical code is fully
incorporated by reference as though copied into this chapter in its
entirety.  The material contained in the National Electrical Code shall not
be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances but shall be
maintained as a public record in the office of the City Secretary and will be
available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours.



('78 Code, § 6-50) (Ord. 251, passed 10-24-72; Ord. 491, passed 4-25-83;
Ord. 931, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 1174, passed 8-25-97; Am. Ord. 1379,
passed 12-10-01; Am. Ord. 1435, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1715-08, passed
10-27-08)



§ 150.003  ELECTRICAL PERMITS AND LICENSES.



   (A)   To whom permits may be issued.  As proof of the
qualifications of those electrical contractors and electricians engaging in
the electrical trade in the city, all work done in the city coming under the
Electrical Code shall be done by a person who holds an appropriate valid
Electrical Contractor's license and/or a Master Electrician's license duly
issued by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation. No permit shall
be issued to any person to do or cause to be done any work regulated by the
Code, except to a person holding a valid Master Electrician's License.



   (B)   Who may do the work.  Master and Journeyman Electricians
licensed by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation and registered
with the city.



      (1)   A Master Electrician may contract for and engage in the
business of installing, repairing or replacing electrical wiring or equipment
of any nature on or in buildings or structures. The Master Electrician may
employ and supervise Journeyman Electricians, helpers and apprentice
electricians.



      (2)   A Journeyman Electrician shall be able to perform any
type of electrical work under the supervision of a Master Electrician, but in
no case shall a Journeyman Electrician contract for or engage in the business
of electrical work of any nature. A Journeyman Electrician shall be able to
lay out work for and to supervise helper or apprentice electricians, but
shall not be able to employ same.



   (C)   Registration. Every person desiring to be registered by the
city to engage in the electrical business in a capacity for which a license
is required by the Code shall comply with the following: be the holder of a
valid State of Texas Electrical Contractor's license and Master Electrician's
license issued by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation.



   (D)   Registration fees. Fees for registration shall be in
accordance with the electrical permits and fees schedule set forth in the
development services permit fee schedule.



   (E)   Registration renewal. Electrical contractor registration shall
expire and be subject to renewal on the date of state license expiration.



('78 Code, § 6-54) (Ord. 251, passed 10-24-72; Ord. 931, passed 3-23-92; Am.
Ord. 1174, passed 8-25-97; Am. Ord. OR-1714-08, passed 10-27-08)



§ 150.004  INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED.



   The 2006 Edition of the International Residential Code and Appendices
G, H, and J are adopted as the official residential building code for the
city. This residential code is fully incorporated by reference as though
copied into this chapter in its entirety. The material contained in the
International Residential Code shall not be included in the formal municipal
codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the
office of the City Secretary and will be available for public inspection and
copying during regular business hours.



(Ord. 1379, passed 12-10-01; Am. Ord. 1436, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord.
OR-1722-08, passed 10-27-08)



§ 150.005  INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED.



   The 2009 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code is
adopted as the official energy conservation code of the city. This energy
conservation code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into
this chapter in its entirety. The material contained in the International
Energy Conservation Code shall not be included in the formal municipal
codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the
office of the City Secretary and will be available for public inspection and
copying during regular business hours.



(Ord. 1379, passed 12-10-01; Am. Ord. OR-1716-08, passed 10-27-08; Am. Ord.
OR-1804-11, passed 4-11-11)



§ 150.006  BUILDING PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Building permits (new structures).



 


Occupancy Classification

 

Permit Fee*



New single-family residence, duplex, townhouse and additions to existing
structures
 

$0.40/sq. foot



New apartments or additions to existing apartments (includes triplex and
quadruplex)
 

$0.30/sq. foot



New industrial structures or additions to existing industrial structures
(manufacturing plant, warehouse, and the like)
 

$0.20/sq. foot



New commercial or additions to existing commercial structures (office,
restaurant, store, school, church, and the like)
 

$0.35/sq. foot



Notes to table:


* Permit fees figured by the square foot shall include the entire square
footage of the structure under roof.



 



   (B)   Building permits (existing structures with no area increase). 



 


Total valuation

 

Fee*






$1 to $500

 
$30



$501 to $2,000

 
$30 for the first $500 plus $4 for each additional $100, or fraction thereof,
to and including $2,000



$2,001 to $25,000

 
$90 for the first $2,000 plus $20 for each additional $1,000, or fraction
thereof, to and including $25,000



$25,001 to $50,000

 
$550 for the first $25,000 plus $15 for each additional $1,000, or fraction
thereof, to and including $50,000



$50,001 to $100,000

 
$925 for the first $50,000 plus $10 for each additional $1,000, or fraction
thereof, to and including $100,000



$100,001 to $500,000

 
$1,425 for the first $100,000 plus $8 for each additional $1,000, or fraction
thereof, to and including $500,000



$500,001 to $1,000,000

 
$4,625 for the first $500,000 plus $6.65 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000




 

$1,000,001 and up
 
$7,950 for the first $1,000,000 plus $5 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof


Notes to table:


* Fees listed are for alterations, repairs or interior finishouts of existing
commercial, industrial and residential structures (where no additional area
has been added to the existing structure).  The value to be used in
computing this fee shall be the total value of all construction work for
which the permit is issued as well as all finish work, painting, roofing,
electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and any other permanent
equipment.



 



   (C)   Miscellaneous building permits and fees.



 


Permit Type

 

Fee





Detached garage or one-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and
storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses built on a permanent foundation
 

$0.30 per square foot/minimum $20



One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds,
playhouses and similar uses not built on a permanent foundation
 

$30 each



One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds,
playhouses and similar uses not built on a permanent foundation and the floor
area does not exceed 120 sq. feet (must meet zoning setbacks)
 

No permit required



Constructed trailer
 

$40 each



Premanufactured house
 

$300 each



Building permit for structure being moved into city (includes building permit
fee)
 

$300 each



Patio covers and carports
 

$30 each



Swimming pools and spas
 

$200 each



Above ground swimming pools and spas with a capacity in excess of 5,000
gallons
 

$60 each



Swimming pool and spas with a capacity that does not exceed 5,000 gallons
 

No permit required





 


Permit Type

 

Fee





Fence permits for fences over 6 feet high
 

$25 each



Screening walls for subdivisions
 

$100 each



Drive approach
 

$60 each



Demolition
 

$100 each



Inspection outside of normal business hours
 

$40 per hour (Minimum charge of two hours)



Reinspection fees, assessed under provisions of Section 109.7, 2000 IBC and
Section R109.5, 2000 IRC
 

1st - $50, 2nd - $75, 3rd and subsequent - $100 each



Work commencing before permit issuance, assessed under provisions of Section
108.4, 2000 IBC and Section R108.6, 2000 IRC
 

100% of original permit fee in addition to regular permit fee



Inspections, for which no fee is specifically indicated
 

$30 per hour (Minimum charge of one hour)



Plan Review fee (to be credited towards final building permit fee)
Non-refundable should permit be denied or cancelled by builder
 

$100 any new SFR
$200 any new non-SFR
(Does not apply to finish-outs, room additions, and the like)



Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to improve
plans
 

$45 per hour (Minimum charge of one hour)





 



   (D)   Miscellaneous permits and fees.



 


Permit type

 

Fee



Tent permit
 

$60 each



Carnival, temporary amusement
 

$300 plus $600 deposit for cleanup



Certificate of occupancy of business license in connection with changes in
ownership or use of existing structure which does not require a building
permit
 

$60 each



Garage sale permit
 

$5




 



   (E)   Sign permits.



 


Permit type

 

Fee





Wall signs
 

$40 each



Pole, ground and all other signs not classified as wall signs
 

$80 each



Temporary and portable signs
 

$40 each



Development and advertising signs
 

$140 each



Special event displays
 

$40 each



Banners
 

$70 each year



Directional (builders) signs
 

$5 each year





 



   (F)   Mechanical permits and fees.



 


New SFR and Multi-Family Dwellings




Permit type

 

Fee



0 to 1,500 s.f.
 

$70



1,501 to 2,500 s.f.
 

$80



2,501 to 3,500 s.f.
 

$90



3,501 to 5,000 s.f.
 

$100



5,001 s.f. or larger
 

$110




 



 


New Commercial or Addition, Alteration or Repair to Commercial or Residential




Permit type

 

Fee





Mechanical contractor annual registration
 

$100



Permit issuance fee
 

$30



Complete HVAC system new or replacement (Furnace, condensing unit, etc.)
 

First unit - $50




Each additional - $25



Individual Unit/Appliance (Unit heater, air handler, etc.)
 

First unit - $30




Each additional - $15





 



 


New Commercial or Addition, Alteration or Repair to Commercial or Residential




Permit type

 

Fee





Boilers
 

First unit - $40




Each additional - $20



Repair, alteration or addition to heating and/or cooling appliances
 

$15



Miscellaneous item (not listed above)
 

$15



Reinspection fees, assessed under provisions of Section 107.2.3, 2000 IMC and
Section R109.5, 2000 IRC
 

1st - $50, 2nd - $75, 3rd and subsequent - $100 each



Work commencing before permit issuance, assessed under provisions of Section
106.5.1, 2000 IMC and Section R108.6, 2000 IRC
 

100% of original permit fee in addition to regular permit fee





 



   (G)   Electrical permits and fees.



 


New SFR and Multi-Family Dwellings



$0.06 per s.f. (under roof) + add $20 for a T-pole permit (if purchased at
the same time)


Example: for a 2,000 s.f. structure (including T-pole permit) = $140


2,000 s.f. x $0.06 = $120 + $20 (T-pole permit) = $140



 



 


New Commercial or Addition, Alteration or Repair to Commercial or Residential




Permit type

 

Fee





Electrical contractor annual registration
 

$100



Permit issuance fee
 

$30



Outlets (receptacles/switches)
 

$0.60



Lighting fixtures
 

$0.60



Swimming pool
 

$40



Temporary power pole
 

$20



Motors
 

First motor - $30




Each additional - $15





 



 


New Commercial or Addition, Alteration or Repair to Commercial or Residential




Permit type

 

Fee





Services - 600 volts or less (to 200 Amps)
 

$25



Services - 600 volts or less (over 200 Amps to 1,000 Amps)
 

$50



Services - Over 600 volts (over 1,000 Amps)
 

$100



Sign circuit
 

$18



Miscellaneous item (not listed above)
 

$12



Reinspection fees, assessed under provisions of Section 109.7, 2000 IBC and
Section R109.5, 2000 IRC
 

1st - $50, 2nd - $75, 3rd and subsequent - $100 each



Work commencing before permit issuance, assessed under provisions of Section
108.4, 2000 IBC and Section R108.6, 2000 IRC
 

100% of original permit fee in addition to regular permit fee





 



   (H)   Plumbing permits and fees.



 


New SFR and Multi-Family Dwellings




Permit type

 

Fee



0 to 1,500 s.f.
 

$100



1,501 to 2,500 s.f.
 

$110



2,501 to 3,500 s.f.
 

$120



3,501 to 5,000 s.f.
 

$130



5,001 s.f. or larger
 

$140




 



 


New Commercial or Addition, Alteration or Repair to Commercial or Residential




Permit type

 

Fee



Plumbing contractor annual registration (includes licensed plumbers,
irrigators and backflow testers)
 

$100



Permit issuance fee
 

$30




 



 


New Commercial or Addition, Alteration or Repair to Commercial or Residential




Permit type

 

Fee





Each plumbing fixture
 

$7



Repair or alteration of drainage or vent piping (each fixture)
 

$7



Building sewer
 

$7



Interceptor/separator (grease, oil, sand, etc.)
 

$7



Water heater and/or vent
 

$7



Water piping (installation or repair)
 

$7



Lawn sprinkler system (including backflow protection)
 

$10



Backflow protection device
 

$7



Pool/hot tub/spa/jacuzzi (water and/or sewer connection)
 

$14



Gas line
 

$7



Gas outlet
 

$2



Miscellaneous item (not listed above)
 

$7



Reinspection fees, assessed under provisions of Section 107.3.3, 2000 IPC,
Section 107.2.3, 2000 IFGC and Section R109.5, 2000 IRC
 

1st - $50, 2nd - $75, 3rd and subsequent - $100 each



Work commencing before permit issuance, assessed under provisions of Section
106.6.1, 2000 IPC, Section 106.5.1, 2000 IFGC and Section R108.6, 2000 IRC
 

100% of original permit fee in addition to regular permit fee





 



(Ord. 1281, passed 9-27-99; Am. Ord. 1437, passed 6-23-03)



§ 150.007  INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED.



   The 2006 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code is adopted as the
official fuel gas code of the city.  This fuel gas code is fully
incorporated by reference as though copied into this section in its
entirety.  The material contained in the International Fuel Gas Code shall
not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances but shall
be maintained as a public record in the office of the City Secretary and will
be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours.



(Ord. 1434, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1718-08, passed 10-27-08)



§ 150.008  INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   The 2006 Edition of the International Building Code and Appendices C,
E, F and I are adopted as the official building code of the city.  This
building code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this
section in its entirety.  The material contained in the International
Building Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of
ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the
City Secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during
regular business hours.



(Ord. 1431, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1713-08, passed 10-27-08)



§ 150.009  INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   The 2006 Edition of the International Mechanical Code and Appendix A
are adopted as the official mechanical code of the city.  This mechanical
code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this section in
its entirety.  The material contained in the International Mechanical Code
shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances but
shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the City Secretary
and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular
business hours.



(Ord. 1433, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1719-08, passed 10-27-08)



§ 150.010  INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.



   The 2006 Edition of the International Plumbing Code and Appendices E,
F, and G are adopted as the official plumbing code of the city.  This
plumbing code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this
section in its entirety.  The material contained in the International
Plumbing Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of
ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the
City Secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during
regular business hours.



(Ord. 1432, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord.



(OR-1720-08, passed 10-27-08)



§ 150.011  DANGEROUS AND SUBSTANDARD STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Purpose and scope.



      (1)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide a
just, equitable and practical method, to be cumulative with and in addition
to any other remedy provided by the building code, electric code, fire code,
residential code, mechanical code, plumbing code, maintenance code, other
ordinances and regulations of the city, Texas Local Government Code, Ch. 214,
or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings, as defined herein, which
from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or
welfare of the general public, or their occupants, and may be required to be
repaired, vacated, demolished, removed or secured. The purpose of this
section is also to provide minimum standards for the continued use and
occupancy of all structures to safeguard life, limb, health, property and
public welfare.



      (2)   Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to all
buildings which are hereinafter defined as dangerous or substandard
buildings, whether now in existence or whether they may hereafter become
dangerous.



      (3)   Designation.  The regulations set forth in this section
may be referred to as the city substandard building ordinance.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      (1)   BOARD.  The Board of Adjustment and Appeals as
authorized to implement the substandard building ordinance by § 150.025 of
this code, as amended.



      (2)   BUILDING.  Any building, fence, awning, canopy, sign,
shed, garage, house, tent or other structure whatsoever, or any portion
thereof. The enumeration of specific types of structures shall not be deemed
to exclude other types of structures to which the sense and meaning of the
provisions hereof in context reasonably have application.



      (3)   BUILDING CODE. The International Building Code as
adopted and amended by the city.



      (4)   BUILDING OFFICIAL.  The person designated by the City
Manager to enforce this section.



      (5)   COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Mansfield,
Texas.



      (6)   ELECTRIC CODE.  The National Electrical Code as adopted
and amended by the city.



      (7)   FIRE CODE.  The International Fire Code as adopted and
amended by the city.



      (8)   MAINTENANCE CODE.  The International Property
Maintenance Code as adopted and amended by the city.



      (9)   MECHANICAL CODE.  The International Mechanical Code as
adopted and amended by the city.



      (10)   PLUMBING CODE.  The International Plumbing Code as
adopted and amended by the city.



      (11)   RESIDENTIAL CODE.  The International Residential Code
as adopted and amended by the city.



   (C)   Enforcement.



      (1)   General.



         (a)   Administration. The Building Official is hereby
authorized to enforce the provisions of this section. The Building Official
shall have the power to render interpretations of this section, and to adopt
and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the
application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations
shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this § 150.011.



         (b)   Inspections. The Building Official and the Fire
Marshal, or their designees, are hereby authorized to make such inspections
and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this §
150.011.



         (c)   Right of entry. When it is necessary to make an
inspection to enforce the provisions of this section, or when the Building
Official, or his or her designee, has a reasonable cause to believe that
there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition contrary to or in
violation of this section that makes it unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the
Building Official, or his or her designee, may enter the building or premises
at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this section;
provided that, if such building or premises is occupied, that credentials
shall be presented to the occupant and entry shall be requested. If the
building or premises be unoccupied, the Building Official, or his or her
designee, shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
person having charge or control of the building or premises, and shall then
request entry. If entry is refused, the Building Official shall have recourse
to the remedies provided by law to secure entry, including, but not limited
to, obtaining an administrative search warrant.



      (2)   Abatement of dangerous or substandard buildings.  All
buildings, or portions thereof, determined after inspection by the Building
Official to be dangerous or substandard, as defined by this section, are
hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
vacation, demolition, removal or securing in accordance with the procedures
specified in this section.



      (3)   Unlawful to violate section. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, or use, occupy or
maintain any building that is deemed herein to be a nuisance or cause or
permit the same to be done in violation of this § 150.011.



      (4)   Inspection authorized. All buildings within the scope of
this section and all construction or work for which a permit is required
shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official.



   (D)   Substandard building declared.



      (1)   For the purposes of this section, any building,
regardless of the date of its construction, having any or all of the
conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a
substandard building, and a nuisance:



         (a)   Whenever any building is dilapidated,
deteriorated, decayed or damaged to the extent that it is unfit for human
habitation and a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare, in the
opinion of the Building Official.



         (b)   Whenever any building, regardless of its
structural condition, is unoccupied by its owners, lessees or other invitees
and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be
entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of
harborage or could be entered or used by children.



         (c)   Whenever any building is boarded up, fenced or
otherwise secured in any manner if:



            1.   The building constitutes a danger to the
public even though secured from entry; or



            2.   The means used to secure the building are
inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the building in the manner
described by paragraph (l)(b) of this division.



         (d)   Whenever any building, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of
sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas
connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Marshal to be a fire hazard.



         (e)   Whenever any building is in such a condition as to
make a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence.



         (f)   Whenever any portion of a building remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building.



         (g)   Whenever any building is abandoned so as to
constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard
to the public.



         (h)   Whenever any building is defined as substandard by
any provision of the building code, maintenance code, electric code, fire
code, plumbing code, mechanical code, residential code, or other ordinance or
regulation of the city, or constructed and still existing in violation of any
provision of any of these codes of the city, to the extent that the life,
health or safety of the public or any occupant is endangered.



         (i)   Whenever a fence or any portion thereof is leaning
by ten degrees or more beyond plumb, or have 10% or more of its pickets
missing, it shall be considered structurally unsafe and a hazard to safety,
health, or public welfare; and if 25% of an existing picket is rotten,
missing, or decayed, it shall be considered missing.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, any building,
regardless of the date of its construction, which has any or all of the
conditions or defects hereinafter described, to an extent that it endangers
the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public, or the
occupants thereof, shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a dangerous
and substandard building, and a nuisance:



         (a)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or
other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged
as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.



         (b)   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle,
passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn
or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case
of fire or panic.



         (c)   Whenever the stress in any materials, or members
or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one
half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for
new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.



         (d)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by
fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that
the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was
before such catastrophe, and is less than the minimum requirements of the
building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.



         (e)   Whenever any portion, member or appurtenance
thereof is likely to fail, to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse,
and thereby injure persons or damage property.



         (f)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof, is not of sufficient
strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place
so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one half of that
specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure,
purpose or location, without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the
building code for such buildings.



         (g)   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped,
buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions
have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in
the case of similar new construction.



         (h)   Whenever the building, or any portion thereof,
because of: 1. dilapidation, deterioration or decay; 2. faulty construction;
3. the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground
necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; 4. the deterioration,
decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or 5. any other cause, is likely to
partially or completely collapse.



         (i)   Whenever, for any reason, the building, or any
portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being
used.



         (j)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical
structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line
passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one
third of the base.



         (k)   Whenever the building, exclusive of the
foundation, shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting
member or members, or 50% or more damage or deterioration of its
non-supporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.



         (l)   Whenever the building has been so damaged by fire,
wind, earthquake, flood or other causes, or has become so dilapidated or
deteriorated as to become:



            1.   An attractive nuisance to children; or



            2.   A harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral
persons.



         (m)   Whenever any building has been constructed, exists
or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition
applicable to such building provided by the building regulations of this
jurisdiction, as specified in the building code, electric code, fire code,
residential code, mechanical code, plumbing code, maintenance code, or of any
law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition,
location or structure of buildings.



         (n)   Whenever any building which, whether or not
erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any
non-supporting part, member or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting
part, member or portion less than 66%, of the: 1. strength; 2. fire-resisting
qualities or characteristics; or 3. weather-resisting qualities or
characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building
of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.



         (o)   Whenever a building, used or intended to be used
for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,
decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or
sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the Building Official
to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a condition that is
likely to cause sickness or disease, including, but not limited to, the
following:



            1.   Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory,
bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit or lodging house.



            2.   Lack of, or improper water closets,
lavatories and bathtubs or showers per number of guests in a hotel.



            3.   Lack of, or improper kitchen sink in a
dwelling unit.



            4.   Lack of hot and cold running water to
plumbing fixtures in a hotel.



            5.   Lack of hot and cold running water to
plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit or lodging house.



            6.   Lack of adequate heating facilities.



            7.   Lack of, or improper operation of, required
ventilating equipment.



            8.   Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and
ventilation required by this section or the building code, electric code,
fire code, residential code, mechanical code, plumbing code, maintenance
code, or other ordinance or regulation of the city.



            9.   Room and space dimensions less than required
by this section or the building code, electric code, fire code, residential
code, mechanical code, plumbing code, maintenance code, or other ordinance or
regulation of the city.



            10.   Lack of required electrical lighting.



            11.   Dampness of habitable rooms.



            12.   Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents.



            13.   General dilapidation or improper maintenance.



            14.   Lack of connection to required sewage
disposal system.



            15.   Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage
and removal facilities.



         (p)   Whenever any building contains structural hazards,
including but not limited to, the following:



            1.   Deteriorated or inadequate foundations.



            2.   Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor
supports.



            3.   Flooring or floor supports of insufficient
size to carry imposed loads with safety.



            4.   Members of walls, partitions or other
vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material
or deterioration.



            5.   Members of walls, partitions or other
vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with
safety.



            6.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof
supports, or other horizontal members that sag, split or buckle due to
defective material or deterioration.



            7.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof
supports, or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry
imposed loads with safety.



            8.   Fireplaces or chimneys that list, bulge or
settle due to defective material or deterioration.



            9.   Fireplaces or chimneys that are of
insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety.



         (q)   Whenever any building is constructed or existing
in violation of the building code, fire code, plumbing code, mechanical code,
electric code, residential code, maintenance code, or other ordinance or
regulation of the city, or is defined as a dangerous building by any
provision of the codes of the city, or is constructed and still existing in
violation of any provision of any of the codes of the city to the extent that
the life, health or safety of the public or any occupant is endangered.



   (E)   Determination by Building Official. When the Building Official
has inspected, or caused to be inspected, any building and has found and
determined that it is substandard, the Building Official may take any or all
of the following actions, as he or she deems appropriate:



      (1)   Issue notice to the record owner that the building is
substandard and must be repaired or demolished; or



      (2)   Issue citation(s) for violation(s) of this section; or



      (3)   Secure the building if permitted by division (L)(l) of
this section; or



      (4)   Recommend to the Board that abatement proceedings be
commenced pursuant to division (F) of section.



   (F)   Public hearing for abatement of substandard buildings.



      (1)   Commencement of proceedings.  When the Building
Official has found and determined that a building is a substandard building,
the Building Official shall commence proceedings to cause the repair,
vacation and relocation of occupants, and the removal, demolition or securing
of the building.



      (2)   Public hearing to be held.  Except when the Council or
the Building Official finds that a building is likely to immediately endanger
persons or property, a public hearing before the Board shall be held to
determine whether a building complies with the standards set out in division
(D) of this section. If the Council or Building Official determines that the
building constitutes an immediate danger, the procedures set forth in
division (L) of this section shall be followed.



      (3)   Notice.  Not less than ten days prior to the date on
which the hearing is set, the Building Official shall issue a notice of the
public hearing, directed to the record owner of the building, and to all
mortgagees and lienholders. The city shall make diligent efforts to determine
the identity and address of any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the
building through searching the county real property records of the county in
which the building is located; appraisal district records of the appraisal
district in which the building is located; records of the Secretary of State;
assumed name records of the county in which the building is located; tax
records of the city; and utility records of the city. The notice shall
contain:



         (a)   The name and address of the record owner;



         (b)   The street address or legal description sufficient
for identification of the premises upon which the building is located;



         (c)   A statement that the Building Official has found
the building to be substandard or dangerous, with a brief and concise
description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous or
substandard under the provisions of division (D) of this section;



         (d)   A statement that the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any
work that may be required to comply with the section, and the time it will
take to reasonably perform the work;



         (e)   Notice of the time and place of the public
hearing; and



         (f)   A statement that, if the building is found to be
in violation of this section, the Council may order that the building be
vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished within a reasonable time.



      (4)   Additional notice of public hearing. Prior to the public
hearing, the city may file a copy of the notice mailed pursuant to division
(F)(3) in the official public records of real property in the county in which
the property is located. If such notice is not filed of record, each
identified mortgagee and lienholder must be notified of any abatement order
issued by the Board at the public hearing, prior to any remedial action by
the city.



      (5)   Burden of proof.  At the public hearing, the owner,
lienholder or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of
any work that may be required to comply with this section, and the time it
will take to reasonably perform the work.



      (6)   Conduct of public hearing. At the public hearing, the
owner of the building, and all other interested persons may make their
appearance and be heard. Any evidence may be received and considered by the
Board. The hearing may be adjourned from day to day or continued upon a
majority vote of the Board, in compliance with the Open Meetings Act.



   (G)   Order of Board regarding substandard building.



      (1)   Findings of the Board. If the Board, by a majority vote,
finds upon evidence presented at the public hearing that the building is in
violation of standards set out in division (D) of this section, the Board may
order that the building be repaired, vacated, secured, removed or demolished,
or its occupants be relocated, by the owner, mortgagee or lienholder within a
reasonable time as provided herein.



      (2)   Time allowed to complete work.



         (a)   The order must require the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee of the building to, within 30 days:



            1.   Secure the building from unauthorized entry;
and/or



            2.   Repair, remove or demolish the building
unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work
cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days.



         (b)   If the Board allows the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove or demolish the building, the
Board shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and
performance of the work, and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee
to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while
the work is being performed, as determined by the Board.



         (c)   The Board may not allow the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove or demolish the building, or
fully perform all work required to comply with the order, unless the owner
lienholder or mortgagee:



            1.   Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for
the work at the hearing; and



            2.   Establishes at the hearing that the work
cannot be reasonably completed within 90 days because of the scope and
complexity of the work.



         (d)   If the Board allows the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part of the work required to
repair, remove or demolish the building, the Board shall require the owner,
lienholder or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the Building
Official to demonstrate that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has complied
with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the
work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee appear
before the Board or the Building Official to demonstrate compliance with the
time schedules.



      (3)   Contents of order.  The order of the Board must
contain, at minimum:



         (a)   An identification, which is not required to be a
legal description, of the building and the property on which it is located;
and



         (b)   A description of the violation of minimum
standards present in the building; and



         (c)   A description of the ordered actions, including a
statement that the owner may repair, if feasible, or demolish or remove at
his or her option; and



         (d)   A statement that the city will vacate, secure,
remove or demolish the building, or relocate the occupants of the building,
if the ordered action is not taken within the time allowed, and charge the
cost to the property; and



         (e)   If the Board has determined that the building will
endanger persons or property and that the building is a dwelling with ten or
fewer dwelling units, a statement that the city may repair the building and
charge the costs to the property if the ordered action is not taken within
the time allowed.



   (H)   Notice of order of the board.



      (1)   Order shall be mailed. After the public hearing, the
Building Official shall promptly mail, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a copy of the order to the record owner of the building, and each
identified lienholder and mortgagee of the building.



      (2)   Order shall be filed with City Secretary.  Within ten
days after the date that the order is issued by the Board, the Building
Official shall file a copy of the order in the office of the City Secretary.



      (3)   Order shall be published. Within ten days after the date
the order is issued by the Council, the Building Official shall publish, in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city, a notice containing:



         (a)   The street address or legal description of the
property; and



         (b)   The date the hearing was held; and



         (c)   A brief statement indicating the results of the
order; and



         (d)   Instructions stating where a complete copy of the
order may be obtained.



      (4)   The order may be filed in the official public records of
real property in the county in which the property is located.



   (I)   Enforcement of the order of the Board.



      (1)   If order not complied with, the city may take action. 
If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished
within the time specified by the order, the city may vacate, secure, repair,
remove or demolish the building, or relocate the occupants at its own
expense, provided however:



         (a)   The city may not act to remove or demolish a
building until after the Board has found:



            1.   That such defects or conditions exist to the
extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the building are endangered; and



            2.   The building is infeasible of repair; or



            3.   There is no reasonable probability that the
building will be repaired within a reasonable period of time if additional
time is given.



         (b)   The city may only repair a building, as provided
herein, to the extent necessary to correct the conditions which render the
building dangerous, and may not act to repair a building unless:



            1.   The Board has made a determination that the
building is likely to endanger person or property; and



            2.   The building is a residential dwelling with
ten or fewer dwelling units.



            3.   In the event there are mortgagors or
lienholders, the city may only repair, remove or demolish the building after
allowing the lienholder or mortgagee an additional 30 days, after the time
prescribed in the order has expired, to complete the required work.



      (2)   Posting of notice to vacate building. If the order
requires vacation or if compliance is not had with the order within the time
specified therein, the Building Official is authorized to require that the
building be vacated. Notice to vacate shall be mailed by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the occupant(s) of the building, shall be posted
at or upon each entrance to the building, and shall be in substantially the
following form:




“SUBSTANDARD BUILDING





DO NOT ENTER





UNSAFE TO OCCUPY





It is a misdemeanor to occupy this





building or to remove or deface this notice.





___________________________________





Building Official





City of Mansfield"




      (3)   Remedial action by city.  Any repair or demolition
work, or securing of the building shall be accomplished and the cost thereof
paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided. Any surplus realized
from the sale of the building, or from its demolition, over and above the
cost of demolition and cleaning of the lot, shall be paid over to the person
or persons lawfully entitled thereto.



      (4)   Failure to obey order.  Any person to whom an order
pursuant to division (G) of this section is directed who fails, neglects or
refuses to comply with the order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
prosecuted in municipal court, in addition to any other remedies available to
the city provided herein.



      (5)   Interference prohibited.  No person shall obstruct,
impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized
representative of the city, or with any person who owns or holds any estate
or interest in the building that has been ordered repaired, vacated,
demolished, removed or secured under the provisions of this section; or with
any person to whom the building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the
provisions of this section, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or
authorized representative of the city, person having an interest or estate in
the building, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and
repairing, or demolishing, removing or securing any such building pursuant to
the provision of this section, or in performing any necessary act preliminary
to or incidental to such work authorized or directed pursuant to this section.



      (6)   Permit required. Any work of closure, repair, removal or
demolition by the property owner, any lienholder or mortgagee, or their
agents, must be performed pursuant to valid, unexpired permits issued by the
city. All permits issued pursuant to an order of the Board shall expire upon
expiration of the time for compliance set forth in the order.



   (J)   Performance of work by the city.



      (1)   Procedure.  When any work of repair, removal,
demolition or securing is to be performed by the city pursuant to the
provisions of any order of the Board, the work may be accomplished by city
personnel or by private contract as may be deemed necessary. Rubble and
debris shall be removed from any premises and the lot cleaned if removal or
demolition is ordered. The building or building materials may be sold if
removal or demolition is ordered, and the proceeds shall be used to offset
other costs of the work.



      (2)   Costs. The cost of such work shall be paid from city
funds and shall constitute a special assessment and a lien against such
property to secure payment thereof, together with 10% interest on such amount
from the date on which the work is performed.



      (3)   Repair to minimum standards only.  The city may repair
the building at its own expense, and assess the expenses on the land on which
the building stands or to which it is attached, only to the extent necessary
to bring the building into compliance with minimum standards.



   (K)   Recovery of cost of securing, repair, removal or demolition.



      (1)   Itemized account and notice of lien. The Building
Official shall keep an itemized account of the expenses incurred by the city
in the securing, repair, removal or demolition of any building pursuant to
this section. Upon completion of the work, the Building Official shall
prepare and file with the City Secretary a sworn account and notice of lien,
containing the following information:



         (a)   The name and address of the owner if that
information can be determined with a reasonable effort;



         (b)   A legal description of the real property on which
the building is or was located;



         (c)   The type of work performed; and



         (d)   The amount of expenses incurred by the city in
performing the work and the balance due.



      (2)   Notice filed in county records. The City Secretary shall
file the notice of lien, along with a copy of the order of abatement issued
by the Council, in the deed records of the county in which the premises are
located.



      (3)   Personal obligation of property owner. The expenses
incurred by the city, as set forth in the sworn account of the Building
Official, shall be a personal obligation of the property owner, in addition
to a priority lien upon the property. The City Attorney may bring an action
in any court of proper jurisdiction against the property owner to recover the
costs incurred by the city.



      (4)   Lien shall be valid and privileged. Upon filing of the
notice of lien in the deed records of Tarrant, Ellis, or Johnson County,
Texas, as applicable, the lien shall be valid against the property so
assessed. The lien shall be privileged and subordinate only to tax liens and
existing special assessment liens, and shall be paramount to all other liens.
The lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest due and payable
thereon has been paid.



      (5)   Assessment must be paid. No utility service, building
permit or certificate of occupancy shall be allowed on any such property
until the assessment is paid and the lien is released by the city.



      (6)   Release of lien. After the expenses incurred by the
city, as set forth in the sworn account of the Building Official, have been
fully paid with interest of 10% per annum from the date the work was
performed, the Building Official shall execute a release of lien, which shall
be filed in the deed records of Tarrant, Ellis, or Johnson County, Texas, as
applicable.



   (L)   Additional authority to secure certain substandard buildings
prior to public hearing and secure, demolish, repair or remove certain
dangerous buildings.



      (1)   Securing of unoccupied, substandard building.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the city may secure a
building if the Building Official determines that the building:



         (a)   Violates the minimum standards set forth in
division (D) of this section; and



         (b)   Is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who
do not have the right of possession to the building.



      (2)   If building creates immediate danger.  Notwithstanding
any other provisions of this section, if it finds that a building is likely
to immediately endanger persons or property, the Board may:



         (a)   Order the owner of the building, the owner’s
agent, or the owner or occupant of the property on which the structure is
located to repair, remove or demolish the structure, or the dangerous part of
the structure, within a specified time; or



         (b)   Repair, remove or demolish the structure, or the
dangerous part of the structure, at the expense of the municipality, on
behalf of the owner of the structure or the owner of the property on which
the structure is located, and assess the repair, removal or demolition
expenses on the property on which the structure was located.



      (3)   Before the eleventh day after the date the building is
secured pursuant to division (L)(1), or action is ordered pursuant to
division (L)(2)(a), or the building is repaired, removed or demolished
pursuant to division (L)(2)(b), the Building Official shall give notice to
the owner by:



         (a)   Personally serving the owner with written notice;
or



         (b)   Depositing the notice in the United States mail,
addressed to the owner at the owner’s post office address; or



         (c)   Publishing the notice at least twice within a
ten-day period, in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which
the building is located, if personal service cannot be obtained and the
owner’s post office address is unknown; or



         (d)   Posting the notice on or near the front door of
the building, if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner’s post
office address is unknown; and



         (e)   In addition to the above, depositing notice in the
United States mail to all lienholders and mortgagees who can be determined
from a reasonable search of instruments on file in the office of the county
clerk.



      (4)   The notice must contain:



         (a)   An identification, which is not required to be a
legal description, of the building and the property on which it is located;



         (b)   A description of the violation of the minimum
standards present in the building;



         (c)   A statement that the city will secure or has
secured, as the case may be, the building, or that the city has taken or will
take the action ordered pursuant to division (L)(2);



         (d)   An explanation of the owner’s entitlement to
request a hearing about any matter relating to the city’s securing,
removing, demolishing or repairing of the building.



      (5)   The Board shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may
testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter relating
to the city’s securing, repairing, removing or demolishing the building,
if, within 30 days after the date the city has taken action pursuant to
division (L)(2)(a) or (2)(b), the owner files with the city a written request
for the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted within 20 days after the date
the request is filed.



      (6)   If the city incurs expenses under this section, such
expenses incurred shall be a personal obligation of the property owner, in
addition to a priority lien upon the property, and costs shall be recovered
as provided by divisions (J) and (K) of this section.



      (7)   It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with an order
issued pursuant to this section.



   (M)   Civil penalty.



      (1)   Civil penally authorized. In addition to any other
enforcement authority provided for by law, the Board may, by order at an
administrative hearing, assess a civil penalty against a property owner, as
provided for herein, for failure to comply with an order issued by the Board
pursuant to division (G) of this section.



      (2)   Showing required.  The civil penalty may be assessed if
it shown at the administrative hearing that:



         (a)   The property owner was notified of the contents of
the order issued pursuant to division (G) of this section; and



         (b)   The property owner committed an act in violation
of the order or failed to take an action necessary for compliance with the
order.



      (3)   Amount of penalty.  The civil penalty may be assessed
in an amount not to exceed $1,000 a day for each violation or, if the owner
shows that the property is the owner’s lawful homestead, in an amount not
to exceed $10 a day for each violation.



      (4)   Notice of administrative hearing. Not less than ten days
prior to the date on which the administrative hearing is set, the property
owner shall be sent a notice of the hearing by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The notice shall contain:



         (a)   A copy of the order issued by the Board pursuant
to division (G) of this section;



         (b)   A statement that the Building Official has
determined that the property owner committed an act in violation of that
order, or failed to take an action necessary for compliance with that order;



         (c)   A statement at the administrative hearing that the
Council may assess a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 a day for each
violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the owner’s lawful
homestead, in an amount not to exceed $10 a day for each violation; and



         (d)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing.



      (5)   Copy of order filed with district clerk.  After the
civil penalty is assessed, the City Secretary shall file, with the district
clerk of the county in which the property is located, a certified copy of the
order, assessing the civil penalty, and stating the amount and duration of
the penalty.



      (6)   Enforcement. The civil penalty may be enforced by the
city in a suit brought by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction for a
final judgment in accordance with the assessed penalty. A civil penalty under
this division is final and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of
the penalty in any suit.



   (N)   Authority not limited.  Notwithstanding all other provisions
of this section, nothing herein shall be deemed a limitation on the duty of
the city to summarily order the demolition of any building or structure,
where it is apparent that its immediate demolition is necessary to the
protection of life, property or general welfare of the people in the city.



   (O)   Section cumulative.  This section shall be cumulative of all
provisions of city ordinances, except where its provision are in direct
conflict with the provisions of such ordinances, in which event the
conflicting provisions of such ordinances and such ordinances are hereby
repealed.



   (P)   General penalty.  Any person, firm or corporation that
violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with this section,
or  that resists the enforcement of any of its provisions, shall be fined
not more than $2,000 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted
to exist shall constitute a separate offense.



   (Q)   Savings clause.  All rights and remedies of the city are
expressly saved as to any and all violations of the provisions of any
ordinance related to substandard or dangerous buildings as they may have been
amended, or any other ordinance or code provision that have accrued at the
time of the effective date of this section; and, as to such accrued
violations and all pending litigation, both civil and criminal, whether
pending in court or not, under such ordinances, the same shall not be
affected by this section, but may be prosecuted until final disposition by
the courts.



(Ord. OR-2050-17, passed 5-24-17; Am. Ord. OR-2063-17, passed 9-11-17)



§ 150.012  INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.



   The 2006 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code is
adopted as the official property maintenance code of the city.  This
property maintenance code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied
into this section in its entirety.  The material contained in the
International Property Maintenance Code shall not be included in the formal
municipal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public
record in the office of the City Secretary and will be available for public
inspection and copying during regular business hours.



(Ord. OR-1721-08, passed 10-27-08)



CONSTRUCTION CODES BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS



§ 150.020  APPOINTMENT.



   There is established a board to be called the Construction Codes Board
of Adjustments and Appeals (hereinafter called "the Board"), which shall
consist of 14 members who are residents of the city. The Board shall be
composed of one registered professional architect, one registered
professional engineer, three licensed master plumbers, three licensed master
electricians, three licensed air-conditioning and refrigeration contractors
and three members selected at large from the building industry. Board members
shall be appointed by the City Council.



('78 Code, § 6-95) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96)



§ 150.021  TERM OF OFFICE.



   Place numbers shall be assigned to each member of the Board. Places
that are odd-numbered shall be appointed in odd-numbered years, and
even-numbered places shall be appointed in even-numbered years. The term of
office for Board members shall be for two years. Vacancies shall be filled
for an unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointments.
Continued absence of any member from regular meetings of the Board shall, at
the discretion of the City Council, render any such member liable to
immediate removal from office. Members shall serve at the will and pleasure
of the City Council.



('78 Code, § 6-96) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96)



§ 150.022  QUORUM.



   Seven members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. In the case of an appeal to the Board involving a
specific trade such as electrical, mechanical, plumbing or air- conditioning
and refrigeration, at least two members of that specific trade are required
to be present before any board action. A simple majority of members present
shall be required to vary the application of any provision of the
construction codes, consisting of the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Plumbing
Code, Uniform Mechanical Code and the National Electrical Code, as adopted by
the city.



('78 Code, § 6-97) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96)



§ 150.023  RECORDS.



   The Building Official shall act as Secretary of the Board and shall
make a detailed record of all its proceedings. The Secretary shall maintain a
complete record of the meetings and minutes of the action of the Board,
together with the other records as the Board may direct.



('78 Code, § 6-98) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96)



§ 150.024  PROCEDURES AND RULES.



   The Board shall select a Chairman and shall further establish rules and
regulations for its own procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of
the construction codes. The Board shall meet at regular intervals to be
determined by the Chairman, and the Board shall render a decision on an
appeal without unreasonable or unnecessary delay.



('78 Code, § 6-99) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96)



§ 150.025  AUTHORITY OF BOARD TO ABATE SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS.



   In addition to other powers and duties conferred upon the Board by this
subchapter, the Board shall enforce the provisions of Ordinance 1143, (the
Substandard Building Ordinance) and carry out the functions established by
that ordinance to abate substandard buildings. In abating substandard
buildings, the Substandard Building Ordinance shall govern the procedures of
the Board and the rights and duties of the property owners.



(Ord. 1144, passed 1-13-97)



§ 150.026  APPEALS; TIME LIMIT.



   (A)   The owner of premises who seeks to erect or alter a building
or structure on the premises, or his/her authorized agent, may appeal from a
decision of the Building Official to the Board if the following occur.



      (1)   The Building Official shall reject or refuse to approve
the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed, or the materials
proposed to be used, in the erection or alteration of the building or
structure.



      (2)   The owner claims that the provisions of the construction
codes do not apply to his/her proposed construction.



      (3)   The owner claims that an equally good or more desirable
form of construction or materials can be employed in his/her construction
than the Building Official requires.



      (4)   The owner claims that the true intent and meaning of the
construction codes or of any of its regulations have been misconstrued or
wrongly interpreted.



   (B)   The notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the
Building Official renders his/her decision. Provided, however, that the
Building Official may, in his/her decision, limit the time for appeal to a
shorter period in cases involving buildings or structures that are, in the
Building Official's opinion, unsafe or dangerous.



   (C)   The Secretary shall notify the Board within 48 hours after
receipt of an appeal.



   (D)   An administrative fee of $50 shall accompany the notice of
appeal which the owner or his/her authorized agent must file in writing with,
and on a form provided by, the Building Official.



('78 Code, § 6-100) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96)



§ 150.027  VARIATIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The Board, when appealed to, shall conduct a hearing and after
the hearing may vary in part or in whole the application of any provision of
the construction codes to any particular case, when, in its opinion, the
interpretation of the Building Official should be modified or reversed for
any reason.



   (B)   The Board may approve alternate methods of construction or
materials where it is impractical to meet the adopted standards of the
construction codes, provided the Board finds the same degree of suitability,
strength, effectiveness, durability and safety exists in the alternate method
or material as intended by the standards.



   (C)   The Board may approve new methods of construction or materials
not covered by the construction codes, provided that the Board finds the same
degree of suitability, strength, effectiveness, durability and safety exists
in the new methods or materials as intended by the standards of the
construction codes. The Board, in approving new standards or processes, shall
rely on recognized standards or practices.



   (D)   A decision of the Board to vary the application of any
provision of the construction codes or to modify an order of the Building
Official shall specify in what manner the variation or modification is made,
the conditions upon which it is made and the reasons therefor.



('78 Code, § 6-101) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96)



§ 150.028  BOARD DECISIONS; PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Every decision of the Board shall be final, subject, however,
to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. The
decision shall be in writing and shall indicate the vote upon the decision.
Every decision shall be promptly filed in the office of the Building Official
and shall be open to the public for inspection. A true and correct copy of
the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant at the
address shown on the appellant notice of appeal.



   (B)   The Board shall in every case reach a decision without
unreasonable or unnecessary delay.



   (C)   If a decision of the Board reverses or modifies any decision
of the Building Official or varies the application of any provision of the
construction codes, the Building Official shall immediately take action in
accordance with the decision.



   (D)   The Board will not render a decision upon any appeal which is
contrary to any state or federal statutes or mandates.



   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any decision of
the Board may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting
forth that the decision is illegal in whole or in part, and specifying the
grounds of the illegality. Unless the petition (appeal) shall be presented to
the court within ten days of the decision of the Board, the decision of the
Board shall become final.



('78 Code, § 6-102) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96)



§ 150.029  LIABILITY.



   The Board, or any of its members charged with the enforcement of the
construction codes and acting in good faith and without malice for the
jurisdiction in the discharge of its duties, shall not thereby render
him/herself liable personally and are thereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result
of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of
their duties.



('78 Code, § 6-103) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96)



MOVING OF BUILDINGS



§ 150.040  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES.



   (A)   No person shall move any building into the city or from one
site within the city to another within or without the city until the person
shall have first secured a permit to do so from the Building Official. The
fees for the permits where buildings are moved in, through or upon streets,
alleys, avenues or public grounds shall be $25 for all buildings.



   (B)   Where it is necessary to cut a building into sections for
removal, the fee shall be based on the area of the entire building plus $10
for each section moved after the first.



   (C)   The above fees are based on the moving being accomplished in
one day of 24 hours from the time the building is moved onto a public street,
alley, avenue or other public ground, and the mover shall pay $10 for each
additional day or fraction thereof that the building is in or on public
ground.



   (D)   In addition to the moving permit and fees provided for in this
section, the owner or his/her agent shall secure a building permit for
foundations, repairs and alterations.



('78 Code, § 6-30) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64) Penalty, see § 150.099



§ 150.041  EXCEPTIONS.



   No moving permit fee shall be charged for the moving of any building
having a width of ten feet or less and a floor area of 300 feet or less,
provided, the building when being moved is loaded on a truck or trailer and
the loaded height does not exceed 15 feet. The mover shall, however, notify
the Building Official of each such moving.



('78 Code, § 6-31) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64)



§ 150.042  PERMIT APPLICATION; PLANS.



   (A)   The application for a moving permit shall state the route to
be followed and shall bear the signed approval of proper representatives of
the public utilities affected, including city utilities, such as those
furnishing electric power and telephone service. Where railway tracks are to
be crossed, the mover shall make necessary arrangement for the crossing and
shall certify that he/she has the approval of the proper railroad officials.



   (B)   The Building Official may require the plans and specifications
as he/she finds necessary to insure that the building, at its new site, if
within the city, will meet these requirements.



('78 Code, § 6-32) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64)



§ 150.043  INSPECTION BEFORE PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   The Building Official shall inspect the building before issuing a
permit for moving, and if he/she deems the building to be in a condition that
would make it unsafe or dangerous to move over public streets or grounds; or
if the building does not reasonably meet the requirements of this code and
other building regulations pertaining thereto and cannot be made to meet the
requirements at its new site, if within the city; no permit shall be issued.



('78 Code, § 6-33) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64)



§ 150.044  INSURANCE AND BOND.



   (A)   Before any permit for the moving of a building is granted by
the Building Official, the person applying therefor shall have on file, in
the City Secretary's office, a certificate showing that the person has taken
out and is maintaining automobile bodily injury and property damage liability
insurance and owner's and contractor's protective liability insurance as
follows: automobile, truck, trailer and dolly bodily liability insurance in
an amount of not less than $25,000 for injuries, including accidental death,
to any one person, and in an amount of not less than $50,000 on account of
one accident and property damage insurance in an amount of not less than
$50,000.



   (B)   No person shall move any building for which a permit is
required for moving a building in the city until the person shall first have
on file with the City Secretary a satisfactory surety bond in the sum of
$1,000 approved by the City Manager. The bond shall be conditioned for the
moving of buildings in accordance with the ordinance of the city regulating
same and shall provide for the indemnification of the city for all damages or
liability that may accrue to or against it by reason of the moving of
buildings by or under the direction of the maker of the bond. The bond shall
be submitted to the Building Official for filing with the City Secretary
after approval by the City Manager and shall be maintained by renewal as long
as the maker is engaged in the business of moving buildings.



('78 Code, § 6-34) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64; Ord. 163A, passed 3-22-66)
Penalty, see § 150.099



§ 150.045  PERMIT TO STATE CONDITION OF MOVING; EXPEDITIOUS OPERATION.



   (A)   A permit issued by the Building Official to a house mover
shall state specifically the conditions to be complied with in moving and
shall designate the route to be taken, and in no case shall streets, alleys,
avenues or public grounds be used for that purpose unless same are on the
route designated in the permit.



   (B)   The moving of a building under a permit when commenced shall
be continuous during all hours of the day and/or night unless the removal is
stopped by conditions beyond the control of the mover, in which case the
mover shall immediately notify the Building Official. Where the moving of a
building has been stopped, the building shall not be left unattended, but the
mover shall at all times have watchmen or flagmen present at the structure to
maintain proper warning signals and lights.



('78 Code, § 6-35) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64) Penalty, see § 150.099



§ 150.046  CARE IN OPERATION; REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   All house movers shall proceed in a careful manner with the moving of a
building and shall not in any manner injure or destroy trees, grass plots,
signs, curbing or sidewalks, nor in any manner interfere with the private
property of individuals. The Building Official shall have the power to revoke
any permit whenever in his/her judgment a house mover is proceeding in a
reckless and careless manner in the removal of a building.



('78 Code, § 6-36) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64) Penalty, see § 150.099



§ 150.047  REPAIR OF DAMAGE.



   Every person receiving a moving permit from the Building Official
shall, within one day after the building has reached its destination in the
city, or has reached the city limits, report that fact to the Building
Official, who shall thereupon inspect the streets, alleys, avenues and public
grounds over which the building has been moved and ascertain the condition
thereof. If the moving of the building has caused any damage to the streets,
alleys, avenues or public grounds or to trees, traffic signals, street
lights, sidewalks or other improvements properly located thereon, the house
mover shall forthwith place same in good repair as they were before the
permit was granted. Upon his/her failure to do so within ten days thereafter,
the Building Official may cause the necessary repairs to be made, and the
mover shall be held responsible for payment of costs. Future permits shall be
withheld from the mover until satisfactory settlement of claims for damages
have been made and recovery by the city of the damages shall be had out of
the bond or insurance.



('78 Code, § 6-37) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64) Penalty, see § 150.099



§ 150.048  POLICE APPROVAL; COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Before proceeding with the moving of a building over any
street, alley, avenue or public grounds, the holder of a permit from the
Building Official shall file a copy of the permit with the Police Department,
which shall designate the time of day during which the moving shall be
accomplished and instruct the movers in the regulations and requirements
designed to reduce traffic congestion and hazards.



   (B)   The mover shall provide proper warning lights at all extreme
corners of the building or as directed by the police and shall provide
flagmen when the police deem it necessary.



('78 Code, § 6-38) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64) Penalty, see § 150.099



§ 150.049  NOTICE TO FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   Every house mover shall report to the Fire Chief, or his/her assistant
at the central fire station, the time at which the moving of a building or
structure is to start and shall give the route to be followed and the
estimated approximate time period the building or structure will be on a
public street, alley or avenue. If for some reason it is found necessary to
leave the building or structure to stand in a street, alley or avenue for
more than one hour during the night, the exact location shall be immediately
reported to the Fire Chief or his/her assistant.



('78 Code, § 6-39) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64) Penalty, see § 150.099



§ 150.050  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person found to be moving any building on the streets of the city
without first having provided insurance and bond coverage, without having
procured requisite inspection, without having procured a permit, without
having procured police approval or without having given notice to the Fire
Department, each or all as required by the terms of this subchapter, shall be
prohibited from moving the building from the point beyond where the person is
found moving the building until the person first complies with the requisites
of this subchapter.



('78 Code, § 6-40(a)) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64; Ord. 519, passed 11-28-83;
Ord. 773, passed 4-11-88) Penalty, see § 150.099



ASBESTOS SURVEY



§ 150.060  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASBESTOS SURVEY.  An inspection of a building or facility to determine
the location, quantity and condition of asbestos containing material therein
by taking samples for analysis or by visual inspection.



   COMMERCIAL BUILDING.  All other buildings which are not defined herein
as residential buildings.



   DEMOLITION.  Operations in which load-bearing structural members of a
building are wrecked or removed.



   RENOVATION.  Additions to or alterations of the interior surfaces of a
building for purposes of restoration by removal, repairing and rebuilding.



   RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS.  A single family structure primarily used or
capable of being used for human habitation.



(Ord. 1272, passed 8-23-99)



§ 150.061  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   Prior to issuance of a permit to any person for the renovation or
demolition of any commercial building within the city limits, an asbestos
survey shall be conducted of the areas to be renovated or demolished.



(Ord. 1272, passed 8-23-99) Penalty, see § 150.099



§ 150.062  RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS.



   An asbestos survey shall not be required prior to the issuance of a
permit for the renovation or demolition involving more than two contiguous
residential building sites which are part of a commercial or public project
such as an urban renewal project, a highway construction project, a project
to develop a shopping center or mall, the construction of an industrial
facility or other large private development.



(Ord. 1272, passed 8-23-99)



§ 150.063  COSTS OF SURVEY.



   Any asbestos survey required herein shall be conducted by an individual
licensed by the state to do an asbestos survey. The cost of the asbestos
survey under §§ 150.061 and 150.062 shall be borne by the person seeking
the permit.



(Ord. 1272, passed 8-23-99)



§ 150.099  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99.



   (B)   Any person in violation of any of the terms of §§ 150.040 et
seq. shall be fined as in a sum not exceeding $500.



('78 Code, § 6-40(b))



   (C)   Any person who shall fail to have performed an asbestos survey
as defined in § 150.060, under the circumstances when required herein by
§§ 150.061 and 150.062 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.



   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of § 150.006 shall be fined no more than $2,000 for all
violations involving zoning, fire safety or public health and sanitation,
including dumping of refuse, and shall be fined not more than $500 for all
other violations of § 150.006.  Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64; Ord. 519, passed 11-28-83; Ord. 773, passed
4-11-88; Ord. 1272, passed 8-23-99; Am. Ord. 1437, passed 6-23-03)



CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   151.01   Statutory authorization



   151.02   Findings of fact



   151.03   Approved plats



   151.04   Statement of purpose



   151.05   Methods of reducing flood loss



   151.06   Definitions



   151.07   Lands to which this chapter applies



   151.08   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard



   151.09   Establishment of development permit



   151.10   Compliance



   151.11   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   151.12   Interpretation



   151.13   Warning and disclaimer of liability



Administration



   151.25   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator



   151.26   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator



   151.27   Permit procedures



   151.28   Variance procedures



Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction



   151.40   General standards



   151.41   Specific standards



   151.42   Standards for subdivision proposals



   151.43   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones)



   151.44   Floodways



 



   151.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control
Insurance Act, Texas Water Code § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of
local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood
losses. Therefore, the City of Mansfield Texas does ordain as follows.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (a)   The flood hazard areas of Mansfield are subject to periodic
inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.



   (b)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.03  APPROVED PLATS.



   Platted lots approved prior to the adoption of this chapter with
minimum finished floor elevations will not be affected by the finished floor
elevation requirements of this chapter. Approved finished floor elevation
prior to the adoption of this chapter shall be in compliance with previous
ordinance requirements.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.04  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Protect human life and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in floodplains;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and  development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future
flood blight areas; and



   (G)   Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in
a flood area.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.05  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.



   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety
or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of flood waters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase flood damage;



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.06  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING.  Flooding occurring on the surface of an
alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is
characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment
transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.



   APEX.  A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the
flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and
alluvial fan flooding can occur.



   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE.  A structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.



   AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD.  The land area that would be
inundated by the 1% annual chance (100 year) flood based on future conditions
hydrology.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.  A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO
zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.  The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM).
After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication
of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99,
AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water
surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling
or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the BASE FLOOD.



   BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BREAKAWAY WALL.  A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.



   CRITICAL FEATURE.  An integral and readily identifiable part of a
flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the
entire system would be compromised.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved and unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.



   ELEVATED BUILDING.  For insurance purposes, a non-basement building,
which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.  For the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before the
effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective
before that date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as
“existing structures.”



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by
a community.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FLOOD OR FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or



      (2)   the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY.  An examination, evaluation and determination
of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations,
or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow)
and/or flood-related erosion hazards.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of a community, on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).  See FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY.



   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA.  Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.  Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.



   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM.  Those physical structural works for which
funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the
extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with
sound engineering standards.



   FLOOD PROOFING.  Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOODWAY.  See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE.  A use, which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory or historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:



         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior or;



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.



   LEVEE.  A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.



   LEVEE SYSTEM.  A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of § 60.3 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL.  For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program,
the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which
base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  For the purpose of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after
the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever
is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which
the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projections;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.



   RIVERINE.  Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  See AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION  (for other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)). 
Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE.  For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before “start of
construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions or (2) Any alteration of a “historic
structure”, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure”.



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see § 60.6 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations).



   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in § 60.3(b)(5),
(c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION.  The height, in relation to the North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.07  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the City of Mansfield, Texas.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.08  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled,
“The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Tarrant County, Texas And Incorporated
Areas”, dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps dated September 25, 2009, “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Johnson
County, Texas And Incorporated Areas”, dated December 4, 2012, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated December 4. 2012, “The Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for Ellis County, Texas And Incorporated Areas”,
dated June 3. 2013, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated June 3.
2013, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared
to be a part of this chapter.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.09  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.10  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its
use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.11  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.12  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.13  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OR LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 151.25  DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Public Works Director or designee is hereby appointed the
Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this
chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 C.F.R. (Emergency Management and
Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to
floodplain management.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.26  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:



   (A)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records
pertaining to the provisions of this chapter;



   (B)   Review permit applications to ensure that the proposed
building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be
reasonably safe from flooding;



   (C)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development
permits required by adoption of this chapter;



   (D)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies (including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is
required;



   (E)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation;



   (F)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the
State Coordinating Agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB)
and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;



   (G)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;



   (H)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in
accordance with § 151.08, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of §§ 151.40 through 151.44;



   (I)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the
Floodplain Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within
Zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that
the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within
the community; and



   (J)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, § 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in Zones Al-30, AE, and AH on the community’s FIRM which
increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one
foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions
required by § 65.12.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.27  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be
presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her
and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape
alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of
manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of
special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:



      (1)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;



      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;



      (3)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of § 151.41(B)(2);



      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or
natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development;



      (5)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance
with § 151.41(B)(1);



   (B)   Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the
Flooplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this
chapter and the following relevant factors:



      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and
bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems;



      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;



      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location,
where applicable;



      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject
to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and



      (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan for that area.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.28  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The City Council, shall hear and render judgment on requests
for variances from the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   The City Council shall hear and render judgment on an appeal
only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.



   (C)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the City
Council may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.



   (E)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the
procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.



   (F)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in § 151.27(B) have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.



   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent
of this chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting
of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of
this chapter (§ 151.03).



   (H)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.



   (I)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.



   (J)   Prerequisites for granting variances.



      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) showing a good
and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a
determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.



      (3)   Any application to which a variance is granted shall be
given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with
the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost
of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting
from the reduced lowest floor elevation.



   (K)   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction
and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria
outlined in divisions (A) through (I) of this section are met, and (ii) the
structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood
damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 151.40  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are
required for all new construction and substantial improvements:



   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;



   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;



   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;



   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;



   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;



   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and



   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.41  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   (A)   In unnumbered A zones (flood hazard areas without base flood
elevations where use of the best available data is required) it shall be
required that the base flood elevation be established through an engineering
study using fully urbanized hydrology, and such data shall be used for
requiring the lowest floor elevation as specified herein below unless waived
by the Floodplain Administrator.



   (B)   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood
elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) § 151.08, (ii) §
151.26(H), or (iii) § 151.42(C), the following provisions are required:



      (1)   Residential construction. New construction and
substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement), elevated to three feet above the base flood
elevation where FEMA Flood Insurance Study data exists or two feet above the
base flood elevation as determined by a study using fully urbanized
hydrology. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor
shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the
standard of this subsection as proposed in § 151.27(A)(1), is satisfied.



      (2)   Nonresidential construction. new construction and
substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to three feet above the base flood elevation where FEMA
Flood Insurance Study data exists or two feet above the base flood elevation
as determined by a study using fully urbanized hydrology or together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base
flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review
structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall
certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of
such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by
the Floodplain Administrator.



      (3)   Enclosures. New construction and substantial
improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:



         (a)   A minimum of two openings on separate walls having
a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;



         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade; and



         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.



      (4)   Manufactured homes.



         (a)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed
within Zone A on a community’s FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using
methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this
requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.



         (b)   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or
substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s
FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in
a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has
incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood, be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated to three feet above the base flood elevation where FEMA Flood
Insurance Study data exists or two feet above the base flood elevation as
determined by a study using fully urbanized hydrology and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.



         (c)   Require that manufactured homes be placed or
substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision with Zones Al-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM that are
not subject to the provisions of division (B)(4) of this section be elevated
so that either:



            1.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated to three feet above the base flood elevation where FEMA Flood
Insurance Study data exists or two feet above the base flood elevation as
determined by a study using fully urbanized hydrology; or



            2.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength
that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.



      (5)   Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational
vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s
FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (ii)
be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit
requirements of § 151.27(A), and the elevation and anchoring requirements
for “manufactured homes” in division (B)(4) of this section. A
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.42  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   (A)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with §§ 151.02
through 151.04 of this chapter.



   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including
the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet
floodplain development permit requirements of § 151.09; § 151.27; and the
provisions of §§ 151.40 through 151.44.



   (C)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or
five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to §
151.08 or § 151.26(H).



   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated by a detailed
engineering study using fully urbanized hydrology for all Zone A areas,
within 100 feet of the contour lines of Zone A areas, and other streams not
mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the community’s FIRM.



   (E)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (F)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.43  STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES).



   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
151.08, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply.



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
three feet above the base flood elevation where FEMA Flood Insurance Study
data exists or two feet above the base flood elevation as determined by a
study using fully urbanized hydrology or the highest adjacent grade at least
as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at
least three feet if no depth number is specified).



   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
non-residential structures:



      (1)   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
three feet above the base flood elevation where FEMA Flood Insurance Study
data exists or two feet above the base flood elevation as determined by a
study using fully urbanized hydrology or the highest adjacent grade at least
as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at
least two feet if no depth number is specified); or



      (2)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities
be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or
below the Base Flood Elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.



   (C)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in § 151.27 are satisfied.



   (D)   Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.44  FLOODWAYS.



   Floodways are designated as areas of special flood hazard established
in § 151.08. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and
erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply.



   (A)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other development within the
adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.



   (B)   If division (A) of this section is satisfied, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of §§ 151.40 through 151.44.



   (C)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, § 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit
encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an
increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first
completes all of the provisions required by § 65.12.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee
thereof who violates any provision of this chapter or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall upon conviction be found guilty of a
misdemeanor and be fined not more than $2,000 for each violation, and in
addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day a
violation occurs is a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)



CHAPTER 152: EROSION CONTROL



Section



   152.01   Adoption of erosion control regulations



§ 152.01  ADOPTION OF EROSION CONTROL REGULATIONS.



   The erosion control ordinance, copies of which are on file in the
office of the City Secretary, is adopted and incorporated as part of this
code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Ord. 1089, passed 9-11-95)



CHAPTER 153: IMPACT FEES



Section



General Provisions



   153.01   Short title



   153.02   Intent



   153.03   Statutory authorization



   153.04   Definitions



   153.05   Applicability of impact fees



   153.06   Impact fees as conditions of development approval



   153.07   Establishment of roadway service areas



   153.08   Land use assumptions



   153.09   Service units



   153.10   Impact fees per service unit



   153.11   Roadway Improvement Plan



   153.12   Updates to plan and revision of fees



Impact Fees; Use of Proceeds



   153.25   Assessment of impact fees



   153.26   Calculation of impact fees



   153.27   Collection of impact fees



   153.28   (Reserved)



   153.29   Offsets and credits against impact fees



   153.30   Establishment of accounts and records



   153.31   Use of proceeds of capital recovery fee accounts



Administration and Enforcement



   153.45   Appeals



   153.46   Refunds



   153.47   Functions of Advisory Committee



   153.48   Agreement for capital improvements



   153.49   Use of other financing mechanisms



   153.50   Impact fees as additional and supplemental regulation



   153.51   Relief procedures



Cross reference:



   Sewer and water impact fees, see §§ 51.095 et seq.



   Subdivisions, see Ch. 154



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as the Roadway Impact Fee
Ordinance.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



§ 153.02  INTENT.



   This chapter is intended to impose roadway impact fees, as established
in this chapter, in order to finance public facilities, the demand for which
is generated by new development in the designated service area or areas.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



§ 153.03  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The city is authorized to enact this chapter by the Texas Local
Government Code, Ch. 395, and its successors, which authorize home-rule
cities, among others, to enact or impose impact fees on land within their
corporate boundaries or extraterritorial jurisdictions, as charges or
assessments imposed against new development in order to generate revenue for
funding or recouping the costs of capital improvements or facility expansions
necessitated by and attributable to the new development and by the City
Charter. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the
power of the city to adopt the chapter pursuant to any other source of local
authority, nor to utilize any other methods or powers otherwise available for
accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in
conjunction with this chapter. Guidelines may be developed by resolution or
otherwise to implement and administer this chapter.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



§ 153.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASSESSMENT.  The determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee
per service unit which can be imposed on new development pursuant to this
chapter.



   BUILDING PERMIT.  Written permission issued by the city for the
construction, repair, alteration or addition to a structure.



   CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION COST OF SERVICE.  Costs of constructing capital
improvements or facility expansions, including and limited to the
construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition
costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees and
expert witness fees) and the fees actually paid or contracted to be paid to
an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant preparing or
updating the Capital Improvements Plan who is not an employee of the city.



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE (ADVISORY COMMITTEE). 
Advisory committee, appointed by the City Council, consisting of at least
five members, not less than 40% of which shall be representatives of the real
estate, development or building industries which are not employees of the
city, and if impact fees are to be applied within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city, including one member representing the
extraterritorial jurisdiction, or consisting of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, including one regular or ad hoc member who is not an employee of
the city and which is representative of the real estate, development or
building industry, and if impact fees are to be applied within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, one representative of the
extraterritorial jurisdiction area, which committee is appointed to regularly
review and update the capital improvements program in accordance with the
requirements of the Local Government Code, Ch. 395, and its successors.



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM (CIP).  Plan which identifies water and
wastewater capital improvements or facility expansions pursuant to which
impact fees may be assessed.



   CITY PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR (DIRECTOR).  Public Works Director of the
city.



   COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT.  All development which is neither residential
nor industrial.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN (MASTER PLAN).  The comprehensive long-range plan,
adopted by the City Council, which is intended to guide the growth and
development of the city which includes analysis, recommendations and
proposals for the city regarding such topics as population, economy, housing,
transportation, community facilities and land use.



   CREDIT.  The amount of the reduction of a impact fee for fees,
payments or charges for the same type of capital improvements for which the
fee has been assessed.



   EXISTING DEVELOPMENT.  All development within the service area which
has a water or wastewater tap on the city's water or sewer system as of the
date of the adoption of this chapter.



   FACILITY EXPANSION.  The expansion of the capacity of an existing
facility which serves the same function as an otherwise necessary new capital
improvement in order that the existing facility may serve new development.
FACILITY EXPANSION does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization or
expansion of an existing facility to better serve existing development.



   FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT.  The map, drawing or chart meeting the
requirements of the city's subdivision ordinance on which is provided a
subdivider's plan of a subdivision, and which has received final approval by
the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council and which is recorded with
the office of the County Clerk.



   GROWTH-RELATED COST.  Capital construction costs of service related to
providing additional service units to new development, either from excess
capacity in existing facilities, from facility expansions or from new capital
facilities. Growth-related costs do not include the following:



      (1)   Construction, acquisition or expansion of public
facilities or assets other than capital improvements or facility expansions
identified in the Capital Improvements Plan.



      (2)   Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new
capital improvements or facility expansions.



      (3)   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing
capital improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter
safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards.



      (4)   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing
capital improvements to provide better service to existing development.



      (5)   Administrative and operating costs of the city.



      (6)   Principal payments and interest or other finance charges
on bonds or other indebtedness, except for such payments for growth-related
facilities contained in the capital improvements program.



   IMPACT FEE.  Fee to be imposed upon new development, calculated based
upon the costs of facilities in proportion to development creating the need
for the facilities. IMPACT FEES do not include dedication of rights-of-way or
easements, or construction or dedication of site-related water distribution
or wastewater collection facilities or internal roadways required by other
ordinances of the city code; or lot or acreage fees placed in trust funds for
the purpose of reimbursing developers for oversizing or constructing water or
sewer mains or lines.



   INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT.  Development which will be assigned to the
industrial customer class of the water or wastewater utilities; generally
development in which goods are manufactured, or development which is
ancillary to the manufacturing activity.



   LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.  Description of the service area and projections
of changes in land uses, densities, intensities and population therein over
at least a ten-year period, adopted by the city, as may be amended from time
to time, upon which the Capital Improvements Plan is based.



   LIVING UNIT EQUIVALENT (LUE).  Basis for establishing equivalency
among and within various customer classes and land uses.



   NEW DEVELOPMENT.  Subdivision of land; the construction,
reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation
or enlargement of any structure; or any use or extension of the use of land;
any of which increases the number of service units for water, wastewater or
roadway service units. New development includes the sale of water taps
resulting from the conversion of an individual well to the city's water
utility and includes the sale of wastewater taps resulting from the
conversion of an individual septic or other individual waste disposal system
to the city's wastewater utility.



   OFFSET.  The amount of the reduction of a capital recovery fee
designed to fairly reflect the value of system-related facilities, pursuant
to rules herein established or administrative guidelines provided and funded
by a developer pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations or requirements.



   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.  A lot developed for use and occupancy as a
residence or residences, according to the city's zoning ordinance.



   ROADWAY FACILITY.  Improvement for providing roadway service
including, but not limited to pavement, right-of-way, drainage and
traffic-control devices. ROADWAY FACILITY excludes roadways which are
constructed by developers, the costs of which are reimbursed from charges
paid by subsequent users of the facilities. ROADWAY FACILITIES also exclude
dedication of rights-of-way or easements or construction or dedication of
off-site roadways required by valid ordinances of the city and necessitated
and attributable to the new development.



   ROADWAY FACILITY EXPANSION.  Expansion of the capacity of any existing
roadway improvement for the purpose of serving new development, not including
the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of the existing roadway
facility to serve existing development.



   ROADWAY IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.  Portion of the CIP, as may be amended from
time to time, which identifies the roadway facilities or roadway expansions
and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are
attributable to new development and which are to be financed in whole or in
part through the imposition of roadway impact fees pursuant to this chapter.



   SERVICE AREA.  Area within the corporate boundaries to be served by
the capital improvements or facility expansions specified in the Capital
Improvements Plan applicable to the service area.



   SERVICE UNIT.  Standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or
discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated in
accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a
particular category of capital improvements or facility expansions.



   SITE-RELATED FACILITY.  Improvement or facility which is for the
primary use or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary
purpose of safe and adequate provision of water, wastewater or roadway
facilities to serve the new development, which is not included in the Capital
Improvements Plan, and for which the developer or property owner is solely
responsible under subdivision and other applicable regulations.



   SYSTEM-RELATED FACILITY.  A capital improvement or facility expansion
which is designated in the Capital Improvements Plan and which is not a
site-related facility. A system-related facility may include a capital
improvement which is located off-site, within or on the perimeter of the
development site.



   TAP PURCHASE.  The filing with the city of a written application for a
water or wastewater tap and the acceptance of applicable fees by the city.
The term TAP PURCHASE shall not be applicable to a meter purchased for and
exclusively dedicated to fire protection.



   WASTEWATER FACILITY.  Improvement for providing wastewater service,
including, but not limited to land or easements, treatment facilities, lift
stations or interceptor mains. Wastewater facility excludes wastewater lines
or mains which are constructed by developers, the costs of which are
reimbursed from charges paid by subsequent users of the facilities and which
are maintained in dedicated trusts. Wastewater facilities also exclude
dedication of rights-of-way or easements or construction or dedication of
on-site wastewater collection facilities required by valid ordinances of the
city and necessitated by and attributable to the new development.



   WASTEWATER FACILITY EXPANSION.  Expansion of the capacity of any
existing wastewater improvement for the purpose of serving new development,
not including the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an
existing wastewater facility to serve existing development.



   WASTEWATER IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.  Portion of the CIP, as may be amended
from time to time, which identifies the wastewater facilities or wastewater
expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are
attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten  years,
which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of
wastewater impact fees pursuant to this chapter.



   WATER FACILITY.  Improvement for providing water service, including,
but not limited to land or easements, water supply facilities, treatment
facilities, pumping facilities, storage facilities or transmission mains.
Water facility excludes water lines or mains which are constructed by
developers, the costs of which are reimbursed from charges paid by subsequent
users of the facilities and which are maintained in dedicated trusts. Water
facilities also exclude dedication of rights-of-way or easements or
construction or dedication of on-site water distribution facilities required
by valid ordinances of the city and necessitated by and attributable to the
new development.



   WATER FACILITY EXPANSION.  Expansion of the capacity of any existing
water improvement for the purpose of serving new development, not including
the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an existing water
facility to serve existing development.



   WATER IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.  Portion of the CIP, as may be amended from
time to time, which identifies the water facilities or water expansions and
their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable
to new development, for a period not to exceed ten years, which are to be
financed in whole or in part through the imposition of water impact fees
pursuant to this chapter.



   VEHICLE MILE.  A unit used to express both supply and demand provided
by, and placed on the roadway system. A combination of a number of vehicles
traveling during a given time period and the distance in which these vehicles
travel in miles.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



§ 153.05  APPLICABILITY OF IMPACT FEES.



   (A)   This chapter shall be uniformly applicable to new development
which occurs within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction.



   (B)   No new development shall be exempt from the assessment of
impact fees unless expressly made so by the terms of this chapter.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



§ 153.06  IMPACT FEES AS CONDITIONS OF DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL.



   No application for new development shall be approved within the City
without assessment of impact fees pursuant to this chapter, and no water and
wastewater tap shall be issued and no building permit or certificate of
occupancy shall be issued unless the applicant has paid the impact fees
imposed by and calculated hereunder unless expressly executed by a provision
of this chapter.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



§ 153.07  ESTABLISHMENT OF ROADWAY SERVICE AREAS.



   (A)   (1)   There are hereby established roadway service areas as
depicted on Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance No. OR-1955-15, and incorporated
herein by reference.



      (2)   The boundaries of the roadway service areas may be
amended from time to time, and new roadway service areas may be delineated,
pursuant to the procedures in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   The roadway service areas are established as shown on the
service area map, which is Exhibit A, incorporated herein by reference, for
this chapter. Additions to any service area may be designated by the City
Council consistent with the procedure set forth in the Local Government Code,
Ch. 395, and its successors.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04; Am. Ord.
OR-1757-09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord. OR-1955-15, passed 7-27-15)



§ 153.08  LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.



   Land use assumptions used in the development of the impact fees are
contained in Exhibit B, incorporated herein by reference, of this chapter.
These assumptions may be revised by the City Council according to the
procedure set forth in the Local Government Code, Ch. 395, and its
successors.  The updated land use assumptions set forth in Exhibit B,
attached to Ordinance No. OR-1955-15, are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04; Am. Ord.
OR-1757-09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord. OR-1955-15, passed 7-27-15)



§ 153.09  SERVICE UNITS.



   (A)   Service units are established in accordance with generally
accepted engineering and planning standards.



   (B)   A single family residential household will generate 4.00
vehicle miles of demand. Other developments will generate demand based upon
size and type of development. The demand factors are set forth in the updated
Land Use/Vehicle-Mile Equivalency Table, as set forth in Exhibit C, attached
hereto and incorporated herein by reference.



   (C)   The City Council may revise the service units designation
according to the procedure set forth in the Local Government Code, Ch. 395,
and its successors.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04; Am. Ord.
OR-1757-09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord. OR-1955-15, passed 7-27-15)



§ 153.10  IMPACT FEES PER SERVICE UNIT.



   (A)   The updated maximum assessable roadway impact fees per service
unit as set forth in Exhibit D attached to Ordinance No. OR-1955-15, and the
updated current collected roadway impact fees per service unit as set forth
in Exhibit E attached to Ordinance No. OR-1955-15, are incorporated herein by
reference.  This amendment shall also apply to § 153.25 of this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   The maximum impact fee per service unit for each
service area shall be computed by dividing the growth-related capital
construction cost of service in the service area, identified in the Capital
Improvements Plan for that category of capital improvements, by the total
number of projected service units anticipated within the service area which
are necessitated by and attributable to new development, based on the land
use assumptions for that service area. In addition, the calculation of the
maximum impact fee per service unit shall comply with the provisions of Local
Government Code,  §§ 395.014(a)(7) and 395.015.  Maximum assessable
impact fees per service unit for each service area shall be established by
category of capital improvements and shall be set forth in Exhibit D to this
chapter, incorporated herein by reference.



      (2)   Maximum assessable impact fees in Exhibit D may be
amended by the City Council according to the procedure set forth in Local
Government Code, Ch. 395, and its successors.



      (3)   Current collected fees shall be set forth in Exhibit E
to this chapter, incorporated herein by reference, and shall not exceed the
maximum fees also set forth in Exhibit D. Current collected fees may be
amended by the City Council from time to time, provided they do not exceed
the maximum assessable fees.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04; Am. Ord.
OR-1757-09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord. OR-1955-15, passed 7-27-15)



§ 153.11  ROADWAY IMPROVEMENT PLAN.



   (A)   The updated Roadway Improvement Plan for the city as set forth
in Exhibit G attached to Ordinance No. OR-1955-15, is hereto incorporated by
reference herein.



   (B)   The Roadway Improvement Plan may be amended from time to time,
pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Local Government Code, Ch. 395,
and its successors.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04; Am. Ord.
OR-1757-09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord. OR-1955-15, passed 7-27-15)



§ 153.12  UPDATES TO PLAN AND REVISION OF FEES.



   The city shall review the land use assumptions and Capital Improvements
Plan for roadway facilities at least every five years. The City Council shall
then make a determination of whether changes to the land use assumptions,
Capital Improvements Plan or impact fees are needed and shall, in accordance
with the procedures set forth in the Local Government Code, Ch. 395, or any
successor statute, either update the fees or make a determination that no
update is necessary.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04)



IMPACT FEES; USE OF PROCEEDS



§ 153.25  ASSESSMENT OF IMPACT FEES.



   (A)   Residential.



      (1)   The approval of any residential subdivision of land or
of any new residential development shall include as a condition the
assessment of the impact fee applicable to the development.



      (2)   Assessment of the impact fee for any new residential
development shall be made as follows.



         (a)   For a development which is submitted for approval
pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations following the effective date
of this chapter, assessment shall be at the time of final plat approval and
shall be the value of the impact fee per service unit then in effect, as
provided in Exhibit E, as set forth in § 153.10. The city may provide the
subdivider with a copy of Exhibit E prior to final plat approval, but such
shall not constitute assessment within the meaning of this chapter.



         (b)   For a development which has received final plat
approval prior to the effective date of this chapter and for which no
replatting is necessary prior to building permit issuance, assessment shall
be upon building permit issuance and shall be the value of the roadway impact
fee per service unit set forth in Exhibit E.



      (3)   Following assessment of the impact fee pursuant to
subsection (A)(2), no additional impact fees or increases thereof shall be
assessed against that development unless the number of service units
increases, as set forth under § 153.09.



      (4)   Following the lapse or expiration of approval of a
residential plat, a new assessment must be performed at the time a new
application for subdivision approval is filed.



   (B)   Nonresidential development.



      (1)   The character of nonresidential development does not
lend itself to the assessment of a roadway impact fee at the time of
subdivision plat processing. It is frequently not possible for a land owner
or developer to identify the specific type of use that will occur in a
nonresidential development at the subdivision platting point because a lease
with a perspective tenant may not yet have been executed.



      (2)   Assessment of the impact fee for any new nonresidential
development shall be made as follows.



         (a)   For a development which is submitted for approval
pursuant to the city subdivision regulations following the effective date of
this chapter, assessment shall be at the time of recordation of the final
plat. The assessment shall be at the maximum assessable impact fees per
service unit then in effect, as provided in Exhibit D to this chapter. The
fee to be collected at the time of building permit issuance shall be at the
current collected roadway impact fee per land use category per service area
as provided in § 153.26.



         (b)   For a development which has received preliminary
or final plat approval pursuant to the city subdivision regulations before
the effective date of this chapter, an impact fee shall be assessed and
collected on development within the approved subdivision plat at the time of
building permit issuance, except for one year after the effective date of
this chapter, the fee to be collected at the time of building permit issuance
shall be at the current collected roadway impact fee per land use category
per service area previously adopted via Ordinance No. OR-1757-09.



      (3)   Following the assessment of the impact fee for
nonresidential development pursuant to the provisions of this section, no
additional impact fees or increases thereof shall be assessed against the
development unless the number of service units increases.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04; Am. Ord.
OR-1757-09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord. OR-1955-15, passed 7-27-15)



§ 153.26  CALCULATION OF IMPACT FEES.



   Following the request for new development as provided in § 153.25 of
this chapter, the city shall compute impact fees due for the new development
in the following manner.



   (A)   In calculating roadway impact fees for a new development, it
is first necessary to identify in which service area the development is
located and then classify the development in one of the land use categories
depicted in the updated current collected roadway impact fee per land use
category per service area as set forth in Exhibit F of Ordinance No.
OR-1955-15, incorporated and made a part hereof by reference.



   (B)   The final determination of the roadway impact fee to be
charged each new development is then calculated by multiplying the updated
current collected roadway impact fee for the corresponding service area and
land use category identified above by the total development units (in number
of dwelling units, square footage in 1,000 square foot increments or other
development unit increments as indicated in the second column of Exhibit F of
Ordinance No. OR-1955-15.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04; Am. Ord.
OR-1757-09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord. OR-1955-15, passed 7-27-15)



§ 153.27  COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEES.



   (A)   No final residential plat shall be signed and released for
recording until all impact fees, including roadway impact fees, have been
assessed except as provided otherwise by contract. For a residential
development which is submitted for preliminary plat approval pursuant to the
city's subdivision regulations subsequent to the effective date of this
chapter, impact fees shall be assessed at the time of final plat approval.



   (B)   All roadway impact fees shall be collected for residential
development at the time of building permit issuance.



   (C)   All roadway impact fees shall be collected for nonresidential
development at time of building permit issuance.



   (D)   For one year after the effective date of this section, the
roadway impact fees to be collected from development on lots within a
subdivision that has either preliminary or final plat approval from the city
before the effective date of this section shall be at the current collected
roadway impact fee per land use category per service area previously adopted
via Ordinance No. OR-1757-09.  Following the expiration of one year from the
effective date of this section, development on lots previously platted shall
be subject to the current collected roadway impact fee per land use category
per service area then in effect, as provided in Exhibit F to Ordinance
OR-1955-15.



   (E)   The city may, at its sole discretion, establish a different
date of fee collection than those provided in this section.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. OR-1757-09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord.
OR-1955-15, passed 7-27-15)



§ 153.28  (RESERVED).



§ 153.29  OFFSETS AND CREDITS AGAINST IMPACT FEES.



   (A)   The city may offset the present value of any system-related
facilities, pursuant to rules established in this section, which have been
dedicated to and have been received by the city, including the value of
capital improvements constructed pursuant to an agreement with the city as
set forth in § 153.48, against the value of the impact fee due for that
category of capital improvement.



   (B)   Any subdivision which has paid a perimeter street fee pursuant
to the provisions of the city subdivision ordinance shall be exempt from the
payment of a roadway impact fee for that development as the City Council has
determined that it is appropriate to give a 100% credit for roadway fee
payments to such developments. A development that has received a refund of a
perimeter street fee payment pursuant to § 10B of the city subdivision
ordinance shall not be entitled to such a credit. A subdivision that has
received only preliminary plat approval on the effective date of this chapter
and has been identified as being subject to the payment of a perimeter street
fee prior to final plat approval shall be required to pay the perimeter
street fee prior to final plat release but shall not be assessed roadway
impact fees if the perimeter street fee is paid within 12 months following
the effective date of this chapter. A development that has not paid its
perimeter street fee within 12 months following the effective date of this
chapter shall lose its exemption and shall be assessed an impact fee in the
same manner as any other development of a comparable character.
Contemporaneously with the consideration of this chapter, the City Council is
contemplating an amendment of the subdivision control ordinance to delete the
requirement for certain subdivisions to pay perimeter street fees unless the
fee has already been assessed in a preliminary or final plat approval prior
to the effective day of this chapter.



   (C)   The city shall credit impact, pro rata, acreage or lot fees
which have been paid pursuant to other city ordinances prior to the effective
date of this chapter against the value of impact fees due for that category
of capital improvement, subject to guidelines established by the city.



   (D)   All offsets and credits against impact fees shall be subject
to the following limitations and shall be granted based on this chapter and
additional standards promulgated by the city which may be adopted as
administrative guidelines.



      (1)   No offset or credit shall be given for the dedication or
construction of site-related facilities.



      (2)   The unit costs used to calculate the offsets shall not
exceed those assumed for the capital improvements included in the Capital
Improvements Plan for the category of facility within the service area for
which the impact fee is imposed.



      (3)   If an offset or credit applicable to a plat has not been
exhausted within ten years from the date of the acquisition of the first tap
purchase made after the effective date of this chapter or within such period
as may be otherwise designated by contract, the offset or credit shall lapse.



      (4)   In no event will the city reimburse the property owner
or developer for an offset or credit when no impact fees for the new
development can be collected pursuant to this chapter or for any value
exceeding the total impact fees due for the development for that category of
capital improvement, unless otherwise agreed to by the city.



   (E)   An applicant for new development must apply for an offset or
credit against impact fees due for the development either at or before the
time of fee payment, unless the city agrees to a different time. The
applicant shall file a petition for offsets or credits with the city on a
form provided for such purpose. The contents of the petition shall be
established by administrative guidelines. The city must provide the
applicant, in writing, with a decision on the offset or credit request,
including the reasons for the decision. The decision shall specify the
maximum value of the offset or credit which may be applied against an impact
fee, which value and the date of the determination shall be associated with
the plat for the new development.



   (F)   The available offset or credit associated with the plat shall
be applied against an impact fee in the following manner.



      (1)   The offset or credit shall be prorated equally among all
living units equivalent (LUE), as calculated in § 153.09, and remain
applicable to the LUE's, to be applied at time of filing and acceptance of an
application for a building permit or tap purchase, as appropriate, against
impact fees due.



      (2)   If the total number of LUE's used by the city in the
original offset or credit calculation described in subsection (F)(1) is
eventually exceeded by the number of total LUE's realized by the actual
development, the city may, at its sole discretion, collect the full impact
fee exclusive of any associated offset or credits for the excess LUE's.



      (3)   At its sole discretion, the city may authorize
alternative credit or offset agreements upon petition by the owner in
accordance with guidelines promulgated by the city.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



§ 153.30  ESTABLISHMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS.



   (A)   The city shall establish separate interest-bearing accounts in
a bank authorized to receive deposits of city funds for each major category
of capital facility for which an impact fee is imposed pursuant to this
chapter.



   (B)   Interest earned by each account shall be credited to that
account and shall be used solely for the purposes specified for funds
authorized in § 153.31.



   (C)   The city shall establish adequate financial and accounting
controls to ensure that impact fees disbursed from the account are utilized
solely for the purposes authorized in § 153.31. Disbursement of funds shall
be authorized by the city at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry
out the purposes and intent of this chapter; provided, however, that any fee
paid shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed
ten years from the date the fee is deposited into the account.



   (D)   The city shall maintain and keep adequate financial records
for each such account, which shall show the source and disbursement of all
revenues, which shall account for all monies received and which shall ensure
that the disbursement of funds from each account shall be used solely and
exclusively for the provision of uses specified in the capital improvements
program as system-related capital projects. The City Finance Department shall
also maintain such records as are necessary to ensure that refunds are
appropriately made under the provision in § 153.46 of this chapter and any
other information as may be necessary for the proper implementation of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



§ 153.31  USE OF PROCEEDS OF CAPITAL RECOVERY FEE ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   The impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter may be used
to finance or to recoup capital construction costs of service. Impact fees
may also be used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance
costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city
to finance the capital improvements or facilities expansions.



   (B)   Impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall not be
used to pay for any of the following expenses:



      (1)   Construction, acquisition or expansion of capital
improvements or assets other than those identified for the appropriate
utility in the Capital Improvements Plan.



      (2)   Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new
capital improvements or facilities expansions.



      (3)   Upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital
improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards.



      (4)   Upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital
improvements to provide better service to existing development; provided
however, that impact fees may be used to pay the costs of upgrading,
expanding or replacing existing capital improvements in order to meet the
need for new capital improvements generated by new development.



      (5)   Administrative and operating costs of the city.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 153.45  APPEALS.



   (A)   The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal
the following decisions to the Director, or his/her designate:



      (1)   The applicability of an impact fee to the development.



      (2)   The value of the impact fee due.



      (3)   The availability or the value of an offset or credit.



      (4)   The application of an offset or credit against an impact
fee due.



      (5)   The amount of the refund due, if any.



   (B)   All appeals shall be taken within 30 days of notice of the
action from which the appeal is taken.



   (C)   The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate
that the value of the fee or the value of the offset or credit was not
calculated according to the applicable impact fee schedule or the guidelines
established for determining offsets and credits.



   (D)   The appellant may appeal the decision of the Director to the
Council. A notice of appeal to the Council must be filed by the applicant
with the City Secretary within 30 days following the Director's decision. If
the notice of appeal is accompanied by a bond or other sufficient surety
satisfactory to the City Attorney in an amount equal to the original
determination of the impact fee due, the development application, subdivision
plat, tap purchase or building permit issuance may be processed while the
appeal is pending.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



§ 153.46  REFUNDS.



   (A)   Any impact fee, or portion thereof, collected pursuant to this
chapter which has not been expended within ten years from the date of
payment, shall be refunded, upon application, to the record owner of the
property at the time the refund is paid, or, if the impact fee was paid by
another governmental entity, to the governmental entity.



   (B)   If a refund is due pursuant to division (A), the city shall
pro-rate the same by dividing the difference between the amount of
expenditures and the amount of the fees collected by the total number of
service units actually developed within the service area for the period to
determine the refund due per service unit. The refund to the record owner or
governmental entity shall be calculated by multiplying the refund due per
service unit by the number of service units for the development for which the
fee was paid and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount.



   (C)   Petition for refunds shall be submitted to the Director on a
form provided by the city for such purpose. Within one month of the date of
receipt of a petition for refund, the Director must provide the petitioner,
in writing, with a decision on the refund request, including the reasons for
the decision. If a refund is due to the petitioner, the Director shall notify
the Finance Director and request that a refund payment be made to the
petitioner. The petitioner may appeal the determination to the Council, as
set forth in § 153.45.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



§ 153.47  FUNCTIONS OF ADVISORY COMMITTEE.



   (A)   The functions of the Advisory Committee are those set forth in
the Local Government Code, Ch. 395, or any successor statute, and shall
include the following:



      (1)   Advise and assist the city in adopting land use
assumptions.



      (2)   Review the Capital Improvements Plan regarding water,
wastewater and roadway capital improvements and file written comments thereon.



      (3)   Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital
improvements program.



      (4)   Advise the city of the need to update or revise the land
use assumptions, capital improvements program and impact fees.



      (5)   File a semiannual report evaluating the progress of the
city in achieving the Capital Improvements Plans and identifying any problems
in implementing the plans or administering the impact fees.



   (B)   The city shall make available to the Advisory Committee any
professional reports prepared in the development or implementation of the
Capital Improvements Plan.



   (C)   The Committee shall adopt procedural rules for carrying out
its duties.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



§ 153.48  AGREEMENT FOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.



   The City Council may authorize the owner of a new development to
construct or finance some of the public improvements identified in the CIP.
In the case of the approval, the property owner must enter into an agreement
with the city prior to fee collection. The agreement shall be on a form
approved by the city and shall establish the estimated cost of improvement,
the schedule for initiation and completion of the improvement, a requirement
that the improvement shall be completed to city standards and any other terms
and conditions the city deems necessary. The Director shall review the
improvement plan, verify costs and time schedules, determine if the
improvement is contained in the CIP and determine the method and timing of
reimbursing the owner for construction costs from impact fee or other
revenues.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



§ 153.49  USE OF OTHER FINANCING MECHANISMS.



   (A)   The city may finance roadway capital improvements or
facilities expansions designated in the Capital Improvements Plan through the
issuance of bonds, through the formation of public improvement districts or
other assessment districts, or through any other authorized mechanism, in
such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in
addition to the use of impact fees.



   (B)   Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and
collection of an impact fee shall be additional and supplemental to, and not
in substitution of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is
lawfully imposed on and due against the property.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



§ 153.50  IMPACT FEES AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATION.



   (A)   Impact fees established by this chapter are additional and
supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed
by the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits or
the sale of water or wastewater taps or the issuance of certificates of
occupancy. The fees are intended to be consistent with and to further the
policies of City's Comprehensive Plan, Capital Improvements Plan, zoning
ordinance, subdivision regulations and other city policies, ordinances and
resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of adequate
public facilities in conjunction with the development of land.



   (B)   This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible
use of property, density of development, design and improvement standards and
requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of
public improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or
other regulations of the city, which shall be operative and remain in full
force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



§ 153.51  RELIEF PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Any person who has paid an impact fee or an owner of land upon
which an impact fee has been paid may petition the Council to determine
whether any duty required by this chapter has not been performed within the
time so prescribed. The petition shall be in writing and shall state the
nature of the unperformed duty and request that the act be performed within
60 days of the request. If the Council determines that the duty is required
pursuant to this chapter and is late in being performed, it shall cause the
duty to commence within 60 days of the date of the request and to continue
until completion.



   (B)   The Council may grant a variance or waiver from any
requirement of this chapter upon written request by a developer or owner of
property subject to this chapter, following a public hearing, upon finding
that a strict application of the requirement would, when regarded as a whole,
result in confiscation of the property.



(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)



CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISIONS



Section



   154.01   Subdivision regulations adopted by reference



§ 154.01  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The comprehensive subdivision ordinance, as amended, copies of which
are on file in the office of the City Secretary, is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length in this
code of ordinances.



(Ord. 213, passed 5-13-69)



CHAPTER 155: ZONING



Section



   155.01   Zoning regulations adopted by reference



§ 155.01  ZONING REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The comprehensive zoning ordinance, as amended, copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Secretary, is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length in this code of
ordinances.



(Ord. 293, passed 12-23-74; Am. Ord. 1170, passed 6-23-97; Am. Ord. 1182,
passed 11-10-97; Am. Ord. 1356, passed 7-2-01; Am. Ord. 1403, passed
10-14-02; Am. Ord. 1415, passed 2-10-03)



CHAPTER 156:  PARK LAND DEDICATION AND DEVELOPMENT FEE



Section



   156.01   Short title



   156.02   Purpose and applicability



   156.03   Park land dedication



   156.04   Park land dedication acceptance criteria



   156.05   Cash in lieu of land



   156.06   Park development fee



   156.07   Credit against park land dedication and park development fee



   156.08   Park development fund and right to refund



   156.09   Approval and appeal process



Cross-reference:



   For provisions concerning Parks and Recreation, see Ch. 96



§ 156.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as the Park Land Dedication and
Development Fee Chapter.



(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03)



§ 156.02  PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   This chapter is adopted to provide adequate recreational areas
and amenities in the form of neighborhood parks as a function of subdivision
development in the city and to make the park land dedication and park
development fee requirements an integral part of the review and approval of
residential developments, whether the developments consist of new
construction on previously vacant land or rebuilding and redeveloping
existing residential areas.



   (B)   New developments or redevelopments that involve only the
replacement or reconstruction of pre-existing dwelling units shall be exempt
from the provisions of this chapter, provided that the developments do not
increase the density of the preexisting dwelling units or involve a replat of
the property.



   (C)   Neighborhood parks are those parks that provide a variety of
outdoor, recreational facilities and within convenient distances from a
majority of the residences to be served by such parks, the standards for
which are set forth in the Mansfield Parks, Open Spaces and Trails Master
Plan.



   (D)   The park quadrants established by the Mansfield Parks and
Recreation Department and shown in the Mansfield Parks, Open Spaces and
Trails Master Plan and Exhibit "A" attached to Ordinance 1421, shall be prima
facie evidence that any park located therein is within a convenient distance
from the majority of residences to be served thereby.  The cost of the
neighborhood parks should be borne by the ultimate residential property
owners who, by reason of the proximity of their property to such parks, shall
be the primary beneficiaries of such parks.



   (E)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the corporate
limits as well as the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as a portion
of the subdivision regulation process.



   (F)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to properties
that are included in a valid preliminary or final plat application that was
submitted before the effective date of this chapter.



(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03)



§ 156.03  PARK LAND DEDICATION.



   (A)   The city has adopted by Council action the Mansfield parks,
open spaces and trails master plan, which provides planning policy and
guidance for the development of a municipal park and recreation system for
the city.  The plan has assessed the need for park land and park
improvements to serve the citizens of Mansfield.  The plan has carefully
assessed the impact on the park and recreation system created by each new
development and has established a dedication and/or cost requirement based
upon individual dwelling units.  The plan constitutes an individualized fact
based determination of the impact of new living units on the park and
recreation system and establishes an exaction system designed to ensure that
new living units bear their proportional share of the cost of providing park
and recreation related services.  Park land dedication requirements and park
development fee assessments are based upon the mathematical formulas and
allocations set forth within the plan. A summary table of the dedication and
cost requirements is set forth in a park land dedication table attached
hereto and incorporated herein for all purposes as Exhibit "B" attached to
Ordinance 1421.



   (B)   When developing residential properties, the owner or developer
shall be responsible for a fee simple dedication of park land at a ratio of
1/100 of an acre or 435.6 square feet of land for each proposed dwelling
unit.  A "dwelling unit" shall mean each individual residence, including
each individual residential unit in a multi-family residential structure or
manufactured home park, designed or intended for habitation by a single
family.  Hereinafter, all references to "the developer" shall mean both the
owner and the developer jointly and severally, where the owner and developer
are not the same party.



   (C)   Any proposed plat submitted to the city for approval shall
show the area required to be dedicated under this section.  In the event a
plat is not required, the dedication of land required under this section
shall be conveyed to the city through a warranty deed, approved by the city
as to form and substance, prior to the issuance of a building permit.



   (D)   Each corner of the park land dedication shall have an iron rod
or pin set, in accordance with other lot corners in the subdivision.  In the
absence of a plat, the location of iron rods or pins set for corners shall be
identified on a recordable land survey completed by a land surveyor
registered in the State of Texas, provided to the city by the developer, and
approved by the city as to form and substance.



   (E)   The owner or developer shall meet with the Director of Parks
and Recreation or his/her designee (hereinafter referred to the "Director")
to ensure compliance with the requirements in this section prior to
platting.  An application for plat approval shall not be accepted unless it
is accompanied by written review comments from the Director.



   (F)   The City Council and the Mansfield Park Facilities Development
Corporation generally consider that development of an area less than five
acres for neighborhood park purposes may be inefficient for public
maintenance.  Therefore, if fewer than five acres are proposed as park land
dedication, the Director shall have the option to: (1) accept the land
dedication; (2) require the developer to pay the applicable cash in lieu of
land amount as provided in § 156.05 below; or (3) reject the land dedication
and grant credit for a private park as provided in § 156.07.



   (G)   The Director, prior to plat submittal, will define the optimum
location of the required park land dedication based upon the proposed park
being located adjacent to current or future park land and based on the City's
Parks, Open Spaces and Trails Master Plan.  If there is not an opportunity
for the proposed park land dedication to be adjacent to current or future
park land, then the Director and Developer will work together to define an
optimum location for the park land dedication.  If an optimum location
cannot be determined, then the director shall accept the cash in lieu of land
option as outlined in § 156.05.



   (H)   In the case of a multi-phase development, if the developer
dedicates all the park land required by this chapter in the first or early
phase(s) of the development, no additional park land dedication will be
required in later phases unless additional lots that are not shown in the
original preliminary plat are included in the later phases of the development.



   (I)   Unless approved by the director, no construction materials
shall be disposed of or deposited within the dedicated park land by the
developer or its contractors, subcontractors, employees, or agents, at any
time while the subdivision is being built.  If materials are deposited or
disposed of within the park, the developer shall remove such materials within
72 hours of written notice by the city.  If the developer fails to remove
the materials after notice, the city may do so at the developer's expense and
no building permits shall be issued for the subdivision(s) until that debt is
paid to the city by the developer.



(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03)



§ 156.04  PARK LAND DEDICATION ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA.



   (A)   Land dedicated for a park or recreational area shall be of
such size, dimensions, topography, and general character as is reasonably
required by the city for the type of use necessary to meet the demand and
need of future residents.  Recreational needs for which land is dedicated
may include but not be limited to multipurpose trails, equestrian trails,
open space buffer areas, swimming pools, active recreation for team or
individual sports, playground, picnic area, and similar uses.



   (B)   Rare, unique, endangered, historic or other significant
natural areas will be given a high priority for dedication pursuant to this
chapter.  Areas that provide an opportunity for linkages between parks or
that preserve the natural character of the surrounding environment may be
required by the city to be included in the park land dedication.



   (C)   The city shall not accept land dedication pursuant to this
chapter if it is subject to one or more of the following disqualification
unless individually and expressly approved by the director:



      (1)   Land within floodplain and floodway designated areas, as
defined by the Mansfield Master Drainage Plans, unless such land dedication
contains an open area as part of the total park land dedication property that
is topographically suitable for the installation of the park amenities as
defined in § 156.04 for neighborhood parks;



      (2)   Park land dedication sites which do not have ready
access to public streets;



      (3)   Park land dedication sites abutted by private properties
on more than two-thirds of the total boundary dimension of such site; or



      (4)   Areas encumbered by overhead utility lines or easements
of any type which might limit the opportunity for park and recreation
development.



   (D)   The city will not accept park land dedication sites encumbered
by hazardous and or municipal waste materials or dump sites.



   (E)   If a developer proposes to dedicate land for park development
purposes pursuant to the terms, conditions and requirements of this chapter,
he or she shall permit the director to make an onsite inspection of the
property for the purposes of determining site suitability and identification
of any visual hazards or impediments to park development and use.  If the
property owner has any form of environmental assessment on the tract, a copy
of that assessment shall be provided to the director.  The director may
initiate and/or require the developer to initiate specific environmental
studies or assessments if the visual inspection of the site gives rise to the
belief that an environmental problem may exist on the site.  The director
may require the employment of those consultants necessary to evaluate any
environmental issues relating to the site providing that the director makes
such determination in good faith.  If an environmental hazard is identified
on the site, the developer must remove the hazard prior to its acceptance
into the park and recreation system of the city.



   (F)   The intentions of this chapter is not to discourage the
creation of parks and amenities in subdivisions that will be maintained by
homeowners associations.



(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03)



§ 156.05  CASH IN LIEU OF LAND.



   (A)   An owner or developer responsible for park land dedication
under this chapter may be required, at the director's option, to meet the
dedication requirements in whole or in part by a cash payment in lieu of land
in the amount set forth below.  Such payment in lieu of land dedication
shall be made prior to filing the plat for record or prior to the issuance of
a building permit where a plat is not required.  All funds collected
pursuant to this section shall be used solely for the acquisition or leasing
of park land in the park quadrant in which the subdivision or development is
located.



   (B)   In instances where land is required to be dedicated, the
director shall have the right to reject the park land dedication and require
a cash payment in lieu of land in the amount set forth below, if the director
determines that:



      (1)   The park land dedication site is such a small area that
it is inefficient to maintain;



      (2)   Sufficient park area is already in the public domain for
the park quadrant where the proposed development is located, and the
recreation needs of the citizens will be better served by expanding or
improving existing parks in said park quadrant; and



      (3)   Development projects within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city are subject to the park land dedication requirements
set forth within this chapter; however, the difficulty faced by the city in
maintaining property outside the corporate limits of the city may result in
the application of a fee in lieu of the land dedication requirement.



   (C)   The cash payment in lieu of land dedication shall be met by
the payment of a fee set from time to time by city ordinance sufficient to
acquire neighborhood park land.  Unless and until changed by city ordinance,
the cash payment shall be computed on the basis of $500 per dwelling unit
within the proposed subdivision.



   (D)   A cash payment in lieu of land dedication, as set forth in
this section, does not relieve the owner or developer of the obligation to
pay the park development fee set forth in § 156.06.  The cash payment in
lieu of land dedication is in addition to the required park development fee.



(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03)



§ 156.06  PARK DEVELOPMENT FEE.



   (A)   In addition to the required dedication of land, as set forth
above and based upon the study referenced in § 156.03(A), the developer or
his or her successor shall pay a park development fee to the city as a
condition to building permit issuance.  However, for developments in the
extra-territorial jurisdiction that are not subject to building permit
requirement, the developer shall pay the park development fee prior to the
recording of the final plat at the county.  The park development fee shall
be set from time to time by city ordinance and shall be sufficient to provide
for the development of amenities and improvements on dedicated neighborhood
park land in the park quadrant in which the subdivision or development is
located.  Unless and until changed by city ordinance, the park development
fee shall be calculated on the basis of $750 per dwelling unit in the
subdivision.



   (B)   In lieu of payment of the required park development fee, the
developer, with approval of the Director, may have the option to construct
the neighborhood park and improvements.  All public park improvements shall
meet the minimum requirements set forth in the Mansfield Parks, Open Spaces
and Trails Master Plan or amendment thereof.  All development plans and
specifications for the construction of said park improvements shall meet the
minimum design and construction standards as provided by the Mansfield Parks
and Recreation Department, be sealed by a landscape architect registered in
the State of Texas and be reviewed and approved by the director prior to
construction.  The developer shall financially guarantee the construction of
such park improvements by providing performance and payment bonds, an
irrevocable letter of credit, or other similar security that is deemed
acceptable by the director prior to the recording of the plat for the
subdivision.  Performance and payment bonds shall name the city as dual
obligee and shall cover 100% of the estimated construction cost of such park
improvements as shown in a construction contract executed by the developer. 
The developer shall be required to provide a two year maintenance bond that
is equal in amount to 100% of the construction cost of said park improvements
and a manufacturers letter stating the main play structure and safety surface
was installed in accordance with the manufacturers installation
requirements.  The developer shall also provide a copy of the application
and subsequent inspection report prepared by the Texas Department of
Licensing and Regulation or their contracted reviewer for compliance with the
Architectural Barriers Act, codified as Article 9102, Texas Civil Statutes. 
All park improvements may be inspected by the city while construction is in
progress.  Once the park improvements are constructed, and after the
director has accepted such improvements, the developer shall deed and convey
such improvements to the city and clear of any lien or other encumbrances.



(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03)



§ 156.07  CREDIT AGAINST PARK LAND DEDICATION AND PARK DEVELOPMENT FEE.



   (A)   The developer of a subdivision shall receive a credit against
the park land dedication and park development fee requirements if the
subdivision includes a private park or recreational facility.  The amount of
land in such private park or recreational facility shall count towards
meeting the park land dedication requirement imposed on the developer,
provided that the land meets the Park Land Dedication Acceptance Criteria in
§ 156.04 above.  The developer shall receive a proportional credit, as
determined by the director, based on actual out-of-pocket dollar costs that
the developer incurred for the improvement of the private park or
recreational facility.  The actual out-of-pocket dollar costs must be
evidenced by documentation approved by the director.  The proportional
credit amount, as determined by the director, shall count toward meeting the
total park development fee imposed on the developer.



   (B)   The park development fee assessed against a development
pursuant to this chapter is for the specific purpose of developing the
acreage that would be developed for park purposes under this chapter. Each
acre of park land will be developed with amenities by the park development
fee charged against the development.  If a developer proposes to develop an
amenity or subdivision recreation site on their property but will do so on a
land area less than the full amount required for park land dedication under
this chapter they shall receive credit for 100% of the funds they spend on
developing that site.  A developer will be given credit for the amenities
they install on their site but the credit will be capped by the maximum
amount of the fee that would be charged for the land area they are actually
using.  A developer may not over commit amenity improvements on a specific
tract thereby eliminating the availability of park development fees remaining
to be used on the balance of the land projected for dedication by the
development for park purposes.



   (C)   Credits requested pursuant to this chapter will only be given
for amenities that meet the minimum design and construction standards as set
forth by the Mansfield Parks and Recreation Department.



   (D)   A developer of a subdivision who dedicates more than the
required park land requirements for that specific subdivision may receive
credits for future park land dedication requirements for other subdivision
developments that he may undertake at a future date in the same quadrant.



   (E)   A developer of a subdivision may dedicate park land that is
not within the boundaries of his or her development and receive park land
dedication credits for that subdivision.  The proposed park land dedication
must be approved by the director prior to the filing of the preliminary
plat.  The proposed park land dedication property must be in the same
quadrant as the proposed subdivision, within a reasonable distance of
existing or developing residential neighborhoods and meet the park land
dedication criteria outlined in § 156.04.



(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03)



§ 156.08  PARK DEVELOPMENT FUND AND RIGHT TO REFUND.



   (A)   All funds collected pursuant to this chapter shall be
deposited in the City of Mansfield's Park Development Fund and used solely
for the acquisition or leasing of park land and the development, improvement,
or upgrades of new and existing parks.  All expenditures shall be
administered in accordance with the current purchasing requirements of the
city and the Mansfield Park Facilities Development Corporation.  Funds shall
not be used for the operation and maintenance of parks.



   (B)   The city shall account for all sums paid into the Park
Development Fund.  Any monies paid into said fund must be expended by the
city within ten years from the date that all the land for a neighborhood park
for the subdivision has been acquired and when the subdivision(s) adjacent to
that park land has been 75% built out.  If not so expended within the
ten-year period, the then current owners of the property shall, on the last
day of such period, be entitled to a refund of the remaining fees.  Said
owners must submit to the city a written request for the refund within one
year of the date of entitlement or the right to receive the refund will be
deemed waived and the funds shall remain as property of the city and be used
for the general purpose of park land acquisition, design and development as
expressed in this chapter.



(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03)



§ 156.09  APPROVAL AND APPEAL PROCESS.



   (A)   The director shall be responsible for the review and approval
of all park land dedication and park development fees submitted in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Any decision made by the director may be appealed to the
Mansfield Park Facilities Development Corporation.



   (C)   The director may defer the approval of park land dedication or
park development fees to the Mansfield Park Facilities Development
Corporation for any reason.



   (D)   Any decision made by the Mansfield Park Facilities Development
Corporation may be appealed to the City Council except for subdivision
platting issues that the Planning and Zoning Commission has authority over.



(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



Table



      I.   ANNEXATIONS



      II.   CONTRACTS



      III.   FRANCHISES



      IV.   VACATIONS



TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


1133
 
11-11-96
 
Annexing a tract of land in the M. W. Davenport Survey Abstract No. 432,
Ellis County, Texas.


1347
 
4-23-01
 
Annexing 0.726 acres situated in the eastern right-of-way of Warren Road,
Tarrant County, Texas.


OR-1987-15
 
12-16-15
 
Annexing 158 acres situated in Johnson County described and depicted in
Exhibit “A” of Ord. OR-1987-15.


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE II: CONTRACTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1199
 
3-23-98
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a contract to lease the facility located
at 103 West Broad Street to Woodhaven National Bank.


1569
 
4-10-06
 
Authorizing the sale of certain real property located at the northeast corner
of Highway 287 and Broad Street to DCB Properties, Ltd.


1656
 
12-10-07
 
Authorizing contracts of sale to Fort Worth Area Habitat for Humanity, Inc.
and the Historic West Mansfield Community Development Corporation to
construct new, affordable single-family housing in the city.


OR-1702-08
 
8-11-08
 
Authorizing contract of sale to Fort Worth Area Habitat for Humanity, Inc. to
construct new, affordable single- family housing in the city.


OR-1745-09
 
6-8-09
 
Authorizing contract of sale to Fort Worth Area Habitat for Humanity, Inc. to
construct new affordable single-family housing in the city.


OR-1747-09
 
6-8-09
 
Authorizing contract of sale to Fort Worth Area Habitat for Humanity, Inc. to
construct new affordable single-family housing in the city.


OR-1847-12
 
10-22-12
 
Authorizing a boundary agreement between the City of Mansfield and the City
of Grand Prairie releasing and accepting corporate limits.


OR-1851-12
 
11-12-12
 
Authorizing a contract of sale to Fort Worth Area Habitat for Humanity, Inc.,
to construct new affordable single-family housing in the city.


OR-1852-12
 
11-12-12
 
Authorizing the execution of a gas lease agreement between the city and XTO
Energy for city-owned property located at 2464 Callender Road.


OR-1860-12
 
12-10-12
 
Authorizing the conveyance of legal interests acquired due to tax delinquency
in certain real property located at 2464 Callender Road.


OR-1865-13
 
1-14-13
 
Authorizing the conveyance of certain real property commonly known as the
Station House at 100 East Broad Street to Mellow Mushroom Three Peat Inc.


OR-1869-13
 
3-18-13
 
Authorizing the conveyance of certain real property located at 528 Patterson
Drive to Trinity Habitat for Humanity.


OR-1880-13
 
7-22-13
 
Authorizing the execution of a gas lease agreement between the city and
Chesapeake Exploration, LLC, for city-owned property located at 3100 East
Broad Street.


OR-1889-13
 
11-25-13
 
Authorizing a lease agreement with Dallas MTA, L.P. d/b/a Verizon Wireless.


OR-1896-13
 
12-10-13
 
Authorizing the sale of 10.588 acres of land located in the Thomas J. Hanks
survey, and including a portion of Blocks 40 and 41 and a portion of Oak
Street, to the Mansfield Park Facilities Development Corporation.


OR-1939-15
 
2-23-15
 
Authorizing a development agreement and contract of sale for the conveyance
of 0.463 acres north of Alvarado Street between First Avenue and Second
Avenue to Posse Construction LLC D/B/A Mansfield Custom Homes.


OR-1945-15
 
4-15-15
 
Authorizing the lease of certain real property located at 110  S. Main
Street and at 109 W. Broad Street to the Historic Mansfield Performance Park
for the purpose of constructing and operating an outdoor amphitheater.


OR-1959-15
 
8-24-15
 
Approving a sports facility lease and operating agreement.


OR-1997-16
 
2-8-16
 
Approving Mansfield Starcenter lease and operating agreement.


OR-2015-16
 
8-22-16
 
Approving modification of Mansfield Starcenter lease and operating agreement.


OR-2016-16
 
8-22-16
 
Authorizing the conveyance of approximately 4.22 acres of city property to
Shops at Broad, LLC.


OR-2077-18
 
1-22-18
 
Authorizing the conveyance of certain real property located at 229 Cotton
Drive to Trinity Habitat for Humanity.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III: FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1178
 
9-22-97
 
Granting the Lone Star Gas Company a gas sales and distribution franchise for
a term of 20 years.


1205
 
5-26-98
 
Granting to Trinity Waste Services a waste disposal and residential recycling
collection franchise.


1256
 
4-12-99
 
Granting consent to the transfer of control of a cable television system and
franchise from Marcus Cable Associates, L.L.C. to Paul G. Allen.


1443
 
9-8-03
 
Granting to Duncan Disposal a waste disposal and residential recycling
collection franchise.


1582
 
8-14-06
 
Amending Ordinance 1443.


OR-1705-08
 
8-25-08
 
Amending Ordinance 1443.


OR-1926-14
 
11-10-14
 
Granting to United Electric Cooperative Services an electric power franchise.


OR-2042-17
 
4-10-17
 
Granting a gas franchise to SiENergy, L.P.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IV: VACATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1123
 
7-22-96
 
Vacating and abandoning the 20 foot walkway right-of-way between Lots 9 and
10, Block 12, North Ridge Addition.


1146
 
2-10-97
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of the 30 foot right-of-way situated in the
William C. Lowe Survey, Abstract 970.


1167
 
6-13-97
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement on Lot 1, Block 41,
Walnut Creek Valley, Section XIX.


1168
 
6-13-97
 
Vacating and abandoning the former Bisbee Water Tower site.


1192
 
2-9-98
 
Vacating and abandoning a utility easement relating to Lots 2 and 4, Walnut
Creek Village.


1203
 
4-27-98
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of the right-of-way of the New Intermediate
School South Addition.


1221
 
8-10-98
 
Vacating and abandoning a utility easement within Lot 9, Block 7, Mansfield
Country Estates, Section 5.


1222
 
8-10-98
 
Vacating and abandoning a utility easement within Lot 1, Mansfield Town
Center.


1243
 
1-11-99
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement on Lot 6, Block 2,
Callender Hill.


1267
 
7-12-99
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement relating to Lot 2-R,
Block 11,  Arbors of Creekwood, Phase 6.


1308
 
3-13-00
 
Vacating and abandoning the right-of-way and easement in a 30 foot wide strip
of land located in the Henry McGehee Survey, Abstract No. 998, Mansfield,
Tarrant County, Texas.


1353
 
6-11-01
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement relating to Lot 22R,
Block 49, Walnut Creek Valley, Section XXI-C.


1357
 
7-9-01
 
Vacating and abandoning the right-of-way of Warren Road located in the J.M.
Thomas Survey Abstract No. 1514 and the Henry McGehee Survey, Abstract No.
998, Mansfield, Tarrant County, Texas.


1360
 
7-23-01
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of an utility easement relating to Lot 6,
Block 15, Hillcrest West Second Filing.


1364
 
8-27-01
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of the right-of-way of East Debbie Lane
located in the Henry McGehee Survey, Abstract No. 998, Mansfield, Tarrant
County, Texas.


1399
 
10-14-02
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of an  utility easement relating to Lot 5,
Block 3, the Fairways of Walnut Creek, Section 3.


1400
 
10-14-02
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of a drainage easement relating to Lot 114,
Block 1, the villages of Spring Lake, Phase 1.


1412
 
12-9-02
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of an utility easement relating to Lot
53-A, Block 49, Walnut Creek Valley, Section 21-C.


1413
 
1-13-03
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of an utility easement relating to Lot 2A2,
Block 48, Hillcrest Addition.


1438
 
6-23-03
 
Vacating and abandoning the right-of-way and easement relating to Lot 22,
Block 16, Section VII, Phase Two Walnut Creek Valley.


1527
 
4-11-05
 
Vacating and abandoning utility easement relating to Lots 5 through 9, Block
3, Strawberry Fields.


1535
 
5-9-05
 
Vacating and abandoning two right-of-ways relating to 0.174 acres of land
located in the northwest corner of the intersection of F.M. 157 and Russell
Lane.


1557
 
1-9-06
 
Vacating and abandoning a right-of- way easement, being approximately 12.77
acres.


1561
 
2-13-06
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of the right-of-way of Ragland Road
Extension.


1562
 
2-27-06
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement relating to Lot 5,
Block 1, McCampbell Estates.


1566
 
3-27-06
 
Vacating and abandoning a utility easement relating to Lot 28, Block 4,
Heritage Estates, Section 12.


1574
 
5-22-06
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of the right-of-way of the former County
Road south of the Philip Thompson Soccer Complex.


1670
 
2-11-08
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of the north and west half of the Seeton
Road right-of-way.


1671
 
2-11-08
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of the south and east half of the Seeton
Road right-of-way.


1675
 
2-25-08
 
Vacating and abandoning to the Texas Department of Transportation the
right-of-way on a portion of the new F.M. 917.


OR-1767-10
 
4-27-10
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of the right-of-way of East Dallas Street
between Waxahachie Street and Graves Street.


OR-1876-13
 
6-10-13
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of a right-of-way along the south side of
Cannon Drive, east of Miller Road.


OR-1897-13
 
12-10-13
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement relating to Lot 9,
Block 5, Twin Creeks addition.


OR-1900-14
 
1-28-14
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of Hospital Drive and declaring that such
property is unnecessary for use by the public.


OR-1935-14
 
12-9-14
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of drainage easement north of National
Parkway and east of S. Holland Rd.


OR-1936-14
 
12-9-14
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement relating to Lot 7,
Block 5, Twin City Creeks addition.


OR-1950-15
 
6-8-15
 
Vacating and abandoning a drainage easement relating to Plainco Properties,
L. P.


OR-1958-15
 
8-24-15
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement relating to Lot 1,
Block 1, Villas Di Lucca addition.


OR-1996-16
 
2-8-16
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of the right-of-way along North Main Street.


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Texas Codes





References to 1978 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO TEXAS CODES




Administrative Code




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section




265.301 - 265.308
 
92.41


288.1
 
Ch. 54, App. A


288.2
 
54.42 , Ch. 54, App. A


288.2(a)(1)(A), (C) - (K)
 
54.36


288.2(a)(2)(A) - (C)
 
54.36


288.2(a)(3)(A), (B), (D), (F), (G)
 
54.36


307.10
 
52.18


363.15
 
Ch. 54, App. A


Tit. 25, Ch. 229, §§ 161-171, 173-175
 
94.02 , 94.03


Tit. 25, § 229.171(h)
 
94.06


Tit. 30, Part 1, Ch. 288, Subch. A,  Rule 288.2
 
54.36


Tit. 30, Part 1, Ch. 288, Subch. A,  Rule 288.2(a)(2)(B)
 
54.39


Tit. 30, Part 1, Ch. 288, Subch. B, Rule 288.20
 
54.02


Tit. 30, Part 3, Ch. 288, Subch. A, Rule 288.2.
 
54.42


Tit. 30, Ch. 291
 
54.99


Tit. 30, Ch. 312
 
115.003


Tit. 30, § 312.8
 
115.002


Tit. 30, § 312.44(j)(4)
 
115.044


Tit. 30, § 330.3 (148)
 
50.01


Tit. 30, § 330.5
 
50.01


Tit. 30, Part 1, Ch. 344
 
54.42


Tit. 31, § 363.15
 
Ch. 54, App. A




 




Agricultural Code




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section


Ch. 63
 
52.21


Ch. 75
 
52.21


Ch. 76
 
52.21



 




Code of Criminal Procedure




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section


Ch. 62
 
130.09


102.0172
 
37.15



 




Family Code




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section


51.12
 
110.27


141.042(d)
 
110.27



 




Health and Safety Code




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section




262.001
 
32.15, 32.16


Ch. 341
 
92.42


341.013
 
92.04


341.064
 
92.41


341.082
 
92.07


342.006 - 342.007
 
92.07


361.001 et seq.
 
71.27


365.012
 
92.03


371.024
 
52.21


Art. 481.134
 
130.09, 130.10


751.001 et seq.
 
98.30


Ch. 823
 
90.50


Ch. 826
 
90.02


826.017
 
90.01




 




Government Code




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section




Ch. 30, subc. CC
 
37.02


201.001 et seq.
 
31.03, 31.04


203.023
 
31.04


418.001 et seq.
 
36.02


551.001 et seq.
 
96.37


615.071 et seq.
 
34.04


851.001 et seq.
 
30.01




 




Local Government Code




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section




Ch. 9
 
Adopting Ordinance


22.042
 
34.15


53.001
 
Adopting Ordinance


53.001(b)
 
Adopting Ordinance


53.002
 
Adopting Ordinance


Ch. 54, subc. B
 
52.99


54.001
 
10.99


54.012(5)
 
52.99


Ch. 171
 
30.41


171.002
 
30.41


171.004
 
30.45


Ch. 214
 
150.011


331.001
 
Ch. 96


362.002
 
34.15


Ch. 395
 
153.03, 153.04, 153.07 - 153.12


395.014(a)(7)
 
153.10


395.015
 
153.10


Ch. 402
 
53.10


Ch. 402, subc. C
 
53.01


Ch. 402, subc. C, §§ 402.041 et seq.
 
53.02


Ch. 552
 
53.10


Ch. 552, subc. C
 
53.05


552.050
 
53.08




 




Occupational Code




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section


2104.001 et seq.
 
98.30



 




Parks and Wildlife Code




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section


31.055
 
93.01



 




Penal Code




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section




Ch. 21
 
112.22


21.01
 
112.26


Ch. 22
 
112.22


Ch. 25
 
112.22


28.02
 
33.01


28.03
 
96.21, 130.03


30.05
 
111.02


42.03
 
71.01, 98.01


42.09
 
90.06, 90.22, 96.23


Ch. 43
 
112.22


43.23
 
130.22


46.05
 
130.04




 




Property Code




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section


71.001 et seq.
 
34.55



 




Revised Civil Statutes




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section


1028
 
Ch. 38


1029
 
Ch. 38


1041
 
Ch. 38


1175(18)
 
98.01


6243-101
 
150.001


9102
 
156.06



 




Tax Code




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section


11.253
 
38.015


Ch. 23, subc. B
 
38.015


Ch. 321
 
38.01


351.002
 
38.15


352.003
 
38.15



 




Texas Constitution




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section


Art. XI, § 5
 
Adopting Ordinance, 53.02



 




Transportation Code




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section




545.356
 
71.04


550.026
 
70.02


550.067
 
70.02


621.303
 
71.25


623.163
 
71.27


Ch. 683
 
93.10


683.071
 
92.01




 




Utility Code




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section


Title 2
 
Ch. 51



 




Water Code




 

Statutory Cite
 
Code Section


11.039
 
54.18


13.315
 
151.01


16.053
 
Ch. 54, App. A


26.121
 
52.99


26.123(a)
 
52.99


26.124
 
52.99



 



REFERENCES TO 1978 CODE



 

1978 Code Section
 
2001 Code Section




1-2
 
10.18


1-5(part)
 
10.05


2-1
 
34.15


2-2
 
34.16


2-3
 
34.17


2-4
 
34.18


2-10
 
31.01


2-11
 
31.01


2-12
 
31.02


2-13
 
31.03


2-14
 
31.04


2-15
 
31.05


2-16
 
31.06


2-17
 
31.04


2-18
 
31.07


2-19
 
31.08


2-20
 
31.08


2-21
 
31.09


2-23
 
31.10, 31.11


2-24
 
31.12


2-25
 
31.13


2.5-1
 
112.01


2.5-2
 
112.02


2.5-3
 
112.03


2.5-20
 
112.04


2.5-21
 
112.05


2.5-30
 
112.20


2.5-31
 
112.21


2.5-32
 
112.22


2.5-33
 
112.23


2.5-34
 
112.24


2.5-35
 
112.25


2.5-36
 
112.26


2.5-37
 
112.27


2.5-38
 
112.28


2.5-41
 
112.40


2.5-42
 
112.41


2.5-43
 
112.42


2.5-44
 
112.43


2.5-45
 
112.44


2.5-50
 
112.99


2.5-51
 
112.06


3-1
 
130.20


3-2
 
130.21


3-3
 
130.22


4-1
 
130.01


6-30
 
150.040


6-31
 
150.041


6-32
 
150.042


6-33
 
150.043


6-34
 
150.044


6-35
 
150.045


6-36
 
150.046


6-37
 
150.047


6-38
 
150.048


6-39
 
150.049


6-40(a)
 
150.050


6-40(b)
 
150.099


6-50
 
150.002


6-54
 
150.003


6-82
 
150.001


6-95
 
150.020


6-96
 
150.021


6-97
 
150.022


6-98
 
150.023


6-99
 
150.024


6-100
 
150.026


6-101
 
150.027


6-102
 
150.028


6-103
 
150.029


7-1
 
36.01


7-2
 
36.02


7-3
 
36.03


7-4
 
36.04


7-5
 
36.05


7-6
 
36.06


7-7
 
36.07


7-8(a)
 
36.08


7-8(d)
 
36.99


8-1
 
33.01


8-2
 
33.02


8-3
 
33.02


8-20
 
33.15


8-21
 
33.16


8-22
 
33.17


8-23
 
33.18


8-24
 
33.19


8-25
 
33.20


8-26
 
33.21


8-27
 
91.01


8-28
 
91.02


8-29
 
91.03


8-31
 
91.04


8-40
 
91.15


8-41
 
91.16


8-42
 
91.17


8-43
 
91.18


8-44
 
91.19


8-45
 
91.20


8-49
 
91.99


9-1
 
92.02


9-2
 
92.02


9-3
 
130.07


9-4
 
130.07


9-5(a)
 
32.15


9-5(c)
 
32.16


9-20
 
92.01


9-21
 
92.03


9-22
 
92.04


9-27
 
92.06


9-28
 
92.07


9-29
 
92.08


9-30
 
92.09


9-47
 
92.99


9-81
 
92.20


9-82
 
92.21


9-83
 
92.22


9-84
 
92.23


9-85
 
92.25


9-88
 
92.40


9-89
 
92.41


9-90
 
92.42


9-91
 
92.43


9-92
 
92.44


9-93
 
92.46


9-94.1
 
92.48


9-95
 
92.49


9.5-11
 
95.01


9.5-12
 
95.02


9.5-13
 
95.03


9.5-14
 
95.04


9.5-21
 
95.15


9.5-31
 
95.16


9.5-32
 
95.17


9.5-33
 
95.18


9.5-34
 
95.19


9.9-1
 
37.01


9.9-2
 
37.02


9.9-3
 
37.03


9.9-4
 
37.04


9.9-5
 
37.05


9.9-6
 
37.06


10-20
 
111.01


10-23
 
111.02


10-24
 
111.15


10-25
 
111.16


10-26
 
111.17


10-27
 
111.18


10-28
 
111.19


10-29
 
111.20


10-30
 
110.45


10-31
 
110.46


10-32
 
110.47


10-33
 
110.48


10-40
 
110.10


10-41
 
110.11


10-42
 
110.99


10-50
 
110.25


10-51
 
110.26


10-52
 
110.27


10-53
 
110.28


10-54
 
110.29


10-55
 
110.27


10-56
 
110.30


10-57
 
110.31


10-58
 
110.32


10-60
 
38.15


10-61
 
38.16


10-61
 
38.17


10-63
 
38.18


10-64
 
38.19


10-65
 
38.19


10-80
 
98.50


10-81
 
98.51


10-82
 
98.52


10-83
 
98.53


10-84
 
98.54


10-85
 
98.55


10-90
 
110.01


11-1
 
130.02


11-2
 
130.02


11-3
 
130.03


11-4
 
130.04


11-20
 
98.30


11-21
 
98.31


11-22
 
98.32


11-23
 
98.33


11-24
 
98.34


11-25
 
98.35


11-26
 
98.36


11-27
 
98.37


11-36
 
130.35


11-37
 
130.37


11-38
 
130.38


11-39
 
130.36


11-51
 
130.05


11-61
 
130.06


11-70
 
130.50


11-71
 
130.51


11-72
 
130.52


11-73
 
130.53


11-74
 
130.54


11-75
 
130.55


12-1
 
96.01


12-3
 
96.37


12-4
 
96.37


12-5
 
96.37


12-6
 
96.37


12-7
 
96.36


12-8
 
96.35


12-9
 
96.20


12-10
 
96.21


12-11
 
96.22


12-12
 
96.23


12-13
 
96.24


12-14
 
96.25


12-21
 
96.02


12-22
 
96.03


12-23
 
96.04


12-24
 
96.05


13-50
 
30.15


13-51
 
30.16


13-52
 
30.17


13-53
 
30.18


13-54
 
30.19


13-55
 
30.20


13-56
 
30.21


13-57
 
30.22


13-58
 
30.23


13-59
 
30.24


13-60
 
30.25


13-61
 
30.26


13-62
 
30.27


13-63
 
30.30


13-64
 
30.28


13-65
 
30.29


13.5-11
 
34.30


13.5-12
 
34.31


13.5-13
 
34.32


13.5-14
 
34.33


13.5-15
 
34.34


13.5-16
 
34.35


13.5-17
 
34.36


13.5-26
 
34.50


13.5-27
 
34.51


13.5-28
 
34.52


13.5-29
 
34.53


13.5-30
 
34.54


13.5-31
 
34.55


13.5-36
 
34.01


13.5-37
 
34.02


13.5-38
 
34.03


13.5-39
 
34.04


14-1
 
38.02


14-2
 
38.03


14-3
 
38.04


14-4
 
38.05


15-1
 
98.01


15-2
 
98.15


15-3
 
98.16


15-4
 
98.17


15-5
 
98.18


15-6
 
98.18


15-7
 
98.02


16-1
 
70.01


16-2
 
71.01


16-3
 
70.02


16-4(part)
 
71.04


16-4(a)
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


16-4(b)
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


16-5
 
72.01


16-6
 
72.02


16-7
 
71.02


16-9
 
71.03


16-20
 
71.20


16-21
 
71.21


16-22
 
71.22


16-23(d)
 
71.23


16-23(e)
 
71.24


16-24
 
71.25


16-25
 
71.26


16-26
 
71.27


16-27
 
71.28


16-28
 
71.29


16-29
 
71.30


16-40
 
72.15


16-41
 
72.16


16-42
 
72.16


16-43
 
72.17


16-44
 
72.18


16-45
 
72.19


16-46
 
72.20


16-47
 
72.21


16-56
 
70.15


16-57
 
70.16


16-58
 
70.17


16-59
 
70.18


16-60
 
70.19


16-61
 
70.20


16-62
 
70.20


17-1
 
51.050


17-2
 
51.051


17-2.1
 
51.001


17-3
 
51.002


17-4
 
51.052


17-5
 
51.053


17-6(part)
 
51.054


17-7
 
33.35


17-8
 
33.36


17-9
 
33.37


17-10
 
33.38


17-38
 
51.055


17-38.1
 
51.056


17-44
 
51.999


17-71
 
51.070


17-72
 
51.071


17-73
 
51.072


17-74
 
51.073


17-75
 
51.074


17-76
 
51.075


17-77
 
51.078


17-78
 
51.079


17-79
 
51.076


17-80
 
51.077


17-81
 
51.080


17-82
 
51.081


17-83
 
51.082


17-84(a)
 
51.083


17-84(b)
 
51.999


17-85
 
51.095


17-86
 
51.096


17-87
 
51.097


17-88
 
51.098


17-89
 
51.099


17-90
 
51.100


17-91
 
51.101


17-92
 
51.102


17-93
 
51.103


18-20
 
113.26


18-21
 
113.26


18-22
 
113.25


18-23
 
113.27


18-24
 
113.28


18-25
 
113.29


18-26
 
113.30


18-27
 
113.31


18-28
 
113.32


18-29
 
113.33


18-30
 
113.34


18-31
 
113.35


18-32
 
113.36


18-33
 
113.37


18-34
 
113.38


18-35
 
113.39


18-36
 
113.40


18-37
 
113.41


18-38
 
113.42


18-50
 
113.01


18-51
 
113.02


18-52
 
113.02


18-53
 
113.03


18-54
 
113.04


18-55
 
113.05


18-56
 
113.06


18-57
 
113.07


18-58
 
113.08


18-59
 
113.09


18-60
 
113.99


 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




21
 
6-10-47
 
70.02, 72.01


109
 
5-27-58
 
130.01


113
 
7-8-58
 
92.03


122
 
8-1-59
 
92.02, 92.04, 92.09


131
 
4-11-61
 
96.21


134
 
5-9-61
 
71.02


142
 
6-26-62
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


144
 
8-14-62
 
92.05, 92.07, 98.01


146
 
9-11-62
 
72.02


148
 
11-13-62
 
33.01


153
 
4-23-63
 
72.02


154
 
6-11-63
 
92.01


163
 
2-13-64
 
150.040 - 150.050, 150.099


168
 
6-22-64
 
72.01


170
 
7-28-64
 
130.07


175
 
1-26-65
 
130.03


178
 
3-9-65
 
111.01


179
 
3-9-65
 
111.02


182
 
10-12-65
 
71.20, 71.22 - 71.30


163A
 
3-22-66
 
150.044


168A
 
5-24-66
 
72.01


207
 
10-22-68
 
92.01, 92.03


209
 
2-11-69
 
38.02 - 38.04


213
 
5-13-69
 
154.01


219
 
4-14-70
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


235
 
10-12-71
 
33.15


235
 
10-12-71
 
33.16 - 33.21, 91.01 - 91.04


248
 
9-12-72
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


251
 
10-24-72
 
150.002, 150.003


255
 
10-24-72
 
130.02


257
 
3-27-73
 
92.01, 92.99


277
 
5-14-74
 
150.001


280
 
7-9-74
 
51.053


293
 
12-23-74
 
155.01


303
 
5-27-75
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


304
 
7-8-75
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


305
 
7-22-75
 
51.051


311
 
10-28-75
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


317
 
10-25-76
 
30.01


318
 
10-25-76
 
30.01


319
 
11-22-76
 
96.01, 96.20 - 96.23, 96.35 - 96.37


323
 
2-28-77
 
51.052


324
 
2-28-77
 
51.054


327
 
3-28-77
 
110.45 - 110.48


328
 
6-13-77
 
51.055, 51.999


342
 
12-12-77
 
72.15 - 72.20


343
 
12-12-77
 
72.16


343
 
1-10-78
 
30.01


352
 
4-4-78
 
32.15, 32.16


353
 
4-24-78
 
51.050, 51.051


356
 
6-12-78
 
51.056


361
 
9-19-78
 
51.052


362
 
9-19-78
 
51.054


373
 
12-11-78
 
33.35, 33.36


376
 
1-22-79
 
51.002


396
 
10-8-79
 
33.36


398
 
10-22-79
 
30.01


401
 
12-17-79
 
91.10, 91.16 - 91.20, 91.99


435
 
1-12-80
 
51.052


402
 
1-28-80
 
34.50 - 34.55


403
 
2-11-80
 
96.24


404
 
2-11-80
 
111.15 - 111.20


408
 
4-28-80
 
70.15 - 70.20


420
 
7-28-80
 
34.30 - 34.36


422
 
8-11-80
 
130.07


426
 
9-15-80
 
51.052


427
 
9-15-80
 
51.054


432
 
12-8-80
 
95.01 - 95.04


433
 
12-23-80
 
30.01


434
 
12-23-80
 
30.01


444
 
7-13-81
 
71.03


446
 
8-12-81
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


449
 
9-28-81
 
111.01


462
 
4-26-82
 
34.33, 34.35


464
 
5-10-82
 
70.01, 71.01


465
 
5-10-82
 
92.99


467
 
6-14-82
 
72.21


473
 
9-15-82
 
51.052


474
 
9-15-82
 
51.054


480
 
12-13-82
 
72.15, 72.19


484
 
1-24-83
 
130.35 - 130.38


487
 
4-11-83
 
91.10, 91.16 - 91.20, 91.99


491
 
4-25-83
 
150.002


493
 
5-9-83
 
98.02


498
 
7-11-83
 
71.20 - 71.24, 71.27


500
 
8-1-83
 
130.01


519
 
11-28-83
 
51.999, 91.99, 92.99, 150.050, 150.099


528
 
3-26-84
 
95.03


537
 
5-31-84
 
38.05


568
 
10-8-84
 
51.052


571
 
10-22-84
 
51.054


603
 
4-22-85
 
110.10, 110.11, 110.99


615
 
6-24-85
 
33.02


617
 
7-8-85
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


627
 
8-26-85
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


629
 
9-9-85
 
51.052


630
 
9-9-85
 
51.054


634
 
9-23-85
 
38.15 - 38.19


656
 
12-9-85
 
30.01


680
 
6-9-86
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


685
 
7-28-86
 
51.052


686
 
7-28-86
 
51.054


695
 
9-22-86
 
92.01, 92.99


699
 
10-13-86
 
92.05, 92.07


703
 
11-10-86
 
33.35, 33.36 - 33.38


704
 
11-10-86
 
113.42


705
 
11-10-86
 
98.50 - 98.55


709
 
11-24-86
 
71.27


715
 
12-8-86
 
30.01


740
 
5-13-87
 
110.01


741
 
5-19-87
 
92.20 - 92.23, 92.25, 92.99


754
 
9-14-87
 
113.01 - 113.09, 113.99


758
 
11-23-87
 
36.01 - 36.08, 36.99


760
 
12-14-87
 
30.01


761
 
12-14-87
 
30.01


762
 
12-14-87
 
96.25


763
 
12-28-87
 
51.070 - 51.083, 51.999


767
 
2-8-88
 
110.25 - 110.32


771
 
3-14-88
 
96.24


773
 
4-11-88
 
38.19, 51.999, 91.99, 92.99, 150.050, 150.099


791
 
9-12-88
 
51.052


794
 
9-26-88
 
96.22


800
 
10-24-88
 
30.01


815
 
12-12-88
 
30.01


832
 
5-8-89
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


843
 
8-28-89
 
92.01, 92.03, 92.04, 92.99


844
 
8-28-89
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


851
 
9-25-89
 
51.052


852
 
9-25-89
 
51.054


854
 
11-13-89
 
30.01


856
 
11-27-89
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


858
 
3-12-90
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


862
 
4-23-90
 
91.10, 91.16 - 91.19, 91.99


867
 
6-12-90
 
34.01 - 34.04


869
 
6-13-90
 
51.095 - 51.102


879
 
10-22-90
 
92.40 - 92.44 , 92.46 , 92.48 , 92.49 , 92.99


882
 
11-26-90
 
30.01


886
 
12-11-90
 
31.01 - 31.13


887
 
12-11-90
 
130.05


888
 
12-11-90
 
130.06


896
 
4-22-91
 
71.20 - 71.24


900
 
8-12-91
 
34.34, 34.35


903
 
9-4-91
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


905
 
9-23-91
 
92.05, 92.07


909
 
11-12-91
 
30.01


922
 
1-27-92
 
92.99


925
 
2-24-92
 
30.01


858
 
3-12-92
 
71.04


931
 
3-23-92
 
150.002, 150.003


933
 
3-23-92
 
91.10, 91.16, 91.18, 91.19, 91.99


938
 
8-10-92
 
51.054


949
 
2-8-93
 
51.001


952
 
2-8-93
 
51.052


953
 
2-8-93
 
51.054


954
 
3-8-93
 
91.18, 91.99


958
 
4-26-93
 
96.02 - 96.05


969
 
8-9-93
 
112.01 - 112.06, 112.20 - 112.28, 112.40 - 112.44, 112.99


981
 
9-27-93
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


989
 
1-24-94
 
30.15 - 30.24, 30.26, 30.28 - 30.30


997
 
3-28-94
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


1023
 
9-26-94
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


1063
 
1-23-95
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


1078
 
6-12-95
 
51.097 - 51.100, 51.103


1083
 
7-10-95
 
95.15 - 95.19


1086
 
7-24-95
 
37.01 - 37.06


1089
 
9-11-95
 
152.01


1098
 
10-23-95
 
71.04, Ch. 73, Sch. I


1099
 
10-23-95
 
37.30 - 37.32


1103
 
11-27-95
 
53.01, 53.02, 53.04, 53.06


1108
 
1-22-96
 
113.25 - 113.41


1113
 
3-11-96
 
130.50 - 130.55


1118
 
4-8-96
 
150.020 - 150.024, 150.026 - 150.029


1132
 
10-28-96
 
32.01 - 32.05


1144
 
1-13-97
 
150.025


1151
 
3-10-97
 
38.01


1170
 
6-23-97
 
155.01


1174
 
8-25-97
 
150.002, 150.003


1182
 
11-10-97
 
155.01


1186
 
1-12-98
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1187
 
1-26-98
 
93.01 - 93.08, 93.10, 93.12, 93.13, 93.99


1197
 
3-9-98
 
35.01 - 35.14, 35.99


1213
 
7-13-98
 
51.097 - 51.100


1220
 
7-27-98
 
99.01 - 99.03, 99.15 - 99.18, 99.30 - 99.40, 99.50 - 99.54, 99.98, 99.99, Ch.
99, Apps. C - E


1223
 
9-14-98
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1236
 
11-9-98
 
33.36 - 33.38


1247
 
2-22-99
 
91.05


1251
 
3-22-99
 
31.01, 31.09


1265
 
7-13-99
 
130.01, 130.99


1272
 
8-23-99
 
150.060 - 150.063, 150.099


1280
 
9-27-99
 
30.01


1281
 
9-27-99
 
150.010


1282
 
10-11-99
 
37.15 - 37.17


1293
 
12-14-99
 
153.01 - 153.12, 153.25 - 153.31, 153.45 - 153.51


1309
 
4-10-00
 
92.20 - 92.27, 92.99


1346
 
4-23-01
 
110.25 - 110.32


1356
 
7-2-01
 
155.01


1357
 
7-9-01
 
T.S.O. IV


1358
 
7-9-01
 
33.36


1360
 
7-23-01
 
T.S.O. IV


1364
 
8-27-01
 
T.S.O. IV


1365
 
8-27-01
 
51.097 - 51.100


1369
 
9-24-01
 
Adopting Ordinance


1372
 
10-8-01
 
92.01, 92.05, 92.06, 93.01, 93.03 - 93.13, 93.99


1379
 
12-10-01
 
150.002, 150.004, 150.005


1390
 
6-24-02
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1391
 
6-24-02
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1394
 
8-12-02
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1396
 
9-9-02
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1399
 
10-14-02
 
T.S.O. IV


1400
 
10-14-02
 
T.S.O. IV


1403
 
10-14-02
 
155.01


1412
 
12-9-02
 
T.S.O. IV


1413
 
1-13-03
 
T.S.O. IV


1415
 
2-10-03
 
155.01


1421
 
4-14-03
 
156.01 - 156.09


1424
 
4-28-03
 
51.010 - 51.020, 51.022, 51.024, 51.055, 51.999


1429
 
6-9-03
 
53.05 - 53.09


1430
 
6-23-03
 
91.01 - 91.05, 91.15 - 91.26, 91.99


1431
 
6-23-03
 
150.008


1432
 
6-23-03
 
150.010


1433
 
6-23-03
 
150.009


1434
 
6-23-03
 
150.007


1435
 
6-23-03
 
150.002


1436
 
6-23-03
 
150.004


1437
 
6-23-03
 
150.006, 150.099


1438
 
6-23-03
 
T.S.O. IV


1443
 
9-8-03
 
T.S.O. III


1451
 
10-13-03
 
130.08, 130.99


1452
 
10-13-03
 
Ch. 73, Sched. I


1456
 
10-27-03
 
72.01


1465
 
12-8-03
 
Ch. 73, Sched. I


1466
 
12-8-03
 
30.40 - 30.50


1472
 
1-29-04
 
98.03


1486
 
7-12-04
 
112.03, 112.23, 112.25, 112.26, 112.40 - 112.47


1490
 
7-26-04
 
130.01


1492
 
8-9-04
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1502
 
10-25-04
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1509
 
11-27-04
 
153.07 - 153.12, 153.25, 153.26


1524
 
3-14-05
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1525
 
3-14-05
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1527
 
4-11-05
 
T.S.O. IV


1528
 
4-11-05
 
95.03


1535
 
5-9-05
 
T.S.O. IV


1492
 
8-9-04
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1544
 
10-10-05
 
91.19


1557
 
1-9-06
 
T.S.O. IV


1559
 
2-13-06
 
51.052


1560
 
1-9-06
 
51.054


1561
 
2-13-06
 
T.S.O. IV


1562
 
2-27-06
 
T.S.O. IV


1566
 
2-27-06
 
T.S.O. IV


1569
 
4-10-06
 
T.S.O. II


1574
 
5-22-06
 
T.S.O. IV


1582
 
8-14-06
 
T.S.O. III


1587
 
8-29-06
 
51.095, 51.097 - 51.100, 51.104, 51.105


1597
 
10-23-06
 
112.01 - 112.06, 112.20 - 112.28, 112.40-112.50, 112.60, 112.61, 112.99


1600
 
11-27-06
 
71.20, 71.23, 71.28


1623
 
6-11-07
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1636
 
8-27-07
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1640
 
9-10-07
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1641
 
9-10-07
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1642
 
9-10-07
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1656
 
12-10-07
 
T.S.O. II


1657
 
12-10-07
 
38.015


1658
 
12-10-07
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


1667
 
1-28-08
 
33.36, 33.38


1670
 
2-11-08
 
T.S.O. IV


1671
 
2-11-08
 
T.S.O. IV


1675
 
2-11-08
 
T.S.O. IV


1680
 
3-10-08
 
52.01 - 52.06, 52.15 - 52.25, 52.35 - 52.41, 52.50 - 52.55, 52.99


1688
 
4-28-08
 
130.09 - 130.11


OR-1702-08
 
8-11-08
 
T.S.O. II


OR-1705-08
 
8-25-08
 
T.S.O. III


OR-1706-08
 
8-25-08
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


OR-1713-08
 
10-27-08
 
150.008


OR-1714-08
 
10-27-08
 
150.003


OR-1715-08
 
10-27-08
 
150.002


OR-1716-08
 
10-27-08
 
150.005


OR-1718-08
 
10-27-08
 
150.007


OR-1719-08
 
10-27-08
 
150.009


OR-1720-08
 
10-27-08
 
150.010


OR-1721-08
 
10-27-08
 
150.012


OR-1722-08
 
10-27-08
 
150.004


OR-1734-09
 
2-9-09
 
51.054


OR-1735-09
 
2-9-09
 
51.052


OR-1737-09
 
2-9-09
 
92.20 -92.27, 92.99


OR-1740-09
 
4-13-09
 
91.01 -91.05, 91.15 - 91.26, 91.99


OR-1742-09
 
5-11-09
 
51.011


OR-1745-09
 
6-8-09
 
T.S.O. II


OR-1747-09
 
8-10-09
 
T.S.O. II


OR-1750-09
 
9-1-09
 
Ch. 73


OR-1757-09
 
11-23-09
 
153.07 - 153.10, 153.25 - 153.27


OR-1758-09
 
12-14-09
 
51.052


OR-1759-09
 
12-14-09
 
51.054


OR-1760-09
 
12-14-09
 
51.073, 51.075, 51.076, 51.079, 51.081


OR-1767-10
 
4-27-10
 
T.S.O. IV


OR-1773-10
 
6-28-10
 
92.20, 92.28 - 92.33


OR-1775-10
 
8-9-10
 
97.01 - 97.12, 97.99, Ch. 97, App. A


OR-1779-10
 
8-23-10
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


OR-1781-10
 
8-30-10
 
51.052


OR-1782-10
 
8-30-10
 
51.054


OR-1785-10
 
9-13-10
 
99.03, 99.18, 99.33, 99.35, 99.37, 99.39, 99.99, Ch. 99, App. C


OR-1786-10
 
10-11-10
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


OR-1787-10
 
10-11-10
 
90.01 - 90.25, 90.35 - 90.39, 90.50, 90.99


OR-1789-10
 
10-11-10
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


OR-1790-10
 
11-8-10
 
97.01 - 97.12, 97.99, Ch. 97, App. A


OR-1799-11
 
3-21-11
 
53.05 - 53.09


OR-1804-11
 
4-11-11
 
150.005


OR-1805-11
 
6-27-11
 
90.06, 90.23.1, 90.99


OR-1810-11
 
8-1-11
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


OR-1811-11
 
8-8-11
 
51.097, 51.098, 51.099, 51.100


OR-1814-11
 
8-22-11
 
37.15 - 37.17


OR-1818-11
 
9-26-11
 
95.01 - 95.04, 95.15 - 95.19


OR-1820-11
 
11-28-11
 
38.015


OR-1821-11
 
11-28-11
 
30.01


OP-1829-12
 
1-9-12
 
53.03, 53.06 - 53.08, 53.10


OR-1831-12
 
2-27-12
 
34.02


OR-1837-12
 
6-11-12
 
98.04


OR-1838-12
 
7-23-12
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


OR-1839-12
 
9-10-12
 
51.052


OR-1840-12
 
9-10-12
 
51.054


OR-1844-12
 
9-24-12
 
33.36


OR-1847-12
 
10-22-12
 
T.S.O. II


OR-1851-12
 
11-12-12
 
T.S.O. II


OR-1852-12
 
11-12-12
 
T.S.O. II


OR-1860-12
 
12-10-12
 
T.S.O. II


OR-1865-13
 
1-14-13
 
T.S.O. II


OR-1869-13
 
3-18-13
 
T.S.O. II


OR-1871-13
 
4-8-13
 
151.01 - 151.13, 151.25 - 151.28, 151.40 - 151.44, 151.99


OR-1876-13
 
6-10-13
 
T.S.O. IV


OR-1877-13
 
6-24-13
 
96.01 - 96.06, 96.21 - 96.25, 96.35 - 96.37


OR-1880-13
 
7-22-13
 
T.S.O. II


OR-1881-13
 
8-12-13
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


OR-1889-13
 
11-25-13
 
T.S.O. II


OR-1896-13
 
12-10-13
 
T.S.O. II


OR-1897-13
 
12-10-13
 
T.S.O. IV


OR-1900-14
 
1-28-14
 
T.S.O. IV


OR-1909-14
 
4-29-14
 
54.01 , 54.02 , 54.15 - 54.21 , 54.35 - 54.43 , 54.99 , Ch. 54, App. A , B , C


OR-1910-14
 
4-29-14
 
92.20 - 92.22 , 92.34 , 92.35 , 92.99


OR-1912-14
 
5-27-14
 
96.24


OR-1918-14
 
9-8-14
 
71.20 , 71.23 , 71.28


OR-1923-14
 
11-10-14
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


OR-1924-14
 
11-10-14
 
50.01 - 50.10 , 50.25 - 50.32 , 50.45 - 50.49 , 50.60 - 50.70 , 50.85 , 50.99


OR-1926-14
 
11-10-14
 
T.S.O. III


OR-1928-14
 
11-24-14
 
94.01 - 94.07 , 94.99


OR-1929-14
 
11-24-14
 
92.10


OR-1930-14
 
11-24-14
 
92.40 - 92.49 , 92.99


OR-1935-14
 
12-9-14
 
T.S.O. IV


OR-1936-14
 
12-9-14
 
T.S.O. IV


OR-1939-15
 
2-23-15
 
T.S.O. II


OR-1942-15
 
3-23-15
 
114.01-114.11, 114.12-114.185, 114.19-114.21, 114.99


OR-1945-15
 
4-15-15
 
T.S.O. II


OR-1950-15
 
6-8-15
 
T.S.O. IV


OR-1955-15
 
7-27-15
 
153.07-153.11, 153.25-153.27


OR-1956-15
 
8-10-15
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


OR-1958-15
 
8-24-15
 
T.S.O. IV


OR-1959-15
 
8-24-15
 
T.S.O. II


OR-1960-15
 
9-8-15
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


OR-1969-15
 
9-28-15
 
115.001-115.003, 115.020-115.023, 115.040-115.045, 115.060, 115.999


OR-1970-15
 
10-12-15
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


OR-1973-15
 
10-26-15
 
53.05


OR-1974-15
 
10-26-15
 
98.50 - 98.56


OR-1987-15
 
12-16-15
 
T.S.O. I


OR-1988-15
 
12-16-15
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


OR-1996-16
 
2-8-16
 
T.S.O. IV


OR-1997-16
 
2-8-16
 
T.S.O. II


OR-2015-16
 
8-22-16
 
T.S.O. II


OR-2016-16
 
8-22-16
 
T.S.O. II


OR-2022-16
 
10-10-16
 
95.01 - 95.04, 95.15 - 95.19


OR-2034-17
 
2-13-17
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


OR-2042-17
 
4-10-17
 
T.S.O. III


OR-2047-17
 
4-24-17
 
51.010 - 51.024


OR-2050-17
 
5-24-17
 
150.011


OR-2057-17
 
8-28-17
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


OR-2058-17
 
9-7-17
 
93.01


OR-2059-17
 
9-7-17
 
92.05


OR-2060-17
 
9-7-17
 
92.04


OR-2063-17
 
9-11-17
 
150.011


OR-2077-18
 
1-22-18
 
T.S.O. II


ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 671
CITY OF MANSFIELD, TEXAS
ADOPTED ON APRIL 15, 1986

HISTORICAL RECORD
Ord No. General Description Approved
970 Adult Entertainment Regulations 08-09-93
971 Permitted Uses in Planned Development Districts 08-23-93
979 Definition for masonry and masonry-like construction 09-27-93
982 Accessory buildings on large land parcels 10-11-93
984 Regulations on temporary signs, portable signs and special event displays 10-25-93
985 Requirement Masonry And Masonry-Like Construction In Freeway
Overlay Districts
10-25-93
1020 Amend Freeway Overlay District regulations to allow single-family and
two-family homes with specific use permit
09-12-94
1039 Regulations of specific use permits 11-14-94
1096 Rename residential districts to SF districts, multi-family districts to MF
districts
10-09-95
1121 Regulations on off-premise advertising signs 07-08-96
1131 Screening of swimming pool and pump filter equipment 10-28-96
1135 Create SF-7.5/18 zoning district 11-13-96
1140 Nonconforming carports 12-09-96
1142 Revise area, setback, height, parking facilities, landscaping, screening and
other design regulations of commercial zoning districts
01-13-97
1145 Definition of camping trailer and revise restrictions on maximum
allowable stay in campgrounds
02-10-97
1157 Regulations pertaining to display of directional signs 04-28-97
1170 Residential parking regulations 06-23-97
1173 Regulations pertaining to display of garage sales signs 08-11-97
1182 Parking regulations in front, side and rear yards, regulations on the
parking and storage of RVs, campers, trailers, boats, motor homes, etc.
11-10-97
1214 Prohibit off-site development signs, reduce the maximum allowable size
of such signs
07-13-98
1215 Revise regulations on portable signs used by civic organizations,
churches, sports leagues and schools
1264 Revise regulations on institutional signs 06-28-99
1295 Revise Sign Standards for political and other signs 01-10-00
1314 Residential Proximity Standards, redefine “Height”, increase minimum
setback for dumpsters and maximum height of C-2 and C-3 zoning,
screening requirements for HVAC equipment and truck docks
07-10-00
1316 Create Pre-development Zoning District 07-10-00
1318 Redefine nonconforming Building, revise Sec. 7700F, extension of
Nonconforming Uses or Buildings
08-14-00
1330 Wireless Telecommunication Facilities 10-23-00
1332 Delete SF-10AC/24, SF-2AC/14, SF-40/24, SF-20/24, prohibit the application
for certain SF zoning districts, amend the maximum lot coverage, minimum
side setback requirement of SF zoning districts, accessory building
regulations, application procedures for zoning change to Planned
Development and enforcement of development schedule
11-13-00
1338 Masonry requirements for all residential dwelling units within SF and 2F
zoning districts
02-12-01
1349 Increase the 10’ non-residential building setback to street 05-29-01
1350 Prohibiting swimming pools in easements 05-29-01
1351 Allow a residential unit for an on-site manager or caretaker for mini- 06-11-01
warehouses
1356 Regulations on establishments that sell alcoholic beverages 07-02-01
1366 Regulations on accessory buildings and structures 09-11-01
1376 Amendment of Section 7400.D requiring masonry walls to be constructed
with materials of earth-tone or traditional masonry color and requiring a 7.5
foot construction and maintenance easement on residential developments
abutting such masonry walls
11-26-01
1380 Regulations on accessory dwellings 02-11-02
1385 Additional wall signs on multi-tenant buildings 04-08-02
1395 Revised residential masonry construction requirements to include gables 09-09-02
1403 Revised Permitted Use regulations and Special Conditions to allow food carts 10-14-02
1415 Revised regulations on temporary batch plants 02-10-03
1426 Revised regulations on accessory buildings and structures 05-12-03
1427 Revised Freeway Overlay District regulations to allow auto repair and service
establishments
05-12-03
1447 Regulations on concrete pavement for all parking, driveway, vehicular access,
and loading and unloading facilities
10-13-03
1448 Revising regulations on the use, location and display of special event
displays, promotional signage, banners and flags
10-13-03
1449 Regulations requiring masonry construction and a minimum variety of
construction materials in the OP, C-1, and C-2 Zoning Districts
10-13-03
1453 Prohibiting portable signs 10-27-03
1454 Prohibiting directional signs and providing for kiosk signs 10-27-03
1460 Amendment of Sections 7300 and 7400 regarding tree caliper size and
measurement and parking lot perimeter landscaping requirements
11-10-03
1461 Amendment of Section 4600 to add underground utility requirements 11-24-03
1462 Amendment of Section 7300C.2 to increase the required street landscape
setback in OP, C-1, C-2 and C-3 zoning and certain multi-family residential
developments; to reduce the required street landscape setback in certain OP
zoning and to impose a street landscape setback requirement on institutional
uses
11-24-03
1468 Amendment of Section 7300K regarding maximum fence height 01-26-04
1474 Amendment of Section 7300K.5 regarding barbed wire fences 02-23-04
1479 Amendment of Sections 5200 and 7100 to prohibit permanent pole and
ground signs and establish regulations for monument signs and unified
development plans, and to consolidate all sign regulations under Section 7100
04-12-04
1480 Amendment of Sections 4400 and 7800, amending Section 2100 and add new
section 7960 adopting provisions for gas well drilling and production
04-26-04
1481 Amendment of Section 7800.B.5 to revise the regulations on the maximum
allowable square footage of accessory buildings
04-26-04
1482 Amendment of Section 7100.I to prohibit wall signs on the rear façade of
buildings
04-26-04
1484 Amendment of Sections 2200, 4500, 4600, 5200, 7300, 7400 and 7800
regarding masonry requirements
05-10-04
1487 Amendment of Sections 4400.B, 6300.E.7 and 7800.B regarding approval of
accessory dwellings based on certain criteria
07-12-04
1488 Amendment of Sections 6300.E and 7800.B.5 regarding revised regulations
for semi-attached accessory buildings based on certain criteria
07-12-04
1493 Amendment of Sections 4600 and 5200 regarding masonry construction
materials in the I-1 and I-2 zoning within the Freeway Overlay District
08-09-04
1494 Amendment of Section 4500C regarding height exceptions for public 08-11-04
buildings, hospitals or schools
1498 Amendment of Section 4600 regarding architectural attributes for nonresidential
development in the OP, C-1 through C-4 districts and all nonresidential
districts within the freeway overlay district and standards for
screening of rooftop and ground mounted equipment
09-14-04
1499 Amendment of Section 6100 regarding Specific Use Permit and Site Plan
approval
09-14-04
1500 Amending Article 5 regarding special purpose district regulations 09-14-04
1503 Amending Section 4500.C to revise the height exception provisions for nonresidential
buildings or structures owned/or operated by a government entity
10-25-04
1517 Amending Sections 8400, 8500 and 8700 regarding the appointment and
terms of office of Board and Commission members
2-28-05
1534 Amending Section 7300 regarding landscaping and screening requirements 4-27-05
1549 Amending Section 7800.B.21 regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages 11-14-05
1555 Amending Sections 4400.B, 7800.B.34 and 7960 to require Specific Use
Permit for Gathering Stations
12-12-05
1567 Amending Sections 2200 and 7200B to revise definitions of vehicles, to
revise the paving, screening, location, vehicle length and other requirements
for vehicles parked in a front, side or rear yard of certain residential
properties, to require vehicles greater than 25-feet in length to be parked in a
building with three walls, a roof and an opaque gate under certain conditions,
and to revise the parking regulations for non-conforming vehicles
3-27-06
1570 Amending Section 7100 for construction signs pertaining to commercial
development
4-24-06
1571 Amending Section 7800.B.4 to establish special conditions for hotels and
motels
4-24-06
1575 Amending Section 5400.K.1 to incorporate the Design Guidelines for Historic
Residential Properties
5-22-06
1576 Amending Section 7960.C to establish an expiration provision for Specific
Use Permits for gas well drilling and production
5-22-06
1585 Amending Section 7301.A.2 to establish screening requirements for electrical
transformers, switch gear devices, telephone pedestals, gas meters and other
service equipment
8-28-06
1586 Amending Section 7100 by establishing regulations for neighborhood
information signs
8-28-06
1598 Amending Section 5200.C.14 regarding the use of land in the freeway overlay
district
11-27-06
1627-07 Amending Section 7100 regarding the provisions on window signs and
banners
6-25-07
1703-08 Amending Sections 7960 and 7800 governing gas well drilling and
production in the City of Mansfield
8-25-08
1732-09 Amending Sections 4600.E and 5200.I.6 for pole-mounted electrical, gas,
cable television and telephone support equipment
1-12-09
10-1788 Amending Sections 4400.K, 7800.B, 7960, and 6100.J regarding permitted
uses, special conditions, notifications and other matters related to gas well
drilling and production and compressors and the amendment of approved
specific use permits
4-27-10
1778-10 Amending Section 7300 regarding landscaping and screening requirements 8-9-10
1853-12 Amending Sections 2200, 3200, 4205, 4600, 7200, 7300 and 7301 regarding
definition, special restrictions, permitted uses, community design standards,
architectural attributes, off-street parking and loading, buffer yard and
11-12-12
screening, parking lot internal landscaping and equipment screening
pertaining to development in the C-4 Downtown Business District
1854-12 Amending Sections 2200, 4600 and 7300 pertaining to a new definition for
porch; architectural attributes and irrigation requirements for development in
the PR, SF, 2F and MH Districts
11-12-12
1855-12 Amending Section 7302 related to construction and permit requirements for
new and replacement wood fences
12-10-12
1868-13 Amending Section 5100.G regarding minor revisions of Planned
Development Districts
02-11-13
1879-13 Amending Section 7100 regarding political sign regulations 07-08-13
1887-13 Amending Section 5100C and 5100D of the Freeway Overlay District
regulations of the zoning ordinance pertaining to paint and body shop
11-11-13
1904-14 Amending Section 7100D of the Sign Standards pertaining to Window Signs 03-24-14
1908-14 Amending Sections 2200 and 4400.B to add a definition for “Non-Traditional
Smoking Related Businesses”
04-16-14
1911-14 Amending Sections 7200.B.19 and 20 regarding construction standards for
residential driveways
05-12-14
1913-14 Amending Section 2200.P.5 and 2200.S.2 pertaining to definitions for public
and private schools and publically owned, non-school facilities
07-21-14
1925-14 Amending Section 5100.C.7 regarding landscaping and screening
requirements for planned development districts
11-10-14
1927-14 Amending Sections 2200, 4400, 7200 and 7800 related to definitions, zoning
classification and permitted use regulations, area, setback and height
regulations, specific use permit requirements, off street parking and loading
standards, landscaping and screening standards, special conditions applicable
to eating places with drive-through services
11-12-14
1934-14 Amending Sections 2200, 4400 and 7800 regarding definitions, zoning
classification and permitted use regulations, specific use permit requirements,
off-street parking and loading standards and special conditions applicable to
medical waste product facilities
12-9-14
1946-15 Amending Section 7960.B.11 regarding time limits for gas well drilling and
production
04-27-15
1957-15 Amending Sections 1300, 4400 Article 6 and 7800.B to create a new
industrial use permit, require Specific Use Permit for industries not elsewhere
listed, delete medical waste product facility and certain industrial uses from
the permitted use table and delete special conditions on medical waste product
facility
08-24-15
1963-15 Amending Sections 4500.B and 8600.G to allow applications for the SF-
7.5/18 Single-Family Residential District, to prohibit applications for the SF-
7.5/16 Single-Family Residential District, and to revise the minimum interior
side yard setbacks for the SF-7.5/18 District
09-14-15
1968-15 Amending Sections 2200.S, 4400.B and 7800.B regarding solar panel systems 09-28-15
1977-15 Amending Subsection C of Section 7500 to prohibit open storage or display
in C-1 and by inserting a new Subsection E to Section 7500 regarding open
storage and display in C-3, I-1 and I-2
11-23-15
1978-15 Amending Subsection 23 and 25 of Subsection B regarding the Parking
Standards of other vehicles and removing the exemption of certain vehicles
from the parking standards
11-23-15
1979-15 Amending Subsection 2 of Subsection C of Section 7100 Sign Standards to
revise the definition of window signs
11-23-15
1980-15 Amending Subsection C of Section 7100 to create a definition for electronic 11-23-15
message center, amending Table 7100D and inserting a new Subsection I
1981-15 Amending Section 4400B, Permitted Use Table to require a Specific Use
Permit for certain uses, delete and add certain uses and amending Section
2200, Definitions, Section 5300, Manufactured Home District Regulations,
Section 7200B, Parking Group Table, Section 7301, Supplemental
Requirements for Screening of Mechanical Equipment and Service Areas, and
Section 7800, Special Conditions to coincide with the changes in Section
4400B
12-14-15
2006-16 Amending Section 4400B “Permitted Use Table” of the Zoning Ordinance to
relabel “Hospital/Home/Center for Alcoholic or Psychiatric Patients” and to
allow “Amusement, Commercial (Indoor)” in I-2 Heavy Industrial zoning
upon approval of an Industrial Use Permit and amending Section 6.2
“Permitted Use Table” of The Reserve Planned Development District
Standards to relabel the same aforementioned land use, require Specific Use
Permit for certain land uses, delete certain land uses and add special
conditions to certain land uses
06-13-16
2052-17 Amending Section 7100, “Sign Standards” of the Zoning Ordinance to
establish new regulations for temporary realtor open house directional signs
and human signs
06-26-17
2072-17 Amending Section 7200.B of the Zoning Ordinance related to the parking of
vehicles such as boats, motor homes, recreational vehicles, campers, trailers,
and other vehicles on properties with a single-family dwelling, two-family
dwelling or townhouse; providing an exemption to such parking restrictions
applicable to certain vehicles in existence before March 2006
10-23-17
2073-17 Amending Sections 7100, 7100.C.2, 7100.D.2 “Temporary Signs Table” and
7100.K.2 of said ordinance revising certain sign definitions; revising the
regulations for promotional signage displays as to quantity and placement of
such signs; revising the regulations for real estate signs
10-23-17
2113-19 Amending Section 4500.B of the Zoning Ordinance to increase the minimum
floor area for houses in the SF-12/22, PR, SF-9.6/20 and SF-8.4/18 zoning
districts
01-14-19
2114-19 Amending Section 4600.D.15 of the Zoning Ordinance to revise the
regulations on reduced size lots
01-14-19
2115-19 Amending Section 6300.E.6 of the Zoning Ordinance to revise the
criteria for a Special Exception to allow an increase in the maximum
allowable area or height, or a reduction of the minimum setback
requirements for accessory buildings or structures on lots of 12,000
square feet or larger
01-14-19
2124-19 Amending Section 8600.A of said Ordinance to revise the regulations
for issuing or revoking Specific Use Permits
05-28-19
TABLE OF CONTENTS
l. TITLE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
1000 Title
1100 Purpose of Ordinance
1200 Relationship to Other Laws
1300 Application of This Ordinance
1400 Interpretation of Ordinance
2. DEFINITIONS
2000 Purpose
2100 Word Usage
2200 Definitions
3. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
3000 Establishment of Zoning Districts
3100 Zoning Districts Enumeration
3200 Zoning Map Adopted
3201 Interpretation of District Boundaries
3202 District Boundary Uncertainty
4. ZONING DISTRICTS REGULATIONS
4000 General Restrictions
4001 Residential Use Restrictions
4002 General Purpose and Description Provisions
4101 PR, Pre-Development District
4102 A, Agricultural District Regulations
4103 SF-5AC/24, Single-family Residential District Regulations
4104 SF-12/22, Single-family Residential District Regulations
4105 SF-9.6/20, Single-family Residential District Regulations
4106 SF-8.4/18, Single-family Residential District Regulations
4107 SF-8.4/16, Single-family Residential District Regulations
4108 SF-7.5/18, Single-family Residential District Regulations
4109 SF-7.5/16, Single-family Residential District Regulations
4110 SF-7.5/12, Single-family Residential District Regulations
4111 SF-6/12, Garden Home District Regulations
4112 2F, Two Family Residential District Regulations
4113 MF-1, Multi-family Residential District Regulations
4114 MF-2, Multi-family Residential District Regulations
4201 OP, Office Park District Regulations
4202 C-l, Neighborhood Business District Regulations
4203 C-2, Community Business District Regulations
4204 C-3, Commercial-Manufacturing District Regulations
4205 C-4, Downtown Business District Regulations
4301 I-l, Light Industrial District Regulations
4302 I-2, Heavy Industrial District Regulations
TABLE OF CONTENTS (CONT')
4400 Permitted Uses
4500 Area, Setback and Height Regulations
4600 Community Design Standards
5. SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICT REGULATIONS
5000 General Provisions
5100 PD, Planned Development District Regulations
5200 FR, Freeway Overlay District Regulations
5300 MH, Manufactured Home District Regulations
5400 H, Historic Landmark Overlay District Regulations
5500 SE, Secondary Freeway Overlay District Regulations
6. SPECIFIC USE PERMITS AND OTHER PERMITS
6100 Specific Use Permit
6200 Temporary Uses
6300 Special Exception
6400 Industrial Use Permit
7. SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS
7100 Sign Standards
7200 Off Street Parking and Loading Standards
7300 Landscaping and Screening Standards
7301 Supplemental Requirements for Screening of Mechanical Equipment and Service
Areas
7302 General Provisions for all Fences and Free Standing Walls
7400 Residential Proximity Standards
7500 Open Storage Regulations
7600 Open Air Vending
7700 Non-Conforming Use Regulations
7800 Special Conditions
7900 Industrialized Housing and Building Regulations
7950 Wireless Telecommunication Facility Regulations
7960 Gas Well Drilling and Production
8. ADMINISTRATION, AMENDMENTS AND ENFORCEMENTS
8100 Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
8200 Issuance of Building Permits
8300 Certificate of Occupancy and Compliance
8400 Board of Adjustment
8500 Planning and Zoning Commission
8600 Changes and Amendments
8700 Historic Landmark Commission
8800 Miscellaneous Provisions
ORDINANCE NO. 671
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING APPENDIX A OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF MANSFIELD (1978) BY REPEALING
ORDINANCE NO. 293 AND ORDINANCE NO. 416 OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF MANSFIELD, AS AMENDED, INCLUDING
THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP WHICH SAID ORDINANCES INCORPORATE
AND TO WHICH THEY REFER, SAVE AND EXCEPT PLANNED
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS AND SPECIFIC USE PERMITS, ENACTING A
NEW ZONING ORDINANCE TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES, TO BE
NUMBERED AS HEREINAFTER PROVIDED, STATING A PURPOSE;
DEFINING TERMS, ESTABLISHING ZONING DISTRICTS; ADOPTING AN
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF THE CITY OF MANSFIELD; PROVIDING
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS; PROVIDING FOR SPECIAL
EXCEPTIONS AND OTHER PERMITS UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS;
PROVIDING OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS;
PROVIDING SIGN REGULATIONS; PROVIDING FOR SPECIAL PURPOSE
DISTRICTS AND STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS RELATING THERETO;
PROVIDING FOR NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND
USES OF LAND AND REGULATIONS RELATING THERETO; PROVIDING
CERTAIN LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS; PROVIDING
CERTAIN OPEN STORAGE AND OPEN AIR VENDING REGULATIONS;
ESTABLISHING FLOOD HAZARD STANDARDS; ESTABLISHING CERTAIN
SPECIAL CONDITIONS; PROVIDING FOR ENFORCEMENT; CREATING A
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES
RELATING THERETO; CREATING A PLANNING AND ZONING
COMMISSION AND REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES RELATING
THERETO; ESTABLISHING A PROCEDURE FOR CHANGES,
AMENDMENTS AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS; PROVIDING FOR
SEVERABILITY, PROVIDING FOR A PENALTY, PROVIDING FOR REPEAL.
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Mansfield requested the Planning and
Zoning Commission to study and evaluate the zoning ordinances of the City of Mansfield; and,
WHEREAS, said Commission was additionally charged with the responsibility of
recommending to the City Council a comprehensive revision of said ordinances; and,
WHEREAS, said Commission thoroughly studied and evaluated planning and zoning
recommendations submitted by City Staff, members of the development community, real estate
community, and other interested segments of the private sector; and,
WHEREAS, a public hearing before said Commission was held on December 2, 3, 4
and 5, 1985, pursuant to Article 1011f of the Texas Civil Statutes, at which hearing the views of the
public were heard; and,
WHEREAS, changes and amendments to the originally proposed Ordinance have been
made by the Planning and Zoning Commission as a result of recommendations, suggestions, and
criticisms of the aforementioned segments of the community and integrated into the final proposal
prepared by said Commission; and,
WHEREAS, the City Council after receipt of said Ordinance from said Commission,
considered and evaluated the recommended Ordinance; and,
WHEREAS, a public hearing before the City Council was held on March 31, 1986,
pursuant to Article 1011d of the Texas Civil Statutes, at which hearing the views of the public were
heard; and,
WHEREAS, further changes and amendments to the Ordinance as recommended by the
Planning and Zoning Commission were made as a result of collective recommendations, suggestions
and criticisms voiced during the aforementioned process; and,
WHEREAS, the City Council believes that the following ordinance will serve to protect
the health, safety, welfare and morals of the community as well as promote orderly development and
growth of the City of Mansfield; and,
WHEREAS, the City Council supports regular review of the Ordinance herein in order
to insure that it will continue to accomplish the desired objectives and still remain a viable planning
document in future years;
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF MANSFIELD, TEXAS,
Section 1
THAT Ordinance No. 293 and Ordinance No. 416 of the City of Mansfield including
the zoning map which said ordinances incorporate and to which they refer, are hereby repealed, save
and except Planned Development Districts and Specific Use Permits, and a new Ordinance No. 671
is hereby enacted to read as follows:
§1000
1000-1
ARTICLE 1. TITLE AND GENERAL INFORMATION.
Section 1000. Title.
This ordinance shall be known as and may be referred to as the "Mansfield Zoning Ordinance".
Section 1100. Purpose of Ordinance.
The purpose of this ordinance is to guide and accomplish a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious
development of the municipality and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future
needs best promote the public health, safety and welfare.
The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been designed to:
1. Promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, property and general welfare.
2. Promote efficiency and economy in the process of development.
3. Promote the healthful and convenient distribution of population.
4. Preserve adequate air and light.
5. Promote good civil design and arrangement.
6. Promote wise and efficient expenditure of public funds.
7. Provide for adequate public utilities and other public requirements.
Section 1200. Relationship to Other Laws.
It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with
existing provisions of other laws or ordinances except for the previously mentioned Ordinance No.
293 and Ordinance No. 416, or with private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed,
easement, or other private agreement. Where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon land,
buildings or structures than is imposed or required by other ordinances, covenants or agreements the
provisions of this Ordinance shall govern, provided nothing stated herein shall state or imply any
liability of the City to enforce private deed restrictions or agreements.
Section 1300. Application of This Ordinance.
No structure shall be constructed, erected, placed or maintained and no land use commenced or
continued within the City except as specifically, or by necessary implication, authorized by this
Ordinance. Specific Use Permits, Industrial Use Permits and/or variances are allowed only as
granted by the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Board of Adjustments
upon finding that the specified conditions exist.
§1400
1400-1
Section 1400. Interpretation of Ordinance
This ordinance shall be interpreted, whenever an administrator or the judiciary is called upon to do
so, in conformance with the purposes intended, by the City Council to be served by its enactment.
The intent of the standards and supporting definitions is to protect both individual property owners
and the general public from adverse impacts which might otherwise be the result of a proposed use.
To this end, those called upon to interpret this ordinance shall proceed as follows:
A. Determine the public purpose(s) of the standard(s) with respect to which an interpretation is
required. Before any zoning interpretation is made, there must be an explicit identification of
the purpose(s) for which the regulation was initially imposed. Each zoning regulation is
intended to protect the interests of both present and future neighbors and the general public.
Each standard is developed as a regulatory response to an identifiable negative impact or
potential impact. A sound interpretation of any such standard cannot be insured without a
careful analysis of the end to which the regulation is directed.
B. Determine the actual impact of a proposed interpretation. There is a critical distinction between
an interpretation which provides a greater degree of design freedom to achieve a permitted land
use and an interpretation which permits a new or not previously permitted use or which allows a
use to be enlarged or have its intensity increased beyond the degree specified in the ordinance.
C. Determine that the proposed interpretation will insure a just balance between the rights of the
landowner and all others who will be affected by that person's land use proposal. If an
interpretation merely would allow a design solution which is more flexible, albeit slightly
different from the one expressly stated and if it results in no less a degree of protection to any
affected party, such an interpretation may be appropriately made. Any interpretation which
would result in any identifiable loss of protection or which would increase the nuisance
potential of any use should not be made by an administrator. Any interpretation which will
result in any loss of protection or increase in intensity beyond that already permitted should
only be made when the party interpreting the ordinance has the power to impose additional
restrictions or conditions to protect the public and exercises this power.
All interpretation should be recorded in writing at the City Secretary's Office. Such records shall be
used for future review as related issues arise so that consistency between actions over time can be
assured. All records of ordinance interpretations shall include both consenting and/or dissenting
opinions from all parties.
§2100
2100-1
ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS
Section 2000. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to define words, terms, and phrases contained within this ordinance.
Section 2100. Word Usage.
In the interpretation of this ordinance, the provisions and rules of this section shall be observed and
applied, except when the context clearly requires otherwise:
A. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms.
B. Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words in the plural number
shall include the singular number.
C. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the feminine gender shall include the
masculine.
D. The word "shall" is mandatory.
E. The word "may" is permissive.
F. The word "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations, associations, trusts, and any other
similar entities.
G. The word "City" means the City of Mansfield, Texas.
H. The words "City Council" means the City Council of the City of Mansfield.
I. The words "Planning and Zoning Commission" shall mean the Mansfield Planning and Zoning
Commission.
J. The word "Board" shall mean the Mansfield Board of Adjustments.
K. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance and any
caption, illustration, or table, the text shall control.
L. The word "Building" includes the word "Structure".
M. The word "Lot" includes the words "Parcel", "Plot", or "Tract".
N. The words “residential zoning” mean the following zoning district classifications: A, SF-
5AC/24, SF-12/22, SF-9.6/20, SF-8.4/18, SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/18, SF-7.5/16, SF-7.5/12, SF-6/12,
2F, MF-1, MF-2, MH, as well as Planned Development that consists of residential uses.
O. Fire Code: The Fire Code adopted by the City of Mansfield and any amendment thereof.
(Ordinance No. 1480, Adopted 4/26/04)
P. Person: Includes both the singular and plural and means an individual person, corporation,
association, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, and any other type of
legal entity and any receiver, trustee, guardian, executor, administrator, and fiduciary or
representative of any kind. (Ordinance No. 1480, Adopted 4/26/04)
§2200
2200-1
Section 2200. Definitions
When used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
Section 2200. A
1. Abutting - Having a common border with, or being separated from such common border by an
alley or easement.
2. Adult Entertainment Establishment - Shall be as defined in the Mansfield Code of Ordinances
as now existing or as hereafter amended.
3. Alley - A public way which affords a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon,
and not intended for general traffic circulation.
4. Apartment House - Any building or portion thereof used as a multiple dwelling for the purpose
of providing three (3) or more separate dwelling units which may share means of egress and
other essential facilities.
5. Amusement, Commercial (outdoors) - Any amusement enterprise offering entertainment or
games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge wherein any portion of the activity takes
place in the open including, but not limited to, a golf driving range, archery range and miniature
golf course.
6. Amusement, Commercial (indoors) - An amusement enterprise wholly enclosed in a building
which is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the enterprise is not perceptible at the
bounding property line and including, but not limited to, a bowling alley or billiard parlor.
7. Art Gallery or Museum - An institution for the collection, display and sales of arts and with
facilities open to the general public.
Section 2200 B.
1. Bar - An establishment licensed by the State of Texas for the sale of alcoholic beverages that
derives more than 75% of the establishment’s gross revenue from the on-premise sale of
alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption. For the purposes of this definition, gross
revenue shall be calculated using the total amount of gross revenue received from the sale of
alcoholic beverages and from the sale of food by the establishment for the preceding 12-month
period. Such establishment shall make available to the city or its agents, during reasonable
hours, its books and records for inspection if required by the city.
2. Basement - That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that
the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is greater than the vertical distance from
grade to ceiling. A basement shall not be counted in computing the number of stories.
3. Bedroom - A room marketed, designed, or otherwise likely to function primarily for sleeping.
4. Bed and Breakfast Inn – An accessory use to a single-family dwelling unit in which no more
than seven (7) rooms in the principal residential structure or in an accessory building(s) on the
property are set aside for guest clients, and breakfast is available onsite to only such guest
§2200
2200-2
clients; length of stay of guest clients ranges from one (1) to thirty (30) days; and the
owner/operator resides on-site.
5. Building - Any structure either temporary or permanent, having a roof or other covering, and
designed, built or intended for the shelter or enclosure or partial enclosure of persons, animals,
chattels or movable property of any kind or for an accessory use. Where independent units with
separate entrances are divided by absolute fire separations, each unit so separated shall be
deemed a building. This definition shall include structures wholly or partly enclosed with an
exterior wall.
6. Building, accessory - A building which (1) is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a
principal use, (2) is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal structure or use
served, (3) is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served except as otherwise
expressly authorized by provisions of this ordinance, and (4) is customarily incidental to the
principle structure or use. Any portion of a principal structure devoted or intended to be
devoted to an accessory use is not an accessory structure.
7. Building Line - A line on a lot, generally parallel to a lot line or street right-of-way line, located
at a sufficient distance therefrom to provide the minimum yards required by this Ordinance.
The building line delimits the area in which buildings are permitted subject to all applicable
provisions of this Ordinance.
8. Building, Main/Principle - The building or buildings on a lot which are occupied by the primary
use.
9. Building, Mixed Use - Any building used partly for residential use and partly for community
facility and/or commercial use.
Section 2200 C.
1. Campground or Recreational Vehicle Park - Any plot or tract of land used for the temporary
placement of camping trailers, travel trailers, motor homes, recreational vehicles and designed
for overnight camping. Said property shall provide utilities and sanitary facilities as deemed
necessary by the City for the patrons.
2. Camping or Travel Trailer - vehicles that are currently registered as recreational vehicles with
the Vehicle Title and Registration Division of the Texas Department of Transportation, having
no foundation other than wheels, jacks, blocks or skirting and is designed to be towed from
place to place and which by design is to be occupied as a dwelling on a temporary basis. This
definition shall include “trailer coach, motor home, recreational vehicle” which by definition are
similar to “camping or travel trailer” but are designed to be driven and contain their own power
plant, drive train and steering device.
3. Church or Rectory - A place of worship and religious training of recognized religions including
the on-site housing of minister, rabbis, priests, nuns and similar staff personnel.
4. Clinic, Medical or Dental - Facilities for examining, consulting with and treating patients
including offices, laboratories and out-patient facilities but not including hospital beds and
rooms for acute or chronic care. This term applies only to facilities used by more than two (2)
health care practitioners or establishments.
§2200
2200-3
5. Clothing Manufacturing and Light Fabrication and Assembly - Operations involving cutting,
sewing, forming and packing of garments and similar items and including, but not limited to,
the making of millinery and clothing accessories, jewelry, trimming decorations, signs,
electronic controls, and any similar item not involving the generation of noise, odor, vibration,
dust or obnoxious or hazardous materials or machinery.
6. Club, Private - Quarters for a private organization, the principle purpose of which is the
preparation and service of food and drink for members and their guests only.
7. College or University - An academic institution of higher learning, accredited or recognized by
the State and offering programs of academic study.
8. Community Center, Private - A building or group of rooms designed and used as an integral
part of a residential project by the tenants of such a project for a place of meeting, recreation or
social activity and under the management and unified control of the operators of the project. A
private Community Center shall not be operated as a place of public meetings, or as a business,
nor shall the operation of such facility create noise, odor, or similar conditions perceptible
beyond the bounding property line of the project site.
9. Community Center, Public - A building and grounds owned and operated by a governmental
body for the social, recreational, health or welfare of the community served.
10. Court - An open space bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building.
11. Coverage, Lot - The percent of lot area which is covered by a roof, floor, or other structure and
is not open to the sky. Roof eaves to the extent of two (2) feet and ordinary projections from
the building not exceeding twelve (12) inches shall not be counted in computing coverage.
Section 2200 D.
1. Dance Hall or Night Club - An establishment offering to the general public facilities for
dancing, dining and entertainment for a fee and subject to regulations by the City of Mansfield.
2. Day Care Center or Nursery - Any place, home or institution which cares for five (5) or more
children under the age of sixteen years old apart from their parents, guardians, or custodians for
regular periods of time for compensation; provided, however, that the term "child care center"
shall not apply to bonafide schools, custody fixed by a court, children related by blood or
marriage within the third degree of the custodial person.
3. Density or Gross Density - A measure of residential land use intensity which is expressed as the
number of dwelling units per acre (du/ac) of gross site area.
4. Development Schedule - A chronological estimate of the rate and order of development.
5. Doctor's or Physician's Office - A small office for examining and consulting with patients
including necessary accessory facilities and occupied by not more than two (2) doctors.
6. Dwelling, Accessory - A dwelling unit accessory to and located on the same lot with the main
residential building and used as living quarters by domestic servants or caretakers employed on
the premises, temporary guests, or family members of the owner of the premises.
§2200
2200-4
7. Dwelling, Single-family - A detached dwelling designed for and occupied by not more than one
(1) family and having no roof, wall, or floor in common with any other dwelling unit.
8. Dwelling, Two Families - A detached building having accommodation for and occupied by not
more than two (2) families, each of which is attached side to side each one (1) sharing only one
(1) common wall with the other. In calculating minimum lot area, a two-family dwelling shall
be considered to be two dwelling units.
9. Dwelling or Dwelling Unit - A room or group of rooms which is arranged, occupied, or
intended to be occupied as living quarters and includes facilities for food preparation and
sleeping.
10. Dwelling, Zero Lot Line - A single-family, fully detached dwelling located on an individual lot
which is set on one of the interior side lot lines. This makes the side yard usable and requires
less land than a house centered on its lot.
Section 2200 E.
1. Eating Places with Drive-In Services - An establishment whose principle business is the sale of
food and/or beverages in a ready-to-consume state: (1) for consumption within the
establishment, (2) for consumption within a motor vehicle parked on the premises where the
customer does not exit the vehicle or (3) through direct window service allowing customers in
motor vehicles to purchase food and/or beverages for off-premise consumption.
2. Eating Places without Drive-In Services - An establishment whose principle business is the sale
of food and/or beverages to customers in a ready-to-consume state, and whose principle method
of operation includes one or both of the following characteristics: (1) customers, normally
provided with an individual menu, are served their foods and beverages by a restaurant
employee at the same table or counter at which food and beverages are consumed; (2) a service
line operation where food and beverages are consumed within the establishment.
Section 2200 F.
1. Family - Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not
more than four individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption.
2. Feed Store/Mixing Plant - An establishment for the sale of grain, prepared feed and forage for
pets, livestock and fowl, part of other activities may involve the grinding, mixing or commercial
compounding of such items.
3. Field or Construction Office - A structure or shelter, subject to removal by owner or Building
Official, used in connection with a development or building project for housing on-site
administrative and supervisory functions and for sheltering employees and equipment.
4. Fix-It Shop and Appliance Repair - A shop for the repair of household and home equipment,
such as electrical appliances, bicycles, lawn mowers, tools and similar items.
5. Floor Area - The sum of the gross floor area for each of a building's stories measured from the
interior limits of the walls of the structure. The floor area of a building includes basement floor
§2200
2200-5
area and includes attic floor area only if the attic area meets the Mansfield Building Code
standards for habitable floor area. It does not include cellars and unenclosed porches or any
floor space in an accessory building or in the principle building which is designed for the
parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of this ordinance.
6. Floor Area Ration (FAR) - An intensity measure expressed as the ratio between the number of
square feet of total floor area in the main building(s) on a lot and the total square footage of land
in the lot; it is the number resulting from dividing the main building floor area by the lot area.
Section 2200 G.
1. Garage Apartment - A dwelling unit designed or constructed as part of a private garage.
2. Garment Pressing and Agents for Laundries and Dry Cleaning - An establishment for custom
cleaning and/or pressing of individual garments only and not a bulk or commercial type
cleaning plant.
3. Gas Service Station - An establishment providing sales of vehicle fuel and/or such services as
lubrication, oil and tire changes, and minor repairs. This use does not include paint spraying or
auto body repair or major engine or motor repairs.
4. Grade - The average elevation of the highest and lowest elevation measured at the finished
surface of the ground at any of the exterior corners of the building or structure.
5. Gross Site Area – The total square footage or acreage of land in a lot or tract excluding the area
within a floodway and area dedicated as public street right-of-way.
6. Group Foster Home - A facility licensed by the State as a foster home that provides room,
board, ordinary care and supervision to no more than twelve (12) individuals under eighteen
(18) years of age who are related or not related to the owner. This term shall include "registered
family home" as defined in Ordinance No. 595.
Section 2200 H.
1. Height - The vertical distance of a building or structure measured from the average established
grade at the street line or from the average natural front yard ground level, whichever is higher,
to (1) the highest point of the roof's surface if a flat surface, (2) the top deck line of a mansard
roof, (3) the mean height level between eaves and ridge of a hip and gable roof, (4) the top of a
parapet wall. If the street grade has not been officially established, the average front yard grade
shall be used for a base level.
2. Home Occupation - A business, profession, occupation, or trade conducted for gain or support
and located entirely within a residential building, or a structural accessory thereto, which use is
accessory, incidental, and secondary to the use of the building for dwelling purposes and does
not change the essential residential character or appearance of such building or neighborhood in
which the building is located.
3. Hospital - A facility in which there are complete facilities for diagnosis, treatment, surgery,
laboratory, X-ray, nursing, and the prolonged care of bed patients.
§2200
2200-6
4. Hotel or Motel - A building or group of buildings designed to be temporarily occupied by
individuals.
Section 2200 I.
1. Industrialized Housing - A residential structure that is designed for the use and occupancy of
one or more families that is constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or
more modular components built at a location other than the permanent residential site, and that
is designed to be used as a permanent residential structure when the modules or modular
components are transported to the permanent residential site and are erected or installed on a
permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and
electrical systems. The term does not include any residential structure that is in excess of three
stories or forty-nine (49) feet in height as measured from the finished grade elevation at the
building entrance to the peak of the roof. The term shall not mean nor apply to (1) housing
constructed of sectional or panelized systems not utilizing modular components; or (2) any
ready-built home which is constructed so that the entire living area is contained in a single unit
or section at a temporary location for the purpose of selling it and moving it to another location.
2. Industrialized Building -A commercial structure that is constructed in one or more modules or
constructed using one or more modular components built at a location other than the permanent
commercial site, and that is designed to be used as a commercial building when the modules or
modular components are transported to the permanent commercial site and are erected or
installed on a permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, airconditioning,
and electrical systems. The term does not include any commercial structure that is
in excess of three stories or forty-nine (49) feet in height as measured from the finished grade
elevation at the building entrance to the peak of the roof.
Section 2200. J. Reserved for Future Use.
Section 2200. K.
1. Kennel - Any place in or at which three (3) or more dogs more than eight (8) weeks old are
kept, or any place in or at which one or more dogs are housed or boarded for pay.
2. Kindergarten - A school for children of preschool age, the teaching of which is purely
preliminary to the teaching of the public school, and which implements a planned curriculum of
constructive endeavors, helpful games, object lessons, songs and social exercises.
Section 2200 L.
1. Laboratory, Scientific or Research - Operations involving the compounding of products such as
perfumes, pharmaceutical and the experiment, testing, development and assembly of
instruments, construction materials and similar items.
2. Loading Space - An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a
group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials.
3. Local Utility Service Line - The facilities provided by a municipality or a franchised utility
company for the distribution of gas, water, drainage, sewage, electric power, telephone or
telecommunication.
§2200
2200-7
4. Lot - Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings and including
such open spaces as are required under this ordinance and having its principle frontage upon a
public street or officially approved place.
5. Lot Area - That area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines of a
building lot, including any portion of an easement which may exist within such property lines,
exclusive of rights-of-way for street or alley purposes.
6. Lot, Corner - A lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets, the interior angle of such
intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. A corner lot shall be deemed
to front on the street on which it has its smallest dimensions, or as otherwise designated by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
7. Lot Depth - The length of a line connecting the mid-point of the front and rear lot lines.
8. Lot, Double Frontage - A building lot, not a corner lot, which adjoins two streets which are
opposite each other and which are parallel or within forty-five (45) degrees of being parallel to
each other. On a double frontage lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines, except as
otherwise provided herein.
9. Lot, Interior - A lot other than a corner lot.
10. Lot Lines - The lines bounding a lot.
11. Lot Line, Front - In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street or place;
and in the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the
street, except in those cases where the latest tract deed restrictions specifies another line as the
front lot line.
12. Lot Line, Rear - That lot line which is opposite to and most distant from the front lot line of the
lot; in the case of a triangular, pentagon or polygon shaped lot, a line twenty (20) feet in length,
entirely within the lot, most parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front lot
line shall be considered to be the rear lot line.
13. Lot Line, Side - Any lot line not a front lot line or rear lot line. Where a lot has only three (3)
lot lines, those lot lines which do not front upon a street shall be deemed side lot lines.
14. Lot of Record - A lot which is part of a subdivision plat which has been recorded in the office
of the County Clerk of Tarrant County or Johnson County or Ellis County.
15. Lot Width - The length of a line, drawn perpendicular to the lot depth line at its point of
intersection with the front setback line, connecting the side lot lines; however, in zoning
districts requiring less than a twenty-five (25) foot front setback, lot width shall be measured as
if said front setback were twenty-five feet (25').
Section 2200 M
1. Maintenance and Repair Services for Buildings - An establishment and related open storage
yard for supplies and operational equipment for building maintenance, but not constituting a
junk, wrecking or salvage yard.
§2200
2200-8
2. Manufactured Home, HUD-Code - A structure, constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according
to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable
in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or
forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or
more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
3. Manufactured Home Rental Communities - A plot or tract of land which is separated into two or
more spaces or lots which are rented or leased or offered for rent or lease to persons for the
installation of manufactured homes for use and occupancy as residences; provided that the lease
or rental agreement is for a term of less than 60 months and contains no purchase option.
4. Manufactured Home Subdivision - A unified development of mobile home sites on lots platted
for such purposes, which lots may be sold to the owners of a mobile home situated thereon,
meeting all of requirements of applicable zoning and subdivision ordinances and designed to
accommodate mobile homes on a permanent basis.
5. Masonry Construction Materials – Masonry construction materials include brick; natural or
manufactured stone; structural clay tile; indented, hammered or split-face concrete masonry unit
or combination of these materials that are laid up unit by unit and set in mortar and that are at
least two (2) inches thick. (Ord. No. 1484, 5/10/04)
6. Masonry-Like Construction Materials – Masonry-like construction materials include fiber
reinforced cement exterior siding, stucco, Exterior Insulated Finish Systems (E.I.F.S.), or
similar exterior cladding; and concrete tilt wall, pour-in-place concrete wall and pre-cast wall
that are at least two (2) inches thick and that are profiled, sculptured, fluted, exposed-aggregated
or have other non-smooth architectural concrete finish. Ord. No. 1484, 5/10/04)
7. Medical Waste Product Facility – An establishment that receives, processes, treats, transfers,
collects or stores medical waste products.
8. Membership Sport or Recreational Club - A private recreational club with restricted
membership, usually of less area than a Country Club, which may include a club house, a
swimming pool, tennis courts, or similar recreational facilities none of which are available to
the general public.
9. Mini-Warehouse - A building or group of buildings in a controlled-access and fenced
compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled-access
stalls or lockers for the dead storage of a customer's goods or wares. No outside storage, sales,
service, or repair activities other than the rental of dead storage units are permitted on the
premises.
10. Mobile Home - A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or
more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40)
body feet or more in length, or, when erected on-site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more
square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
§2200
2200-9
11. Manufactured Home Lot or Pad - A plot of ground within a manufactured home rental
community or subdivision designed for the accommodation of one manufactured home, with an
area of not less than 4500 square feet and meeting all setbacks contained herein.
12. Model Home - A single-family dwelling in a developing subdivision located on a legal lot of
record that is limited to temporary use as a sales office for the subdivision and to provide an
example of the dwellings which have been built or which are proposed to be built in the same
subdivision.
13. Motor/Railroad Freight Terminal - A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck
or railroad car is assembled and is stored for interstate and/or intrastate shipment by motor truck
or railroad car. A motor freight terminal is a truck terminal.
14. Multi-Tenant Office Or Retail Strip Building – A building with two (2) or more office or retail
tenants in a single structure on the same lot with each tenant having its own separate entrance
on the building’s exterior.
Section 2200 N.
1. Nursery - An enterprise which conducts the retail sale of plants grown on or off the site, as well
as accessory items directly related to their care and maintenance but not power equipment such
as gas or electric lawnmowers and farm implements. The accessory items normally sold are
clay pots, potting soil, fertilizers, insecticides, baskets, rake and shovels.
2. Nursing or Assisted Living Facility - A private home for the care of children or the aged or
infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, not containing equipment for
surgical care or the medical treatment of disease or injury.
3. Nonconforming Building, Lawful – A building, structure, or portion thereof which does not
conform to the regulations of this ordinance and which lawfully existed at the time the
regulations with which it does not conform became effective.
4. Nonconforming Use, Lawful - A use of a building or land which does not conform to the use
district regulations of this Ordinance and which lawfully existed at the time the regulations with
which it does not conform became effective. A lawful conforming use existing at the time of
the adoption of this ordinance shall not become nonconforming as a result of a Specific Use
Permit requirement.
5. Non-Traditional Smoking Related Business – A retail establishment or other business whose
principal business is the offering of a service related to, or the selling of, renting or exhibiting of
products or devices known as water pipes, hookahs, electronic cigarettes or electronic vaping
devices, steam stones, hookah pens or any comparable devices. For the purpose of this
definition, the term “principal” shall mean over 25% of the volume of sales or rentals, stock in
trade or display areas generated from or devoted to the products or devices described herein.
Section 2200 O.
§2200
2200-10
1. Occupancy - Occupancy as used herein pertains to and is the purpose for which a building is
used or intended to be used. A change of occupancy is not intended to include a change of
tenants or proprietors.
2. Openings for Light and Air - Any windows, window walls or glass panels located in the
building, but not including doors which are used only for ingress or egress.
3. Open Space - An area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on a lot
that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projections of cornices, eaves
and plant material.
4. Open Space, Common - Parks, playgrounds, community centers, golf courses, parkways, water
areas or similar areas which are created as private open space under a permanent agreement for
maintenance and responsibility and is accepted by the City Council and approved by the City
Attorney.
Section 2200 P.
1. Parkway - That public property situated between the curb or edge of a street and the property
line of the land adjacent.
2. Philanthropic Institution - Any organization operating under a non-profit charter, the activities
of which are devoted exclusively to benevolent purposes.
3. Porch – An exterior structure that extends along the outside of a building, usually roofed and
generally open-sided but may also be partially enclosed, screened, or glass-enclosed; it is often
an addition to the main structure.
4. Public Building, Utility Shop or Storage Yard of Local, State or Federal Government - Facilities
such as office buildings, maintenance yards or shops required by branches of Local, State or
Federal Government for service to an area, such as Highway Department Yard or City Service
Center.
5. Publically Owned Non-School Facility – A structure, facility or land area owned by a
governmental entity including a public school district that is not used for classroom instruction
purposes but for administration, maintenance, vehicle storage, entertainment or athletic
competition not focused on continuing instruction. Facilities of this type will be treated as
public uses of structures or land for zoning, alcoholic beverage regulation and other regulatory
purposes.
Section 2200 Q. (Reserved for Future Use)
Section 2200 R.
1. Radio, Television or Micro-Wave Tower - Structure supporting an antenna for transmitting or
receiving any portion of the radio spectrum, but excluding non-commercial antenna installations
for home use of radio or television.
2. Railroad Track and Right-of-Way - not including railroad stations, sidings, team tracks, loading
facilities, docks, yards or maintenance areas.
§2200
2200-11
3. Recreational Area - An area devoted to facilities and equipment for recreational purposes,
swimming pools, tennis courts, playgrounds, community clubhouses, and other similar uses.
4. Recycling Collection Center - An open yard for the receiving, sorting, storage or packing of
paper, rags, glass, boxes, aluminum and similar commodities.
5. Repair Garage - A shop for the disassembly, rebuilding and repair of motor vehicle engines,
electric motors, vehicle transmissions or other major components. Minor vehicle maintenance
shall be classified as a service station.
6. Retail Stores and Shops Other than Listed - Any establishment not listed in the permitted use
listing, offering consumer goods for sale except those uses specifically excluded and listed in
other districts.
7. Rooming/Boarding House - A building other than a hotel or multi-family dwelling where
lodging is provided for compensation for three (3) but not more than twelve (12) persons, where
meals may or may not be served, and where facilities for food preparation are not provided in
the individual rooms. Where meals are served, they shall be served only to the residents of the
boarding house.
Section 2200 S.
1. School, Business or Professional - A business operating for profit and offering instruction and
training in a service or art, such as a secretarial school, barber college, beauty school,
commercial art school, but not including a manual trade school.
2. School, Public or Private – For purposes of zoning, alcoholic beverage regulation and other
regulatory ordinances, a structure intended, designed and constructed for the use of providing
classroom instruction to students. It is intended to include actual classroom facilities and
attached administrative, cafeteria and auditorium facilities. Gymnasiums are included within
this definition if they are attached to a facility designed and used for classroom instruction of
students.
3. School, Vocational or Trade - A business operating for profit and offering instruction and
training in a trade such as welding, brick laying, machinery operation or other similar manual
trades.
4. Shopping Center - A group of commercial establishments which is planned, developed, and
managed as a unit related in its location, size and type of shops to the trade area that the unit
serves.
5. Solar Panel Systems – A combination of equipment and/or controls, accessories,
interconnecting means and terminal elements for the collection, storage and distribution of solar
energy. Solar panel systems do not include individually powered outdoor solar lights, such as
garden lights, accent lights, security lights or flood lights.
6. Stable, Commercial - A building or land where horses are kept for breeding, remuneration, hire,
sale, boarding, riding or show.
7. Stable, Private - Any building, incidental to an existing residential, principle use, that shelters
horses for the exclusive use of the occupants of the premises.
§2200
2200-12
8. Stable, Riding Club -A paddock, stable and related riding and quartering facilities for horses
owned by a specific number of recorded members and maintained for the exclusive use of such
members and guest.
9. Storage, Outside - The storage of any equipment, machinery, building materials or
commodities, including raw, semi-finished and finished materials, the storage of which is not
accessory to a residential use, and which is visible from ground level; provided, however, that
vehicular parking except junked or damaged vehicles shall not be deemed to be outside storage.
10. Street Frontage - The length of all property on one side of a street measured along the line of the
street, or in the case of a dead-end street, then the length of all property abutting on one side
between an intersecting street and the end of the dead-end street.
11. Structure - Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the
ground or attached to something having permanent location on the ground. This term shall
include any man made screening structure, sign or device.
12. Stucco - Exterior plaster as defined in the Uniform Building Code currently adopted by the City
and amendment thereof.
Section 2200 T.
1. Telephone Exchange, Switching Relay & Transmitting Station - Not including public business
facilities, storage or repair facilities.
2. Townhouse - A single-family dwelling, on a separate lot which fronts on a street, a place, a
court or a private access easement, which is attached to two (2) or more similar dwellings by a
vertical lot line, or party walls, which has its own private entrance, and which in combination
with said attached dwellings constitutes an architectural whole.
Section 2200 U.
1. Use - The purpose or activity for which land or any building thereon is designed, arranged, or
intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
2. Use, Accessory - An accessory use is one which (1) is subordinate to and serves a principle
structure or a principle use, (2) is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principle
structure or use served, (3) is located on the same lot as the principle structure or use served
except as otherwise expressly authorized by provisions of this ordinance, and (4) is customarily
incidental to the principle structure or use.
3. Use, Main/Principle - The specific primary purpose for which land is used.
4. Use, Temporary - A temporary use is one established for a fixed period of time with the intent
to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time. Such uses do not involve the
construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
5. Used Merchandise Store - A retail store for used materials, goods, and merchandise of less than
twenty (20) years of age, and those over twenty (20) year of age which do not derive a value
from their age.
§2200
2200-13
Section 2200 V.
1. Variance - Permission to depart from the literal requirement of this ordinance granted pursuant
to Section 8400.
2. Vehicle – Any passenger vehicle or other vehicle.
3. Vehicle, Other – Any bus, all-terrain vehicle, motor home, recreational vehicle, camper, trailer,
boat, or any vehicle of any kind that is not a passenger vehicle.
4. Vehicle, Passenger – Any automobile, truck or motorcycle intended primarily for transportation
to and from work, school, shopping or similar domestic uses.
5. Veterinary Clinic - An establishment for the care and medical veterinary practice on or for
domestic household animals, conducted completely within an enclosed, soundproofed structure
and not using any setback or open space for the activities defined.
6. Veterinary Hospital - An establishment for the care and medical treatment of large animals and
domestic household pets having treatment and boarding facilities both in an enclosed building
and outside pens or runs enclosed by a permanent type of fencing.
Section 2200 W.
1. Wrecking or Salvage Yard - Premises upon which waste or scrap materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, stored, packed, disassembled or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and
other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, bottles and used building materials. This term shall also
include an automobile wrecking and salvage yard.
Section 2200 X. (Reserved for Future Use)
Section 2200 Y.
1. Yard - An open space, other than a court, between a building and the adjoining lot lines,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided herein.
2. Yard, Front - A yard extending across the front of the lot between side lot lines and having a
minimum horizontal depth measured from the front lot line as specified for the district in which
the lot is located.
3. Yard, Rear - A yard, except for accessory buildings as herein permitted, extending across the
rear of the lot between side lot lines and having a minimum horizontal depth measured from the
rear lot line as specified for the district in which the lot is located. On corner lots, the rear yard
shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimensions. On both
corner and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the
front yard.
4. Yard, Side - A yard between a building and side lot line, extending from the front yard or front
lot line where no front yard is required to the rear yard and having a minimum horizontal
distance measured from the side lot lines as specified for the district in which the lot is located.
Section 2200 Z. (Reserved for Future Use)
§3000
3000-1
ARTICLE 3. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
Section 3000. Establishment of Zoning Districts.
Mansfield, Texas is hereby divided into zoning districts of such number and character as are
necessary to achieve compatibility of uses within each district, to implement the official Mansfield
Land Use Plan and related official plans and the Official Zoning Map of Mansfield, and to serve the
other purposes of this ordinance which are detailed in Article 1.
Section 3100. Zoning Districts Enumeration.
For the purpose of this ordinance, all land and water areas in Mansfield are hereby divided into
zoning districts which shall be designated as follows:
PR Pre-Development District
A Agricultural District
SF-5AC/24 Single-Family Residential District – 5 acre lots minimum
SF-12/22 Single-Family Residential District – 12,000 sq. ft. lots minimum
SF-9.6/20 Single-Family Residential District – 9,600 sq. ft. lots minimum
SF-8.4/18 Single-Family Residential District – 8,400 sq. ft. lots minimum
SF-8.4/16 Single-Family Residential District – 8,400 sq. ft. lots minimum
SF-7.5/18 Single-Family Residential District – 7,500 sq. ft. lots minimum
SF-7.5/16 Single-Family Residential District – 7,500 sq. ft. lots minimum
SF-7.5/12 Single-Family Residential District – 7,500 sq. ft. lots minimum
SF-6/12 Garden Home District – 6,000 sq. ft. lots minimum
2F Two Family Residential District – 3,750 sq. ft. per unit minimum
MF-1 Multi-family Residential District – 12 units per acre maximum
MF-2 Multi-family Residential District – 18 units per acre maximum
OP Office Park District
C-l Neighborhood Business District
C-2 Community Business District
C-3 Commercial-Manufacturing District
C-4 Downtown Business District
I-l Light Industrial District
I-2 Heavy Industrial District
FR Freeway Overlay District
MH Manufactured Home District
PD Planned Development District
Section 3200. Zoning Map Adopted.
The official Zoning Map of the City of Mansfield attached hereto and made a part hereof for all
purposes, is hereby adopted and shall be filed with the City Secretary of the City of Mansfield. The
boundaries of the various districts as enumerated in Section 3100 are hereby established as identified
on said map. All notations, references, legends, scales, and every detail shown on said map are
incorporated into and made a part of this ordinance.
§3200
3200-1
Section 3201. Interpretation of District Boundaries.
The following rules shall be used to determine the precise location of any zoning district boundary
shown on the Official Zoning Map of Mansfield.
A. Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the limits of any municipal
corporation shall be construed as following such limits.
B. Boundaries shown as following or approximately following streets shall be construed to follow
the center lines of such streets.
C. Boundary lines which follow or approximately follow platted lot lines or other property lines as
shown on the Mansfield Tax Maps shall be construed as following such lines.
D. In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the Zoning Map shall be determined by
use of the scale appearing on the map.
E. Any property on the Zoning Map which does not have a zoning district designation shall be
classified as a PR, Pre-Development District.
F. Boundaries shown as following or approximately following survey lines, or county lines shall
be construed as following such lines.
G. Boundaries shown as following or approximately following railroad lines shall be construed to
lie midway between the main tracks of such railroad lines.
H. Boundaries shown as following or approximately following shorelines of any lakes shall be
construed to follow the mean high waterline of such lakes, and in the event of change in the
mean high waterline shall be construed as moving with the actual mean high waterline.
I. Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers,
or other continuously flowing water courses shall be construed as following the channel center
line of such water courses taken at mean low water, and in the event of a natural change in the
location of such streams, river, or other water courses, the zone boundary shall be construed as
moving with the channel center line.
J. Boundaries shown as separated from, and parallel or approximately parallel to, any of the
features listed in paragraphs A through G above shall be construed to be parallel to such
features and at such distances therefrom as are shown on the map.
Section 3202. District Boundary Uncertainty.
If after the application of the aforementioned rules, uncertainty still exists with respect to the
boundaries of the various districts, as shown on the Zoning Map, the conflict shall be resolved by
utilizing the appeal power of the Board of Adjustments as set forth in Article 8.
§4000
4000-1
ARTICLE 4 ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 4000. General Restrictions.
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, no land or building shall be used, and no building,
structure or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved, altered, enlarged or repaired,
for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with the requirement established in the
district in which such land, building, structure, or improvement is located, and in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance.
Section 4001. Residential Use Restrictions.
Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district permit residential uses of a more
restrictive district, such residential uses shall be subject to the conditions as set forth in the
regulations of the more restrictive district unless otherwise specifically stated. For the purpose of
this Ordinance, the level of restrictions shall be in the order of districts listed in Section 3100, with
the "A", Agricultural District as the most restrictive to the "I-2", Heavy Industrial District as the least
restrictive.
Section 4002. General Purpose and Description Provisions.
Paragraphs included within the district regulations in Article 4 hereof entitled "General Purpose and
Description" contain general descriptive information to provide the reader with a conceptual
understanding of the general legislative intent of the district indicated. The provisions of such
paragraphs are directory and not mandatory.
Section 4101. PR, Pre-Development District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To identify areas that will ultimately be developed for
residential, commercial or industrial purposes. This zoning classification does not infer any
specific indication of future land uses other than its projection for some form of residential,
commercial or industrial development. The actual zoning classification for properties in these
areas will be converted to a residential, commercial or industrial zoning district classification at
the initiation of the development process by a properly filed zoning change request to be
evaluated in conformance with the City’s Zoning Ordinance. The zoning classification selected
will be determined based upon normal zoning change review criteria to include the City’s then
current Land Use Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, and the developer’s projected uses.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in the PR District shall be the same as those permitted in the
SF-12/22 District.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in the PR District shall be the same
as those provided for the SF-12/22 District.
Section 4102. A, Agricultural District Regulations.
D. General Purpose and Description: To establish and preserve agricultural areas for those
agricultural uses which are compatible with nearby urban development.
E. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in an A, Agricultural District are set forth in Section 4400.
§4000
4000-2
F. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in an A, Agricultural District, are
set forth in Section 4500.
Section 4103. SF-5AC/24, Single-Family Residential District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To provide for the development of single-family detached
dwelling units on lots of not less than five (5) acres.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in the SF-5AC/24 District are set forth in Section 4400.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in the SF-5AC/24 District are set
forth in Section 4500.
Section 4104. SF-12/22, Single-Family Residential District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To provide for the development of single-family detached
dwelling units on lots of not less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in the SF-12/22 District are set forth in Section 4400.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in the SF-12/22 District are set
forth in Section 4500.
Section 4105. SF-9.6/20, Single-Family Residential District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To provide for the development of single-family detached
dwelling units on lots of not less than nine thousand six hundred (9,600) square feet.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in the SF-9.6/20 District are set forth in Section 4400.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in the SF-9.6/20 District are set
forth in Section 4500.
Section 4106. SF-8.4/18, Single-Family Residential District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To provide for the development of single-family detached
dwelling units on lots of not less than eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in the SF-8.4/18 District are set forth in Section 4400.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in the SF-8.4/18 District are set
forth in Section 4500.
Section 4107. SF-8.4/16, Single-Family Residential District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To provide for the development of single-family detached
dwelling units with a minimum floor area of 1,600 square feet per unit on lots of not less than
eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in the SF-8.4/16 District are set forth in Section 4400.
§4000
4000-3
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in the SF-8.4/16 District are set
forth in Section 4500.
Section 4108. SF-7.5/18, Single-Family Residential District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To provide for the development of single-family detached
dwelling units with a minimum floor area of 1,800 square feet per unit on lots of not less than
seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in the SF-7.5/18 District are set forth in Section 4400.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in the SF-7.5/18 District are set
forth in Section 4500.
Section 4109. SF-7.5/16, Single-Family Residential District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To provide for the development of single-family detached
dwelling units with a minimum floor area of 1,600 square feet per unit on lots of not less than
seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in the SF-7.5/16 District are set forth in Section 4400.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in the SF-7.5/16 District are set
forth in Section 4500.
Section 4110. SF-7.5/12, Single-Family Residential District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To provide for the development of single-family detached
dwelling units with a minimum floor area of 1,200 square feet per unit on lots of not less than
seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in the SF-7.5/12 District are set forth in Section 4400.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in the SF-7.5/12 District are set
forth in Section 4500.
Section 4111. SF-6/12, Garden Home District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To provide for the development of single-family detached
and zero-lot-line dwelling units on lots of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in the SF-6/12 District are set forth in Section 4400.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in the SF-6/12 District are set forth
in Section 4500.
Section 4112. 2F, Two Family Residential District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To provide for the development of two family dwelling
units with each unit occupying its own lot of not less than three thousand seven hundred and
fifty (3,750) square feet.
§4000
4000-4
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in the 2F District are set forth in Section 4400.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in the 2F District are set forth in
Section 4500.
Section 4113. MF-1, Multi-family Residential District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To provide for the development of multi-family dwelling
units at a density of not more than twelve (12) units per acre.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in the MF-1 District are set forth in Section 4400.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in the MF-1 District, are set forth in
Section 4500.
Section 4114. MF-2, Multi-family Residential District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To provide for the development of multi-family dwelling
units at a density of not more than eighteen (18) units per acre.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in the MF-2 District are set forth in Section 4400.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in the MF-2 District, are set forth in
Section 4500.
Section 4201. OP, Office Park District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To establish and preserve a district for limited kinds of
business and other uses which are compatible with nearby residential uses.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in an OP, Office Park District are set forth in Section 4400.
The office, retail and service uses permitted in this district shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 7800, Special Conditions, in addition to conforming with regulations of the OP District.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in an OP, Office Park District, are
set forth in Section 4500.
Section 4202. C-l, Neighborhood Business District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To establish and preserve a business district serving
patrons who arrive on foot or arrive by car and park once to carry out several errands, including
travelers, tourists and vacationers as well as residents of the city and surrounding area.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in a C-l, Neighborhood Business District are set forth in
Section 4400.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in a C-l, Neighborhood Business
District are set forth in Section 4500 except that all commercial, retail and service uses permitted
in this district shall not exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet in gross floor area for any lot or
premise.
§4000
4000-5
Section 4203. C-2, Community Business District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To establish and preserve general commercial areas
consisting of shopping facilities where customers reach individual business establishments
primarily by automobile, and to provide for other kinds of uses in compatible circumstances.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in a C-2, Community Business District are set forth in Section
4400.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in a C-2, Community Business
District are set forth in Section 4500.
Section 4204. C-3, Commercial-Manufacturing District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To establish and preserve commercial -manufacturing area
consisting of sales and display operations which by their nature are not compatible with many
other general commercial uses, as well as selected manufacturing uses which are either free of
objectionable influences in their operations and appearance or can eliminate or control
objectionable characteristics by landscaping, screening and other abatement devices.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in a C-3, Commercial-Manufacturing District -are set forth in
Section 4400.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in a C-3, Commercial-
Manufacturing District are set forth in Section 4500.
Section 4205. C-4, Downtown Business District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To establish and preserve the downtown business area of
Mansfield which is and will be substantially developed in a dense pattern with high building
coverage and vehicle parking provided on the street, and which requires a different approach
than is appropriate in newer retail and commercial areas.
B. Permitted Uses: Any uses permitted in the foregoing OP, C-l and C-2 Districts, excluding
churches, private schools and hospitals, but including a bed and breakfast inn, single-family
dwellings and multiple family dwellings provided that such dwellings are not located on the
ground floor and provided that off-street parking is available for such dwellings.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in the C-4, Downtown Business
District are set forth in Section 4500.
Section 4301. I-l, Light Industrial District.
A. General Purpose and Description: To establish and preserve industrial areas consisting of
manufacturing, assembling and fabrication activities that are predominantly light and non
offensive in character, as well as commercial uses which are most appropriately located as
neighbors of industrial uses or which are necessary to service the immediate needs of people in
these areas.
§4000
4000-6
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in an I-l, Light Industrial District are set forth in Section 4400.
The permitted uses in this district shall be subject to special conditions as set forth in Section
7800.B.26, in addition to conforming with regulations of the I-l District.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in a I-1 Light Industrial District, are
set forth in Section 4500.
Section 4302. I-2, Heavy Industrial District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: To establish and preserve industrial areas for heavy
manufacturing uses which by their nature may not be compatible with commercial or other
manufacturing uses. Provision is also made for the location in this district of uses which may
have characteristics of a noxious nature, along with the imposition of reasonable standards for
the protection of adjacent uses.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in an I-2, Heavy Industrial District, are set forth in Section
4400.
C. Area and Height Regulations: Area and height regulations in an I-2, Heavy Industrial District,
are set forth in Section 4500.
§4400
4400-1
Section 4400. Permitted Uses.
A. Use of Land and Buildings: Buildings, structures, land or premises shall be used only in
accordance with the uses specifically permitted in the zoning district classification for the site
subject to compliance with parking regulations, height and area requirements, "Special
Conditions" and all other requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
B. Permitted Use Table: The permitted uses in each specific zoning district are shown by means
of symbols in the permitted use tables on the following pages. The letter “P” in the zoning
district column opposite the listed permitted use means the use is permitted as a use of right in
that district subject to:
1. Providing off-street parking in the amounts required by reference to the “Parking Group
Table” column, and
2. Subject to compliance with all of the requirements specified in the section or sections whose
number appears in the “Special Conditions” column.
The letter “S” in the zoning district column opposite the permitted use means the use is permitted
in that zoning district only after:
1. Providing off-street parking in the amounts required by reference to the “Parking Group
Table” column,
2. Subject to compliance with all of the requirements specified in the section or sections whose
number appears in the “Special Conditions” column, and
3. Obtaining a Specific Use Permit as set forth in Article 6, Section 6100.
The letter “I” in the zoning district column opposite the permitted use means the use is not
permitted as a use of right in that district and is permitted only after:
1. Providing off-street parking in the amounts required by reference to the “Parking Group
Table” column.
2. Subject to compliance with all of the requirements specified in the section or sections whose
number appears in the “Special Conditions” column, and
3. Obtaining an Industrial Use Permit as set forth in Article 6, Section 6400.
The referenced requirements of “"Parking Group Table”" and “"Special Conditions”" listed in
the above mentioned columns are provided in Section 7200 and Section 7800, respectively.
No primary use shall be permitted in any district other than a use shown in the following tables
and no primary use shall be permitted in any district unless the letter “P” or the letter “S” appears
opposite the listed permitted use.
C. Uses not Listed: Primary uses not listed in the Permitted Use Table may be permitted in any
district where similar uses are permitted subject to the determination of the Director of Planning.
The function and location requirements of the unlisted use must be consistent with the purpose
and description of the zoning district, compatible with the permitted uses in the district, and be
similar in traffic-generating capacity, noise, vibration, dust, odor, glare and heat producing
characteristics.
§4400
4400-2
D. Accessory Use: A use which is customarily incidental to that of the primary existing use, which
is located on the same lot or premise as the primary existing use, and which has the same zoning
district classification, shall be permitted as an accessory use without being separately listed as a
permitted use subject to the determination of the Director of Planning.
§4400
4400-3
SECTION 4400B PERMITTED USE TABLE
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
A. Accessory Residential Uses
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 1. Accessory Building, Structure or Use P 5
P P P P P P P P P P 2. Accessory Dwelling P 35
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 3. Home Occupation P 6
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 4. Private Recreation Facility P 7
P P P P P P P P P 5. Private Stable P 12
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 6. Private Utility Shop or Storage P 10
7. Quarters for On-Site Manager or Caretaker of Mini-Warehouses S S S P 32
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 8. Solar Panel System P P P P P P P 38
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 9. Swimming Pool P 9
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 10. TV Dish Antenna P P P P P P P 11
4400-4
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
B. Agricultural Uses
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
S 1. Animal Pound (Public or Private) S S S
P S S S S S S S S 2. Farm, Ranch or Orchard 20
S 3. Kennel S S S
S 4. Livestock Auction S S S
S 5. Livestock Feed Lot S S
S 6. Poultry Raising or Hatchery S S
4400-5
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
C. Automobile/Vehicle Service Uses
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
1. Auto Auction S P 7f
2. Auto Glass, Upholstery or Muffler Shop S S P P P 7b 18
3. Car Wash, Including Self-Service S S P 7g 17
4. Auto Painting or Body Repair S P P P 7b 18
5. Auto Parts or Accessory Sales (Indoor) S S S P P P 7c
6. Auto Parts or Accessory Sales (Outdoor) S P 7d
7. Auto Rental S S P
8. Recreational Vehicle Sales, Including RV Trailers S P P P
9. Auto Sales, In Building S S P 7e
10. Gasoline Service Station S S P P P 7a
11. New Truck Sales Lot S S P P P
12. New and Used Car Sales Lot S S P P P 7f 26
13. Truck or Heavy Vehicle Repair S P P P 7b 18
14. Auto Repair Garage S S P P P 7b 18
15. Temporary Storage of Impounded Vehicle P P P
16. Tire Retreading or Capping P P 7b
17. Used Truck Only Sales Lot P
18. Used Car Only Sales Lot S P 7f
19. New Agricultural or Utility Trailer Sales S S P P P
20. Trailer, Truck or Recreational Vehicle Rental S P P P 29
4400-6
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
D. Commercial and Warehouse Uses
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
1. Adult Entertainment Establishment P P 5b 21, 30
2. Bakery or Confectionery Wholesale S P P P 8e
3. Bottle Works Wholesale S P P P 8e
4. Building Material or Lumber Yard S S P P P 8a, 8d 28
5. Cabinet Making S P P P 8e
6. Woodworking Shop S P P P 8e
7. Chemical Products, Bulk Storage S S P P 8c
8. Upholstery S P P P 8e
9. Cleaning, Laundry Plant S P P P 8e
10. Dyeing Plant S P P P 8e
11. Cleaning Plant, Other Than Clothing and Linen P P P 8e
12. Clothing Mfg. or Light Fabrication and Assembly S P P P 8e
13. Contractor Shop and Storage Yard (Outside) S P P P 8d, 8e
14. Feed Store S P 8e
15. Heavy Machinery Sales, Service or Storage S P P P 8d, 8e
16. Job Printing S P P P 8e
17. Newspaper Printing S P P P 8e
18. Maintenance or Repair Services For Buildings S P P P 8e
19. Mini-Warehouses S S S P 27
20. Nursery-Wholesale S S P 8e
21. Open Storage or Sale of Commodities Not Elsewhere Listed S S S P 8d
22. Paint Shop or Paint Mixing, Wholesale or Warehouse S P P P 8e
4400-7
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
D. Commercial and Warehouse Uses (continued)
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
23. Plumbing, Electrical or Air Conditioning Sales and Service S S P P P 8e
24. Recycling Collection Center or Freestanding Donation Box S S S P 8e
25. Scientific or Research Laboratories S P P P 8e
26. Storage or Sales Warehouse S S P P P 8c 27
27. Trailer or Manufatured Housing Sales or Rental P P P 8d
28. Wholesale Office or Sample Room Only S S P P P 8c
4400-8
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
E. Educational, Institutional and Special Uses
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
1. Art Gallery or Museum P P P P P P 2k
S S S S S S S S S S S S S 2. Cemetery, Mausoleum or Crematorium S S S S S P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 3. Church or Rectory P P P P P P 2f
4. College, University, Business or Professional School P P P P P 2c
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 5. Community Center, Public P P P P P P P 2a
S S S S S S S S S S S S S 6. Convent or Monastery P P P P P
S S S S 7. Day Nursery of Child Care Center P P P P P 2g
S S S S S S S S S S S S S 8. Elementary or Secondary School, Private P P P P P 2b
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 9. Elementary or Secondary School, Public P P P P P P P 2b
10. Fairground or Exhibition Area P P P P P 2d, 2e
11. Fraternal Organization, Lodge or Civic Club S P P P P 2l
12. Hospital/ Home/Center for Substance Abuse or Psychiatric Patients S S P 2i
13. Hospital/Home/Center for General, Acute or Chronic Care P P P 2h
S S S S 14. Kindergarten, Private P P P P P 2g
15. Labor Union or Similar Union Organization S P P P P P P 2p
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 16. Library, Public P P P P P P P 2k
17. Mortuary or Funeral Chapel P P P P 2o
18. Nursing or Assisted Living Facility P P P 2n
19. Jail or Prison, Privately Owned or Operated S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 20. Public Park, Playground P P P P P P P
21. Vocational or Trade School P P P P P P 2b
4400-9
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
F. General Retail Uses
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
1. Bakery or Confectionery Store, Retail P P P P P 4b 24
2. Book Store, Retail P P P P P 4b 24
3. Camera and Photography Supply P P P P P 4b 24
4. Cleaning and Laundry, Retail S S P P P 4b
5. New Clothing or Department Store P P P P 4b
6. Discount Store S S P P 4b
7. Drug Store or Pharmacy P P P P P 4b 24
8. Florist, Retail P P P P P 4b 24
9. Food or Beverage Sales Store P P P P P P 4b 24
10. Furniture, Home Furnishings or Appliance Store P P P P 4c
11. Upholstery, Retail S P P P 4c
12. Gift Store P P P P P 4b 24
13. Handicraft or Art Object Sales Store P P P P P 4b
14. Hobby, Toy or Game Store P P P P P 4b
15. Jewelry Store P P P P 4b
16. Luggage or Leather Goods Store P P P 4b
17. Non-Traditional Smoking Related Business S S S 4b
18. Nursery or Garden Store, Retail P P P P 4b 28
19. Pawn Shop P P 4b
20. Pet Shop P P P P 4b
21. Retail and Service Establishments Not Elsewhere Listed S S S S S S P 4a, 4b 22, 24
22. Sewing, Needlework and Goods Store P P P P P 4b
23. Stationery or Office Supply Store P P P P P 4b 24
24. Sporting Goods or Bicycle Store P P P P 4b
25. Used Merchandise Store S S P 4b
4400-10
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
G. General Service and Office Type Uses
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
1. Advertising Agencies P P P P P 6d
2. Advertising Service with Outdoor Storage Facilities P P P 6d
3. Drive-In Banking Facilities P P P P 6a
4. Banking Offices or Facilities Excluding Drive-In Services P P P P P 6a
5. Beauty Shop or Barber Shop S P P P P 4a
6. Catering Service P P P P
7. Coin-Operated Laundries and/or Dry Cleaning, Self-Service P P P 4e
8. Computer and/or Data Processing Services P P P P P P 6d
9. Eating Places with Drive-Through Service S S S S P 5b 21, 36
10. Eating Places without Drive-Through Services P P P P P 5a 21
11. Fix-It Shop or Household Appliance Service and Repair S S S P P P 4c
12. Food Carts P P 33
13. Agents for Garment Pressing, Laundries or Dry Cleaning S P P P P P 4a
14. Key Shop S P P P P 4a
15. Mailing, Reproduction, Commercial Art, Photo or Steno Service P P P P P P 6d
16. Medical or Dental Laboratories P P P P P P P 6d
17. Office, Physician, Dentist or Other Health Practitioners P P P P P P 6c
18. Office, Professional or Administration P P P P P P P 6d
19. Personnel Supply Services P P P P P P P 6d
20. Pet Grooming P P P P P 4a
21. Private Club or Lodge P P P P P 5b 21
22. Shoe Repair Shop or Shoe Shine Parlor P P P P P 4a
23. Studio for Photographer, Musician or Artist P P P P P P P 4a
24. Tailor or Dressmaking Shop P P P P P 4a
4400-11
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
G. General Service and Office Type Uses (cont'd)
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
25. Veterinarian Hospital with Outside Animal Run or Pens S S S P 6d
26. Veterinarian Office Only P P P P 6d
4400-12
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
H. Government Uses
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
1. Federal, State or Municipal Building P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 2. Fire Station or Similar Public Safety Building P P P P P P P
3. Public Utility Shop or Storage P P P P
4400-13
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
I. Hotels, Group Quarters and Other Lodging Places
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
1. Bed and Breakfast Inn P
S S S S S S S S S S S S S 2. Group Foster Homes P 1a
S S 3. Age Restricted Senior Living Facility S S S P 2j
S 4. Hotel or Motel S S P P P P 1g 4, 21
P P 5. Houses on a Membership Basis P 1g
P P 6. Private Dormitory P 1i
P P 7. Rooming and Boarding House, Organization Hotel or Lodging P 1f
8. Vacation Rental P
4400-14
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
J. Manufacturing and Industrial Uses
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
1. Aircraft Hardware or Parts Manufacturing P P P 8f
2. Aircraft Manufacturing I P 8f
3. Appliance (Small) Manufacturing P P P 8f
4. Automobile Manufacturing I P 8f
5. Boiler Works I P 8f
6. Chemical Processing S I P 8f
7. Clay Products Manufacturing S I P 8f
8. Container Manufacturing (Wood, Paper or Plastic) P P P 8f
9. Cotton or Cottonseed Processing or Storage I P 8f
10. Creamery/Dairy Products Mfg. or Wholesale Distribution S P P P 8f
11. Electrical Component Manufacturing S P P P 8f
12. Electrical Equipment or Appliance Manufacturing (Large) I P 8f
13. Electroplating P P P 8f
14. Flour Mill I P 8f
15. Food Processing P P P 8f
16. Foundry, Forge Plant or Rolling Mill I P 8f
17. Furniture, Cabinet Manufacturing P P P 8f
18. Kitchen Equipment P P P 8f
19. Heavy Equipment Manufacturing I P 8f
20. Ice Cream Manufacturing S P P P 8f
21. Ice Manufacturing or Storage S P P P 8f
22. Machine Shop or Welding S P P P 8f
23. Metal Fabrication Plant S P P P 8f
4400-15
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
J. Manufacturing and Industrial Uses (continued)
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
24. Manufactured Home, Industrialized Housing, Building Mfg. P P P 8f
25. Oil Well Tools or Equipment Manufacturing S I P 8f
26. Paper Manufacturing S 8f
27. Paper Products Manufacturing S P P P 8f
28. Petroleum or Chemical Manufacturing I P 8f
29. Planing Mill P P P 8f
30. Rope Manufacturing S P P P 8f
31. Salvage or Reclamation of Products (Inside Only) S P P P 8f
32. Stone Monument Works I P 8f
33. Temporary Batch Plant P P P P P P 23
34. Textile or Garment Manufacturing S P P P 8f
35. Travel Trailer, Camper or Camper Top Manufacturing P P P 8f
36. Industries Not Elsewhere Listed S S P 8f 25
4400-16
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
K. Natural Resource and Extractions
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
1. Mining Extraction S S P
S S S S S S S S S S S S S 2. Oil or Gas Well Drilling or Production S S S S S S P 34
S S S S S S S S S S S S S 3. Line Compressor S S S S S S P 34
4. Petroleum Products Collection or Storage (Wholesale) S S P 8b
5. Sand, Gravel or Earth Sales or Storage S S P 8b
4400-17
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
L. Public Utilities
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 1. Cable TV Transmission Line P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 2. Electric Transmission Line P P P P P P P
3. Electrical Generating Plant S S P P
S S S S S S S S S S S S S 4. Electrical Substation P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 5. Gas Transmission Line or Metering Station P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 6. Local Utility Service Line P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 7. Pumping Station P P P P P P P
S S S S S S S S S S S S S 8. Radio, TV or Microwave Tower S S S S S S S
S S S S S S S S S S S S S 9. Railroad Switching Yards S S S P P P P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 10. Sewage Pumping Station P P P P P P P
11. Sewage Treatment Facility S P P
S S S S S S S S S S S S S 12. Telephone Exchange, Switching Relay or Transmission Station P P P P P P P
13. Utility Business Office P P P P P P P 6d
14. Utility Service or Storage yard or Buildings S P P P P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 15. Water Standpipe or Elevated Water Supply, Reservoir or Well P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 16. Water Treatment Plant P P P P P P P
4400-18
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
M. Recreation and Entertainment Uses
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
1. Amusement, Commercial (Indoor) P P P I P 3c 21
2. Amusement, Commercial (Outdoor) S S P 3d 21
3. Bar, Dance Hall or Night Club S S P 5b 21
4. Bowling Alley P P P P 3b 21
5. Campground or Recreational Vehicle Park P
6. Coin-Operated Amusement Devices P P P 3c
7. Commercial Sport, Ballpark, Stadium or Athletic Field S P P P 3e
S S S S S S S S S S S S S 8. Country Club P P P P P 3g
9. Driving Range or Miniature Golf Course P P P 3h
10. Go-Cart Track P 3d
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 11. Golf Course P P P P P P P 3g
12. Gun Club, Skeet or Target Range S S S S P
13. Membership Sport or Recreation Club P P P P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 14. Parks P P P P P P P
15. Pool or Billiard Hall P 3c 21
16. Rodeo Ground P 3d 21
17. Roller or Ice Skating Rink P P P P 3d
18. Stable, Commercial, Rental or Boarding P 14
19. Stable, Riding Club P 13
20. Swimming Pool, Commercial P P P 9
21. Theatre, Drive-In P
22. Theatre, Other Than Drive-In P P P P 3a
4400-19
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
N. Residential Uses
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800B
P P P P P P P P P P P P 1. Single Family Dwelling P 1a 31
P P P 2. Zero-lot-line Dwelling P 1j 1, 31
P P P 3. Two Family Dwelling P 1b 31
P P 3. Townhouse P 1c 2
P P 4. Multi-family Dwelling P 1e 2
P P 5. Apartments P 1e 2
As specified in Section 5300 of this Ordinance 6. Manufactured Housing P 1h 3
As specified in Section 5300 of this Ordinance 7. Camping Trailer P 3
4400-20
Nonresidential
Residential Districts Permitted Primary Uses Districts A
SF-5AC/24
SF-12/22
SF-9.6/20
SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/16
SF-7.5/18
SF-7.5/16
SF-7.5/12
SF-6/12
2F
MF-1
MF-2
O. Transportation Uses
OP
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
PD
Parking Group
Table, Sec. 7200
Special Conditions,
Sec. 7800
1. Airport Landing Field S S P 15
2. Bus Station or Terminal S S P P P
3. Heliport S S S S S P 15
4. Hauling or Storage Company S P P P 8c
5. Motor Freight Terminal S P P P 8c
6. Parking Lot or Structure, Commercial S S S S P P 16
7. Parking Lot, Truck S P P
8. Railroad Freight Terminal S P P 8c
9. Railroad Passenger Station S S P P P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P 10. Railroad Track or Right-Of-Way P P P P P P P
4400-21
4400-22
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§4500
4500-1
Section 4500. Area, Setback and Height Regulations.
A. No lot, parcel, premises or tract of land shall be created and no building permit shall be issued
for any request that does not meet the appropriate minimum lot area, width, depth, yard and
height regulations as set forth in the tables labeled “Section 4500 B. Area and Height
Regulations”.
B. (See Area and Height Regulations Tables.)
C. Exceptions to Area and Height Regulations:
1. In an industrial district, no structural setback shall be required from a railroad right-of-way
not less than fifty (50) feet in width.
2. A non-residential building or structure owned and/or operated by a government entity shall
be exempt from the district maximum height regulations.
3. A building or structure may exceed the district maximum height regulations with a Specific
Use Permit provided that the following minimum setback requirements are met:
a. Single-family or two family dwellings may be increased in height not more than ten (10)
feet when two side yards of not less than twenty (20) feet each are provided.
b. In zoning classifications other than the C-2 and C-3 Districts, hospitals may be erected
to a height not exceeding forty-five (45) feet when the front, side and rear yards are each
increased an additional foot for each foot such buildings exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
c. In C-2 and C-3 Districts, hospitals may be erected to a height that is deemed appropriate
by the City Council provided that the front, side and rear yards are each increased an
additional foot for each foot such buildings exceed fifty (50) feet in height, unless the
additional setback requirement is modified or waived by the City Council during the
approval of the Specific Use Permit. (Ordinance No. 1494, Approved 8/11/04—
Ordinance No. 1503, Approved 10/25/04)
4. Interior side yards shall not be required for abutting commercial and industrial properties in
the same zoning district if both properties are developed as a unit under a common
development plan provided that the construction meets the requirements of the Mansfield
Building Code and Fire Code.
5. Nonconforming lots of record existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance and lots
or parcels created as a result of condemnation or involuntary sale by owner to a government
entity with power of eminent domain, shall be exempt, unless indicated, from the minimum
lot area, depth and width requirements provided they are developed in accordance with all
minimum yard requirements. Multi-family uses shall not be exempt from the minimum lot
area requirements.
6. When individual attached townhouses or condominiums are to be sold separately, there shall
be no minimum lot area, lot width and lot depth requirements; provided that the total land
area of the project, including the land on which the units are located and the land held in
common ownership by the unit owners, is equal to the total minimum land area required per
dwelling unit in the district in which the project is located.
§4500
4500-2
7. The height regulations of this Ordinance shall not apply to belfries, chimneys, church spires,
conveyors, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, storage towers, monuments,
ornamental towers or spires, cranes, construction equipment, smoke stacks, stage towers and
scenery lofts, tanks, ham radio and television antennas, and microwave relay, radio and
television transmission towers provided that in a PR, residential or commercial district
restricted to thirty-five (35) feet in height, one (1) addition foot shall be added to the width
and depth of the front, side and rear yards for each foot that such structures exceeds thirtyfive
(35) feet in height. (Ordinance No. 1448, Adopted 10/13/03---Ordinance No. 1503,
Adopted 10/25/04)
8. Buildings or structures for existing developments in industrial districts shall be exempt from
the minimum yard requirements where the expansion, enlargement or separate addition
thereof is limited to land already owned by those businesses or committed to them under
long term leases (or extensions thereof) at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance unless
it abuts a residential zoning district.
9. Permitted residential use in the C-4 Downtown Business District, shall not be subject to the
area and setback restrictions of a more restrictive residential district.
10. The zero-lot line concept which involves locating a residential dwelling with a doorless and
windowless wall actually on one interior side lot line and with one side yard at a minimum
width of ten (10) feet shall be permitted in the SF-6/12 District when the appropriate
building lines and necessary structural restrictions for the zero-lot-line concept, as set forth
in Section 7800, are shown on a recorded plat which has been approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
11. Where a building line has been established by a recorded plat or a City Ordinance and such
line requires a greater or lesser front, side or rear yard setback than is prescribed by this
Ordinance for the district in which the building line is located, the required front, side or rear
yard shall comply with the building line so established by such plat or ordinance.
12. Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, a required
front yard shall be provided on both streets unless a building line for accessory buildings has
been established along one frontage on the plat or by City ordinance, in which event only
one required front yard need be observed.
13. Every part of a required yard shall be open and unobstructed except for accessory buildings
or use as permitted herein, and the ordinary projection of window sills, belt courses, fences,
cornices, and roof eaves not exceeding twenty-four (24) inches into the required yard. No
accessory building or use shall be allowed in the required front or side yard except as
provided in Section 7800.B.5.
D. Minimum Setback for Trash Containers and Refuse or Recycling Storage Areas: Trash
containers and storage areas for refuse or materials awaiting disposal or recycling shall setback a
minimum of fifty (50) feet from any public street.
E. Minimum Floor Area and Building Separation in MF-1 & MF-2 Districts:
1. In any district in which apartments and multi-family dwellings are permitted, the following
standards shall be followed in establishing the minimum floor area, minimum width of a
§4500
4500-3
place or court and minimum separation between buildings, to be measured between building
walls:
Dwelling Type Minimum Floor Area
a. Townhouse 1,200 sq. ft. per unit
b. Apartment and other multi-family
dwelling
600 sq. ft. per efficiency
750 sq. ft. per 1 bedroom unit
900 sq. ft. per 2 bedroom unit
1,000 sq. ft. per 3 bedroom unit
The minimum average floor area per apartment or multi-family residential project shall be
eight hundred (800) square feet; said minimum average floor area shall apply to the total
number of units to be constructed under the same building permit.
When Buildings are Facing Minimum Separation
a. Front to front 40 feet
b. Front to rear 40 feet
c. Rear to rear 20 feet
d. Side to side 10 feet
e. Side to front 20 feet
f. Side to rear 10 feet
2. In applying the above described standards, the front of a building shall be deemed to be any
building face, whether in one or more planes, having doors, entrances or openings for
primary access to the building or any unit therein. The rear of the building shall be the face
of the building that is most nearly parallel and opposite to the building front and has no
doors, entrances or openings for any access to the building or units therein. A building is
considered to have a double frontage if both frontage has doors, entrances or openings for
access to the building or units therein. The sides of a building shall be building faces that
are not considered as the front or rear of the building.
F. Area, Setback and Height Regulations for Accessory Buildings – Refer to Section 7800.B.5.
§4500
4500-4
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§4500
4500-5
SECTION 4500B. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS. 1.) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
Minimum
Minimum Exterior
Side Yard (Feet)
Zoning
District6
Lot Area
per Dwelling
Unit
(Sq. Ft.)
Minimum
Floor Area
Per Unit
(Sq. Ft.)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Minimum
Lot Width
(Feet)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(Feet)
Minimum
Front Yard
(Feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
(Feet) 1
Minimum
Interior
Side Yard
(Feet) 1
backing
up to an
abutting
side yard
backing
up to an
abutting
rear yard
Maximum
Height
(Feet)
Minimum
Masonry
Construction
6
A 2 acres 2,200 15% 150 200 40 15 25 25 25 35 See
Section
4600
SF-12/22 12,000 2,6008 45% 90 120 25 25 10 25 15 35
SF-9.6/20 9,600 2,4008 45% 80 110 25 15 10 25 15 35
SF-8.4/18 8,400 2,2008 45% 70 110 25 15 10 20 15 35
SF-7.5/18 7,500 1,800 45% 65 110 25 15 5 & 102,7 20 15 35
2F 3,750 1,000 45% 65 110 25 15 5 & 102 20 15 35
MF-1 3,630 See Sec. 4500F 40% 100 120 25 253 203 25 25 354
MF-2 2,420 See Sec. 4500F 40% 100 120 25 253 203 25 25 354
SF-5AC/24 5 acres 2,400 15% 200 200 45 35 20 45 20 35 See
Section
4600
SF-8.4/16 8,400 1,600 45% 70 110 25 15 5/7.55 20 15 35
SF-7.5/16 7,500 1,600 45% 65 110 25 15 5 & 102,7 20 15 35
SF-7.5/12 7,500 1,200 45% 65 110 25 15 5/7.55 20 15 35
SF-6/12 6,000 1,200 45% 60 100 25 15 0/105 20 15 35
`
Footnotes:
1 Refer to Section 7400C for minimum rear or side yard requirement on residential lots abutting property in an OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 or I-2 zoning classification.
2 Requires two side yards to have a combined total of not less than 15’ with a 5’ minimum on one side and a 10’ minimum on the other side.
3 Notwithstanding the above, townhomes, apartments and multi-family dwellings in MF-1 and MF-2 Districts, when located adjacent to other residential districts that do not permit
multi-family dwellings, shall setback from the property line along such other residential districts four (4) feet for every one (1) foot of building height. See additional
landscaping requirements in Section 7300 that may affect the building setback.
4 Multi-family dwelling units in MF-1 and MF-2 Districts shall not be higher than 35’ or two stories, whichever is less.
5 For single-family detached dwellings located in SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/12 and SF-6/12 Districts, the minimum interior side yard shall be five (5) feet for one-story units and seven
and a-half (7.5) feet for units with more than one-story. Zero-lot-line dwellings in SF-6/12 District shall comply with the provisions in Section 4500C.10.
6 The area and height regulations for the PR District shall be the same as those provided for the SF-12/22 District.
7 Developments in the SF-7.5/18 District approved prior to September 14, 2015, and developments in the SF-7.5/16 District approved prior to November 13, 2000, may continue
to use a minimum interior side yard of five (5) feet for one-story dwelling units and seven and a-half (7.5) feet for dwelling units with more than one-story.
8Developments approved prior to January 14, 2019, may continue to use a minimum floor area as follows: SF-12/22 or PR may be 2,200 square feet; SF-9.6/20 may be 2,000
square feet, and SF-8.4/18 may be 1,800 square feet.
§4500
4500-6
SECTION 4500 B. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS 2) NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Zoning
Districts
(Numbers in
brackets refer
to exceptions in
Section 4500C)
Lot
Dimension
(i.e. Area,
Width, Depth)
Maximum
Floor Area
Ratio
Minimum Building Setback (feet) (7) (10) (12) Masonry
Construction
Requirement
Maximum
Height
(Feet)
(2) (6)
When abutting
street right-ofway
When abutting other property lines
(1) (3)
in a nonresidential
district
in a residential
district
OP None 0.6 25 None Refer to
Section 7400C
Refer to
Section 4600
35
C-1 None 0.6 25 None Refer to
Section 7400C
Refer to
Section 4600
35
C-2 None 2.0 25 None Refer to
Section 7400C
Refer to
Section 4600
50
C-3 None 2.0 25 None Refer to
Section 7400C
Refer to
Section 4600
50
C-4 None 2.0 NONE None 10 Refer to
Section 4600
40
I-1 None 2.0 30 None 40 Refer to
Section 4600
None
I-2 None 1.0 30 None 40 Refer to
Section 4600
None
§4600
4600-1
Section 4600. Community Design Standards.
A. Exterior Construction Materials for development in the OP, C-1 through C-4 zoning districts and
the I-1 and I-2 Freeway Overlay Zoning Districts
1. In the OP, C-1 through C-3 Zoning Districts and the I-1 and I-2 Freeway Overlay zoning
districts, the exterior surfaces of all structures, including screening walls, wing walls,
columns and supports, shall consist of at least seventy (70) percent masonry construction
materials. This requirement shall apply to new structures, expansion of existing structures,
and any repair or alteration that involves more than fifty (50) percent of the exterior surfaces
of an existing structure. This requirement shall not apply to roofs, awnings, canopies, doors,
windows, glass walls and frame assemblies thereof. The remaining thirty (30) percent of the
exterior surfaces may be constructed of masonry-like construction materials or any
construction materials not expressly prohibited by this section. (Ordinance No. 1493,
Adopted 8/9/04)
2. Development in the C-4 zoning district shall comply with the masonry construction
requirements in paragraph 1 above if a new structure is constructed on a vacant lot or on a
lot where all pre-existing structures have been or will be demolished. In addition, a walk-in
cooler or freezer and smoker or cooker that is attached to a new or existing building may be
exempt from the requirements provided that the cooler, freezer, smoker or cooker is
separated from the street by a building or screening that is compatible with the primary
building and taller than the cooler, freezer, smoker or cooker.
3. Masonry construction materials and masonry-like construction materials are as defined in
Section 2200M.
4. The exterior wall surfaces of all new structures shall be constructed of at least two materials
that compliment each other and are consistent in style.
5. The following construction materials shall be prohibited on the exterior wall surfaces of all
structures:
a. Vinyl or aluminum siding;
b. Plastic or fiberglass panels;
c. Unfired or underfired clay, brick or other masonry product;
d. Corrugated, ribbed or standing-seamed metal panels;
e. Galvanized or aluminum coated metal cladding;
f. Smooth, unfinished or untextured concrete masonry units or concrete walls; or
g. Reflective glass.
6. Any damage to the exterior surfaces of a structure shall be repaired within 120 days from the
date the damage occurs.
§4600
4600-2
7. Existing structures that were lawful before the effective date of this ordinance but which do
not conform to the regulations of this ordinance after its passage, shall be lawful nonconforming
buildings or structures. Ordinance No. 1493, Adopted 8/9/04)
8. Deviation from the above requirement may be accomplished only through Planned
Development zoning.
9. Facilities or development on property owned and used by the City of Mansfield and the
Mansfield Independent School District are exempt from the masonry materials requirements
of this section.
10. When all other conditions are met, industrialized buildings for private schools and churches
are permitted without masonry construction materials as long as the total floor are of the
industrialized buildings does not exceed 35% of the total floor area of the primary structure.
(Ordinance No. 1449, Adopted 10/13/03)
B. Exterior construction materials for development in the MF-1 and MF-2 Zoning Districts
1. In the MF-1 and MF-2 Zoning Districts, the exterior surface of all structures, including
screening walls, wing walls, gables, and columns and supports, shall be constructed of at
least eighty (80) percent masonry construction materials. This requirement shall not apply to
roofs, awnings, canopies, doors, windows, glass walls and frame assemblies thereof. The
remaining twenty (20) percent of the exterior surfaces may be constructed of masonry-like
construction materials or any construction material not expressly prohibited by this section.
2. Notwithstanding the above, chimneys and fireplaces on external wall surfaces shall be
constructed of a minimum of one hundred (100) percent masonry construction. This
requirement shall not apply to chimneys for fireplaces that are not on or part of the external
wall.
3. The following construction materials shall be prohibited:
a. Plastic or fiberglass panels;
b. Unfired or underfired clay, brick or other masonry product;
c. Corrugated, ribbed or standing-seamed metal panels;
d. Galvanized or aluminum coated metal cladding;
e. Smooth, unfinished or untextured concrete masonry units or concrete walls; or
f. Reflective glass.
4. Existing structures that were lawful before May 10, 2004, but which do not conform to the
regulations of this ordinance after its passage, shall be lawful non-conforming buildings or
structures.
5. Deviation from the above requirement may be accomplished only through Planned
Development zoning.
§4600
4600-3
6. Facilities or development on property owned and used by the City of Mansfield and the
Mansfield Independent School District are exempt from the masonry materials requirement
of this section.
7. When all other conditions are met, industrialized buildings for private schools and churches
are permitted without masonry construction materials as long as the total floor area of the
industrialized buildings does not exceed 35% of the total floor area of the primary structure.
C. Exterior construction materials for development in the SF, PR, or 2F Zoning Districts
1. In the SF, PR or 2F Zoning Districts, the exterior wall surfaces of all dwelling units and all
non-residential development such as churches, schools or public facilities shall be
constructed of at least eighty (80) percent masonry construction materials, including gables.
This requirement shall not apply to roofs, awnings, canopies, doors, windows, glass walls
and frame assemblies thereof. The remaining twenty (20) percent of the exterior surfaces
may be constructed of masonry-like construction materials or any construction materials not
expressly prohibited by this section.
2. Notwithstanding the above, chimneys and fireplaces on external wall surfaces shall be
constructed of a minimum of one hundred (100) percent masonry construction materials.
This requirement shall not apply to chimneys for fireplaces that are not on or part of the
external wall.
3. The following construction materials shall be prohibited:
a. Plastic or fiberglass panels;
b. Unfired or underfired clay, brick or other masonry product;
c. Corrugated, ribbed or standing-seamed metal panels;
d. Galvanized or aluminum coated metal cladding;
e. Smooth, unfinished or untextured concrete masonry units or concrete walls; or
f. Reflective glass.
4. Deviation from the above requirement may be accomplished through Planned Development
zoning or through an appeal to the Board of Adjustment for a special exception as set forth
in Section 6300 of this ordinance.
5. Notwithstanding the above, facilities or development on property owned and used by the
City of Mansfield and the Mansfield Independent School District are exempt from the
masonry materials requirements of this section.
6. When all other conditions are met, industrialized buildings for private schools and churches
are permitted without masonry construction materials as long as the total floor area of the
industrialized buildings does not exceed 35% of the total floor area of the primary structure.
7. The following properties in SF, PR or 2F zoning are automatically exempted from said
masonry construction requirement:
§4600
4600-4
a. Properties that are part of a preliminary or final plat approved before February 12, 2001;
and
b. Existing dwelling units that are in legal conformance before the adoption date of the
requirement described above; such dwelling units shall not be considered nonconforming
uses due to non-compliance with the masonry construction requirement.
(Ordinance No. 1484, Adopted 5/10/04)
D. Architectural attributes for residential development in the PR, SF and 2F Districts.
1. Developments in a valid preliminary plat submitted for approval on or before November 12,
2012 shall be exempt from the requirements in this Subsection D.
2. The front entry to a house shall be well-defined and kept proportional to the house. The
front entry must be designed so as not to distract from the rest of the house.
3. Only specialty windows such as box windows or circular windows may be flush mounted to
the exterior face of the building, all other windows are to be inset to create relief on the
elevations.
4. Facades shall avoid large expanses of uninterrupted, single exterior materials and must be
broken up by changes in plane, window placement, window trim, or color changes.
Front entry not proportional. Distracts from
the rest of the house. Not Acceptable.
Front entry is well defined and proportional to the
house. Acceptable.
Large expanse with only one window and no material
changes, projections or articulation. Not Acceptable.
Large expanse with articulated features, windows and
material changes. Acceptable.
§4600
4600-5
5. Shutters, if provided, shall be sized and shaped to match the associated openings.
6. Gutters, if provided, shall be copper, galvanized steel, aluminum or painted if exposed to the
street.
7. All asphalt roof shingles shall be laminated architectural shingles with a three dimensional
appearance and warranted for at least thirty (30) years.
8. A minimum roof pitch of 8:12 (inches of rise per inches of run) from side to side shall apply
to the predominant roof, except a tile or slate roof may have a minimum roof pitch of 5:12
(inches of rise per inches of run) from side to side. A variety of roof pitches may be
incorporated into the roof design provided that the predominant roof meets the minimum
roof pitch requirement.
9. In order to encourage variety, the exterior facades of houses on a continuous block shall vary
within every 10 houses. When a house is constructed, the same combination of brick, stone,
masonry-like materials and paint shall not be used on other houses within five (5) lots on
either side of that house. The rear façade of a house on a lot that backs up to a street with
four or more lanes as shown in the Thoroughfare Plan shall vary in design and construction
materials from the rear façade of other houses within three (3) lots on either side of that
house that also back up to the same street.
10. Design between garage and house shall use same or complementary colors and materials.
11. Other quality products are encouraged, including but not limited to: tile, slate or metal roofs
suited to the architecture of the house; decorative columns and railings; wood garage doors;
insulated garage doors varied patterns, style and type of materials; and architectural details
such as tile work, wood trim, and moldings; or accent materials integrated into the façade.
12. All exposed wood accents or wooden garage doors shall be stained, sealed or painted for
protection and regularly maintained.
13. In order to encourage variety, for developments with 100 lots or more, there shall be at least
six (6) housing products provided for every 100 houses in a development. To be classified
as a housing product, a housing product shall have at least three (3) of the following
characteristics which clearly and obviously distinguish it from other housing products:
a. Different room layout and size of house;
Shutters are not proportionally sized to windows.
Not Acceptable.
Shutters are sized proportionally to windows. Acceptable.
§4600
4600-6
b. Exterior materials;
c. Roof lines;
d. Garage placement; and
e. Placement of the foot print on the lot and/or building face.
In order to expedite individual permit approval, a builder is required to submit plans or
drawings showing floor plans, elevations or other design elements of each housing product
and have them pre-approved for compliance with the above requirement.
14. In order to encourage variety, for developments with 30 lots or more, driveway orientations
shall vary throughout the development. A minimum of 20% of all lots shall contain a JSwing
or side entry orientation. Additional lot widths shall be provided to accommodate
this configuration.
15. For developments with one hundred (100) lots or more, a maximum of ten (10) percent of
the residential lots may be reduced to the size allowed in the next lower zoning district from
the current zoning of the development as shown in the table below:
Base zoning
district:
10% of the lots
may be:
SF-12/22 or PR SF-9.6/20
SF-9.6/20 SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/18 SF-7.5/18
The reduced size lots must comply with the minimum lot area, minimum lot depth,
minimum lot width, and minimum setbacks of the lower zoning district that they are
designated. The minimum floor area of houses on reduced sized lots shall be the same as the
minimum floor area required for the base zoning district.
The location of the reduced size lots must be shown on the preliminary plat of a qualified
development to be dispersed throughout the development such that they are not concentrated
in any particular phase, block or area of the development. In a development with three or
more blocks, there shall be no more than one-third (1/3) of the total allowable reduced size
lots within each block. To ensure that the reduced size lots are dispersed according to the
provisions of this paragraph, the Director of Planning must approve the design and location
of the lots before the preliminary plat of the development is presented to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for approval.
16. Front porches that are fully covered and have a minimum depth of seven (7) feet may
encroach a maximum distance of ten (10) feet into the minimum front yard setback in any SF
or 2F district.
17. The minimum front yard setback for twenty-five (25) percent of the lots in a development
may be decreased to twenty (20) feet provided that no front entry garage shall be located
within twenty-five (25) feet of the front property line.
§4600
4600-7
18. To enhance the quality of life of residents and aesthetics, all developments with interior
streets shall have an enhanced entryway. At the time of preliminary plat, a developer shall
submit an enhanced entryway plan that will include at least five (5) of the following features:
a. Boulevard section with median;
b. Enhanced pavers or stained concrete;
c. Decorative street lighting at the enhanced entryway which conforms to the City’s
standards with Oncor Electric Services or other utility providers;
d. Enhanced architectural features;
e. Enhanced fencing and landscaping features; and
f. Use slip roads adjacent to arterials to front some homes on open space, where applicable.
To ensure that the entryway meets the intent of this paragraph, the Director of Planning must
approve the design of the proposed enhanced entryway before the preliminary plat of the
development is presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval.
19. Every development is encouraged to incorporate designs with the following concepts:
a. Single loaded streets adjacent to public parks and/or open space;
b. Curvilinear streets in developments over 50 acres;
c. Lots fronting on block ends in gridded rectangular layouts;
d. Shorten block lengths to approximately nine-hundred (900) feet to distribute traffic and
shorten pedestrian trips;
e. Allow connectivity to adjacent neighborhoods and open space;
f. Allow pedestrian proximity to neighborhood services/commercial development;
g. Incorporate drainage features into open space; and
h. Limit lot frontage on higher volume collectors.
20. To enhance the quality of life of residents, for developments with 250 lots or more, one
recreation facility shall be provided for every 250 lots. To be classified as a recreation
facility, a recreation facility shall have at least one (1) of the following amenities:
a. Swimming pool;
b. Pond equipped with an aerator;
c. Walking or bike trails;
d. Playground;
§4600
4600-8
e. Open game fields;
f. Common green areas or open space;
g. Lighted courts for activities such as volleyball, basketball, tennis, shuffleboard, racquet
ball, croquet; or
h. Other amenities approved by the Director of Planning that meet the intent of this
paragraph.
To ensure that the recreation facility meets the intent of this paragraph, the Director of
Planning must approve the design and location of the proposed recreation facility before the
preliminary plat of the development is presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
approval.
21. Every neighborhood with common open space, private park land, landscaping, common
walls and fencing shall have a mandatory Home Owners Association (HOA) to maintain
those improvements.
22. Connections to the Master Trail System shall be provided in accordance with the Parks and
Recreation Master Plan, where possible.
23. All lawns and landscaping shall be irrigated in accordance with Section 7300 of this
Ordinance.
24. The Director of Planning is authorized to interpret and apply the forgoing provisions to
ensure conformance with the purposes intended by the City Council. The decision of the
Director of Planning shall be final unless an appeal of the decision is made to the City
Council. Such appeal shall be submitted within ten (10) days after the decision has been
rendered by the Director of Planning by filing a Notice of Appeal in the office of the
Director of Planning, setting forth in clear and concise fashion the basis for the appeal. The
City Council shall consider the appeal at a regular meeting and may affirm, modify, or
reverse the decision of the Director of Planning.
25. Deviation from the above requirements may be accomplished only through Planned
Development zoning.
E. Architectural attributes for non-residential development in the OP, C-1 through C-3 Districts and
all non-residential districts within the Freeway Overlay District.
1. Architectural attributes are intended to address the visual impact of long uninterrupted walls
or rooflines by providing a minimum amount of variations according to the size of the
structure.
2. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the
context with which they are used.
3. All non-residential buildings shall be architecturally finished on all four (4) sides with the
same materials, detailing (e.g. tiles, awnings, moldings, cornices, etc.) and features (e.g.
windows, openings, columns, towers, arches, etc.).
§4600
4600-9
4. All non-residential buildings with facades greater than one hundred (100’) feet in length
shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses that are at least four (4’) feet deep.
Projections/recesses must be at least four (4’) feet in length. No uninterrupted length of
façade may exceed fifty (50’) feet in length.
5. All non-residential buildings with flat roof planes greater than one hundred (100’) feet in
length shall incorporate variations in the height of the roof plane that differ by at least two
(2’) feet in height. Variations to flat roof planes may include pilasters and projected or
raised entry features. No uninterrupted length of any flat roof plane may exceed fifty (50’)
feet in length.
6. All non-residential building facades shall include a repeating pattern of elements such as
material module change, colors or textures. At least one of these elements shall repeat
horizontally.
7. All non-residential buildings shall be designed to include no less than four (4) of the
architectural elements from the list below. Buildings over 20,000 square feet must include a
minimum of six (6) of the architectural elements listed below.
a. Canopies, awnings, arcades, covered walkways or porticoes;
b. Recesses/projections, columns, pilasters projecting from the plane;
c. Varied roof heights for pitched, peaked, sloped or flat roof styles;
d. Articulated cornice line;
e. Arches;
f. Display windows, faux windows or decorative windows;
g. Architectural details (such as tile work and molding) or accent materials integrated into
the building façade;
h. Integrated planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaping and sitting areas or
outdoor patios;
i. Offsets, reveals or projecting ribs used to express architectural or structural bays; or
j. Other architectural features approved by the Director of Planning
8. Existing structures that were lawful before September 14, 2004, but which do not conform to
the regulations of this ordinance after its passage, shall be lawful non-conforming buildings
or structures.
9. All new structures or expansion of existing structures shall comply with the requirements in
this section. Any repair or alteration that involves more than fifty (50) percent of the
exterior surfaces of an existing structure shall comply with the requirements in this section.
10. Deviation from the above requirements may be accomplished only through Planned
Development zoning.
§4600
4600-10
Ordinance No. 1498, Adopted 9/14/04
F. Underground Utilities
1. Definitions:
a. Transmission Line - Electrical lines operated at voltages of sixty thousand volts or
higher that bring power from a generating plant to an electrical sub-station.
b. Feeder Line - An electrical line that emanates from an electrical sub-station or hub to
distribute power throughout an area.
c. Lateral Line - An electrical line that emanates from a feeder line, typically through a
sectionalizing device like a fuse or a disconnect, to distribute power to smaller areas of
electric consumers; such line can be either single or three phase.
d. Secondary Service Line - An electrical line which, through a transformer, connects a
lateral line to a customer’s electrical service entrance.
2. After November 24, 2003, for all developments in the OP, C-1, C-2 and C-3 zoning districts,
for developments on property within the Freeway Overlay District, and for churches, schools
and public facilities in PR or residential zoning districts, all utility lines shall be placed
underground except for transmission lines and feeder lines. All electrical, gas, cable
television and telephone support equipment shall be installed on the ground or placed
underground. This requirement shall not apply to the following:
a. Utility lines or support equipment installed before November 25, 2003; or
b. Any support equipment belonging to the City, the Mansfield Independent School
District or any state agency for the regulation of traffic, street lighting, or any other
public safety purpose.
3. The cost of installing these utilities underground shall be the responsibility of the property
owner or developer who is seeking utility service for their property. The utility company
providing the utility service shall advise the customer of the nearest connection point and the
perspective customer shall be responsible for the cost of bringing the utility service to the
point of connection on the utility system designated by the utility company. A property
owner or developer requesting utility service shall not be entitled to pro rata reimbursement
from subsequent customers who might tie on to a lateral line or secondary service line.
4. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to require the City of Mansfield or the
utility company to bear the additional cost of placing utilities underground.
5. The provisions of this section are not intended to alter the intent of the electrical franchise
agreement.
6. Nothing contained within this subsection shall be construed to require that any existing
overhead facility be placed underground or to prohibit the upgrading, reconstruction or
reconductoring of any existing overhead facilities with overhead facilities.
§4600
4600-11
7. Any property owner, developer or utility company who believes that the imposition of this
underground utility construction requirement causes a unique and unreasonable hardship
shall have the right to apply for a waiver to the requirement on a case by case basis. The
applicant shall submit a written request to the City Council via the City Secretary’s office.
The request must provide the following information:
a. A description of the property, land use and/or utility improvements for which a
waiver to the requirement is sought.
b. An explanation as to why the application of the underground utility regulation is
unreasonable as applied to the applicant’s property or situation.
c. A description of any negative impacts created by the requirement to place the
utilities underground.
d. The City Secretary’s office shall place the request for a waiver on the agenda of the
City Council for consideration at a public meeting. The applicant shall receive
written notice of the date of the proposed hearing on the waiver request. The City
staff shall not be required to provide written notice of the waiver request to any
other individual or entity. On the date that the item is set for hearing, the City
Council shall conduct a public hearing on the waiver request giving any individual
who desires to prevent information or evidence to the City Council on the
appropriateness or inappropriateness of the wavier, the opportunity to appear before
the City Council and present such information. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
City Council by majority vote, may approve a waiver of the underground utility
construction requirement on all or part of the proposed utility improvements or may
deny the request for a waiver.
(Ordinance No. 1461. Adopted 11/24/03)
§5100
5100-1
ARTICLE 5. SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
Section 5000. General Provisions.
The special Purpose Article is designed as an inclusive Article that establishes sets of standards for
uses or areas that deserve specific, independent considerations. None of the districts contained in
this Article are cumulative.
Section 5100. PD, Planned Development District Regulations.
A. Purpose: This district is intended to accommodate unified design of residential, commercial,
office, professional services, retail and institutional uses and facilities or combinations thereof in
accordance with an approved comprehensive development plan. This district is designed to
permit flexibility and encourage a more creative, efficient and aesthetically desirable design and
placement of buildings, open spaces, circulation patterns and parking facilities in order to best
utilize special site features of topography, size or shape.
B. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in a PD, Planned Development District, are set forth in Section
4400.
C. Development Standards and Regulations:
1. Height Regulations: The maximum height requirement for permissible uses in this district
shall be established on the approved development plan with due regard to site and general
area characteristics including land use, zoning, topography and setbacks, etc.
2. Density Regulations: The density requirement for development shall be established on the
approved development plan taking into account the goals and objectives, planning
principles, and guidelines in the adopted Master Land Use Plan.
3. Open Space Regulations: Provisions for public, private and common open space shall be
evaluated with due regard to density, site coverage, and physical characteristics of the site.
Common open space must be usable for recreational activities including but not limited to
playgrounds, trails, or other passive or active play areas. No open space shall be proposed
that is less than twenty (20’) feet in width to accommodate a minimum section of trail
surface, landscape buffer area and space for maintenance. Ownership and maintenance of
these areas must be addressed with the plan proposal.
4. Off-Street Parking Regulations: The off-street parking requirements shall be established on
the approved development plan and generally in accordance with Section 7200, hereof. The
location, number of spaces and size of parking areas shall be evaluated with due regard to
vegetation, topography, and other physical characteristics of the site.
5. Setback Regulations: The setback requirements shall be established on the approved
development plan.
6. Masonry Construction Standards: The masonry construction standards shall be established
on the approved development plan.
7. Landscaping and Screening Regulations: The landscaping and screening requirements shall
be established on the approved development plan but shall not be less than the minimum
§5100
5100-2
requirements for development prescribed in Section 7300 of this Ordinance unless a
reduction, change or modification of the landscaping and screening requirements is approved
by the City Council as part of the development plan.
8. Tree Preservation and Mitigation: Preservation of trees shall be evaluated with due regard to
aesthetics and other physical characteristics (e.g. topography, view corridors, utilities,
access) of the site. This evaluation should be made prior to the design and layout of
proposed improvements such that the environment suggests design. The requirements for
tree preservation and mitigation shall be established through the policies and procedures
prescribed in the Natural Resources Management Ordinance in cooperation with the
Landscape Administrator. The City deems it necessary that a developer consult with the
Landscape Administrator as early in the site search, acquisition and planning process as
possible so as to minimize negative impacts on the development.
D. Approval Procedures:
1. A concept plan shall be required as a pre-requisite to any application for PD, Planned
Development zoning.
2. The Planning & Zoning Commission and City Council will each hold a public hearing to
review the proposed concept plan. The review of the concept plan does not grant any
change in zoning. It merely allows the applicant to seek a conceptual review before
spending the necessary resources to prepare a development plan.
3. After the concept plan review and a favorable indication from Planning & Zoning and
Council, the applicant may submit a formal application for zoning change to a Planned
Development District and for approval of a development plan. Such application shall be
submitted in accordance with the provisions of Section 8600. The procedures for hearing
said zoning change application and for approval of the development plan shall be the same
as for an application for any other zoning change.
4. The applicant has the option to by-pass the concept plan review process if prepared to submit
a development plan without any prior indication from the Planning & Zoning Commission
and City Council regarding the development concept.
5. Prior to considering an application for a zoning change to a Planned Development District
and development plan, the City Council shall request a recommendation from the Planning
& Zoning Commission.
6. After receiving the Planning & Zoning Commission’s recommendation, the City Council
shall hold a public hearing to consider the application.
7. After the public hearing, City Council may approve the original application and
development plan or modify the development plan as deemed appropriate by the City
Council.
8. The approved development plan and the associated development standards and regulations to
be observed on the Planned Development District shall be specified and incorporated as part
of the ordinance establishing the district. Every Planned Development District approved
under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be considered an amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance and Zoning Map.
§5100
5100-3
E. Concept Plan Application: An application for review and consideration of a Concept Plan
shall consist of the following:
1. A complete signed application as provided by the Planning Department or on the City’s
website at www.mansfield-tx.gov
2. The appropriate fee in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by City Council.
3. On a separate 8 ½” X 11” exhibit, provide a metes and bounds description of the property
included in the concept plan boundaries, including the total acreage, signed and sealed by a
registered surveyor.
4. On a separate 8 ½” X 11” exhibit, list the proposed specific land uses in detail and the
approximate acreage data for each use. If land uses are general, refer to the nearest, least
intensive zoning district that would accommodate the proposed use and any excluded uses.
Example: All uses permitted in the “C-3, Commercial District, excluding outside storage or
sales”.
5. An electronic copy of the plan in accordance with current established policy.
6. All large format drawings shall be folded to an approximate size of 8 ½” X 11” with the title
block showing.
7. Fifteen (15) copies of the plan in 24” X 36” or 22” X 34” format, drawn at an acceptable
scale indicating all significant features of the proposed development to include:
a. A vicinity map locating the property in relationship to existing major thoroughfares.
b. Title block, preferably in lower right-hand corner, including the following: “Concept
Plan, name of development, survey and abstract number or recorded plat information,
city, county, state, date of preparation, acreage and number of lots”.
c. Acceptable scale: 1” = 20’, 1” = 40’, 1” = 100’ or as approved.
d. Type size is legible at full scale and when reduced.
e. North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity.
f. Name, address, phone and fax of owner/developer and the firm preparing the plan.
g. A map showing the boundaries of the different land uses and the boundary dimensions.
h. Adjacent or surrounding land uses, zoning, streets and other pertinent existing or
proposed off-site improvements, sufficient to demonstrate the relationship and
compatibility of the site to the surrounding properties, uses and facilities.
i. The location, height, setbacks and minimum floor areas for all buildings and if nonresidential,
the floor area ratio.
j. The number, location, and typical dimensions of the lots, the setbacks, the number of
dwelling units, and number of units per acre (density).
§5100
5100-4
k. The location, type, and size of all fences, berms, or screening features.
l. When deemed necessary, the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council may ask
for more information during the review of a Concept Plan.
F. Development Plan Application: An application for zoning change to PD, Planned
Development shall consist of the following:
1. A complete signed application as provided by the Planning Department or on the City’s
website at www.mansfield-tx.gov The appropriate fee in accordance with the current fee
schedule adopted by City Council.
2. On a separate 8 ½” X 11” exhibit, provide a metes and bounds description of the property
included in the zoning change request, including the total acreage, signed and sealed by a
registered surveyor.
3. On a separate 24” X 26” or 22” X 34” sheet, drawn at the same scale as the plan, show the
approximate topography of the plan area, all water courses that will remain in a natural state,
100-year floodway and a 100-year floodplain per FEMA and other hydraulic and hydrologic
studies as necessary. Provide two (2) copies.
4. On a separate 24” X 36” or 22” X 34” sheet, drawn at the same scale as the plan, show
proposed and existing water and sanitary sewer locations. Also include the locations and
sizes of private water and sanitary sewer lines. Provide two (2) copies.
5. On a separate 8 ½” X 11” exhibit, list the specific land uses in detail and the acreage data for
each use. If land uses are general, refer to the nearest, least intensive zoning district that
would accommodate the proposed use and excluded uses. Example: All uses permitted in
the “C-3, Commercial District, excluding outside storage or sales”.
6. A separate exhibit and documents indicating the traffic volumes, turning movements,
evaluation of ingress and egress existing and proposed, when required by the City Engineer.
7. An electronic copy of the plan in accordance with current established policy.
8. All large format drawings shall be folded to an approximate size of 8 ½” X 11” with the title
block showing.
9. Fifteen (15) copies of the plan at 24” X 36” drawn at an acceptable scale indicating all
significant features of the proposed development to include:
a. A vicinity map locating the property in relationship to existing major thoroughfares.
b. Title block, preferably in lower right-hand corner, including the following:
“Development Plan, name of development, survey and abstract number or recorded plat
information, city, county, state, date of preparation, acreage and number of lots”.
c. Acceptable scale: 1” = 20’, 1” = 40’, 1” = 100’ or as approved.
d. Type size is legible at full scale and when reduced.
§5100
5100-5
e. North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity.
f. Name, address, phone and fax of owner/developer and the firm preparing the plan.
g. A map showing the boundaries of the different land uses and the boundary dimensions.
h. Adjacent or surrounding land uses, zoning, streets, drainage facilities and other existing
or proposed off-site improvements, sufficient to demonstrate the relationship and
compatibility of the site to the surrounding properties, uses and facilities.
i. The location and size of all streets, alleys, parking lots and parking spaces, loading areas
or other areas to be used for vehicular traffic and the proposed access and connection to
existing or proposed streets adjacent to the plan area. Include a chart indicating the
number of required parking spaces by use, the method of calculation and the number of
proposed parking spaces.
j. The types of surfacing, such as paving (e.g. concrete, brick, turf, etc.) to be used at the
various locations.
k. The location and size of all fire lanes with all curb radii adjacent to the fire lane labeled.
The nearest fire hydrant dimensioned to the property corner and all proposed fire
hydrants.
l. The location, height, setbacks and minimum floor areas for all buildings, and if nonresidential,
the floor area ratio. Include the following building details for non singlefamily
developments:
(1) Entrance and exits to the building.
(2) Architectural renderings or elevations of proposed structures with all exterior
materials for roofs, awnings, walls etc. labeled.
(3) Calculations of the masonry content on each façade and in total for each
building. (Example: Area of front facade = h x 1, percent masonry = 80%)
(4) Distance between buildings and distance from building to property lines.
m. The number, location, and dimensions of the lots; and the setbacks, number of dwelling
units, and number of units per acre (density). A graphic showing a typical lot layout,
with size and setbacks.
n. The location of all on-site facilities for liquid waste or method of temporary storage
pending disposal, including existing or proposed septic fields.
o. The location, size and type of each outside facility for waste or trash disposal. If no
facility is shown, provide a note indicating method of disposal and removal.
p. A tree survey locating all protected trees by type, size and species in a printed and
electronic format, as required by the Landscape Administrator, and mitigation plan, if
required by the city’s Natural Resources Management Ordinance. (Refer to the Tree
Preservation Application as found on the city’s website.)
§5100
5100-6
q. A landscape plan showing all landscape setbacks and buffers; parking lot landscaping;
and any additional landscaping proposed. A chart indicating the size, length and width
of the landscape areas, with the required number of plants and the proposed number of
plants should be included on the plan. The landscape plan may be presented on a
separate exhibit on the same sheet size and at the same scale as the site plan.
r. The approximate location and size of greenbelt, open, common, or recreation areas, the
proposed use of such areas, and whether they are to be used for public or private use. If
private, indicate the proposed ownership.
s. The approximate location and size of required Parkland Dedication areas, as required by
the city’s Parkland Dedication Ordinance for residential development.
t. The location, type, and size of all fences, berms, or screening features.
u. A plan, including elevations, showing location, size, height, orientation and design of all
signs regulated by the city’s sign ordinance.
v. The location, size and type of all pedestrian areas, bike paths and sidewalks.
w. The location, size, type and purpose of any outside storage or outside display and
method of screening. Indicate the percentage of outside storage as compared to the
building square footage.
x. Phases of development should be shown and labeled. Provide a development schedule
indicating the start and finish date of each phase, broken down by use and acreage.
y. When deemed necessary, the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council may ask
for more information during the review of a Planned Development. Likewise, they may
waive some of the information if the application is a simple request to deviate from the
existing zoning category on the property.
z. If applicable, show the following mandatory owners association notes:
(1) A mandatory owners association will be responsible for the maintenance of the
“insert list of private amenities and common areas here”. (Example: screening
fences, common areas, parks, amenity centers, landscaping)
(2) The Owners Association and associated documents shall be filed in accordance
with the City of Mansfield policies. These documents must be reviewed by the
City Attorney prior to filing the final plat. The documents shall be filed with the
final plat at Tarrant County when deemed necessary by the attorney. The
documents shall be submitted in a timely manner to allow for a minimum of 60
days review. Failure to submit the documents or incomplete documents may result
in delay of construction, acceptance of the subdivision or delay in approval of a
building permit. The City does not accept the responsibility for any delays in
construction, approval or acceptance of the subdivision caused by the failure to
submit the association documents or the inaccuracy of the documents.
10. A statement that clearly indicates that the proposed development will be in complete
accordance with the provisions of the approved Planned Development District and that all
§5100
5100-7
Development Plans recorded hereunder shall be binding upon the applicant thereof, his
successors and assigns, and shall limit and control all building permits.
G. Amendments: The Director of Planning and Development may approve minor variations or
revisions from the original Planned Development which do not increase density, change traffic
patterns, or result in any increase in external impact on adjacent properties or neighborhoods.
The Director of Planning may refer any variation or revision that warrants special consideration
to the City Council for its review. If, in the City Council’s determination, the variation or
revision does not constitute a significant change, no public hearing shall be called and the
variation or revision shall be deemed approved. The City Council in its sole discretion may
direct any variation or revision to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its review and
recommendation and, in such event, said variation or revision shall follow the procedures set out
in Section 8600 herein regarding amendments to the Zoning Ordinance.
H. Platting Required Prior to Development:
1. Prior to issuance of any building permits, the development plan shall reflect all stipulations
as approved by the City Council and the property shall be final platted in accordance with
the subdivision ordinance and platting policies of the City.
2. When a development plan has been approved, final plats may be submitted in phases as
shown on the approved plan. In no case, however, shall the density of all approved final
plats exceed the maximum approved project density.
I. Maintenance of Common Open Space: When common open space, common recreational
areas or private utilities and private streets are approved as a part of a development plan, the
applicant for the approval of the applicable Planned Development District shall also submit a
scheme, subject to the approval of the City Attorney and City Council, for assuring continued
retention and perpetual maintenance of said items for as long as the development exists. The
associated documents must be reviewed by the City Attorney prior to filing the final plat. The
documents shall be filed with the final plat at Tarrant County when deemed necessary by the
attorney. The documents shall be submitted in a timely manner to allow for a minimum of 60
days review. Failure to submit the documents or incomplete documents may result in delay of
construction, acceptance of the subdivision or delay in approval of a building permit. The City
does not accept the responsibility for any delays in construction, approval or acceptance of the
subdivision caused by the failure to submit the association documents or the inaccuracy of the
documents.
J. Enforcement of Development Schedule: If the developer or property owner fails to adhere to
the development schedule shown in the approved development plan, the City has the option to
initiate an amendment of the Planned Development District or development plan as deemed
necessary by the City Council. The procedures for amending the Planned Development District
or development plan shall be the same as for a new zoning change application.
§5100
5100-8
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§5200
5200-1
Section 5200. FR, Freeway Overlay District Regulations.
A. General Purpose and Description: This district shall function as an overlay zoning district the
regulations of which are superimposed and shall supersede the regulations of an approved
standard zoning district; such standard zoning districts identified as the PR, A, SF-5AC/24, SF-
12/22, SF-9.6/20, SF-8.4/18, SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/18, SF-7.5/16, SF-7.5/12, SF-6/12, 2F, MF-1,
MF-2, OP, C-l, C-2, C-3, C-4, I-l, I-2, MH and PD District. Where provisions of the “FR”,
Freeway Overlay Districts shall be applicable to any property which is adjacent to and within
three hundred (300) feet of the right-of-way lines of a highway abutting a FR District in the City
of Mansfield, the "FR" District is created as an overlay district whereby it is recognized that
certain specific standards relative to land use, set backs, signage, etc. are appropriate and
necessary that such standards shall be superimposed and shall supersede the regulation of an
approved standard zoning district. Where such district regulations are in conflict with the
provisions of these sections, all regulations of the approved standard zoning districts shall be in
effect except as identified in this section.
B. Use Regulations: A building or premise in this district shall be used only for the following
purposes:
1. Any use identified in the MF-1, MF-2, OP, C-l, C-2, C-3 or I-l districts subject to the
conditions identified in subsection C herein prohibiting certain land uses or requiring
restricted use approval for certain identified land uses so long as said uses are permitted
within the approved standard zoning district. No cumulative use permitted in a standard
zoning district with a "FR" prefix shall be permitted unless provided for herein.
C. Uses identified in this paragraph are expressly prohibited as the primary use of land on any lot or
tract in the FR, Overlay District. Such uses are also prohibited secondary uses except as
identified in this section as permitted secondary usage:
1. Any use identified in the MH, C-4 or I-2 district unless otherwise permitted.
2. Plant Nursery.
3. Mobile Homes, Trailers, temporary buildings, tents, except as temporary office for
construction or business relocation and only in compliance with Section 6200B of this
Ordinance.
4. Open warehousing except as specifically provided herein.
5. Any outside storage of vehicles for repair, storage, sale or use except as a secondary use to a
permitted use provided herein.
6. Travel trailer park.
7. Rental stores with outside storage or display.
8. Landscape materials, sales, rental or supply with outside storage.
9. Any outside storage of materials or products for finishing fabrication or disposal.
10. Pool or billiard hall.
§5200
5200-2
11. Amusement center.
12. Amusement park except as a planned development, or specific use.
13. Outdoor amusements including but not limited to commercial swimming pool, drive-in
theater, driving range miniature golf course, riding stable or club.
14. Buildings or enclosed structures whereby vehicles may enter into and pass completely
through to the other side, except for the following purposes:
a. Mechanical service or modification;
b. Inspection; and,
c. Electronic product or component installation
15. Second hand goods.
16. Pawn shop.
17. Kennel.
18. Carwash with exception that a single bay fully automatic car wash be permitted as a
secondary use to retail gasoline sales.
19. New or used motor vehicle part sales with outside storage.
20. Use motor vehicles sales except as a secondary use to new motor vehicles sales.
21. Tire recapping or retreading.
22. Salvage or reclamation.
23. Temporary storage of impounded vehicles or vehicles awaiting dismantling or repair.
24. Trailer rental, sales or storage.
25. Truck or motorcycle rental, storage or secondary sales except as a secondary use to new
truck or motorcycle sales.
26. Heavy equipment rentals, sales or storage, new or used.
27. Any use involving nude employees.
28. Book stores, theaters, or movie houses except those within a strip commercial shopping
center, shopping mall or as part of a planned development as provided herein.
29. Petroleum products, wholesale storage.
30. Planning mill.
31. Railroad yard, shop; truck terminal, stops.
§5200
5200-3
32. Night Club, bar or private club except as a secondary use to a hotel, motel, restaurant and
provided that the sale of food constitutes a minimum of 60% of total sales.
33. Any use incorporating the housing outdoors or indoors of any livestock or animals except as
a secondary use to an amusement park or Planned Development for amusement purposes
(Specific Use Permit Required).
34. Drive-thru or to go food services except as a secondary use to a walk-in restaurant.
D. Restricted Land Uses:
Any building or premises in this overlay district may be used for the purpose identified in this
paragraph only when the use has been specifically approved by Specific Use Permit in
compliance with the provisions of Section 6100 of this Ordinance.
1. Single-family dwelling, zero-lot-line dwelling, and two-family dwelling.
2. Amusement Park (except as may be incorporated as part of a planned development)
3. Dance Hall or night club.
4. Recycling collection center.
5. Building materials and lumber sales with outside storage.
6. Any secondary use incorporating housing of animals indoors.
7. Auto repair, auto paint and body shop and auto service establishments that meet the
requirements of Section 7800, Special Conditions and the following conditions; provided
that a car wash shall continue to be prohibited as shown in Section 5200C and that an auto
service department of a new car dealership shall be exempt from the specific use permit
requirement depicted in Section 5200D above.
a. Architectural elements shall be required to enhance all building facades. Such
architectural elements may include cornices, moldings, pilasters, wall recesses or
projections, arches, special entryways, awnings, canopies, porticoes, pitched roof and/or
combinations of such elements. In addition, architectural details such as a variety of
patterns, colors and textures of building materials shall also be required. Building
elevation drawings shall be included as a part of the application for the specific use
permit. Elevation drawings shall be in color and depict the proposed architectural
elements and details.
b. No service bay shall face an abutting public street or highway if it is not completely
behind a screening enclosure.
c. No service bay shall be located less than one hundred (100) feet from the highway rightof-
way if it is not completely behind a screening enclosure.
d. Service bays that are not totally screened by an existing intervening building shall be
screened from view from any highway that abuts the property where the service bays are
located. Screening shall be achieved by a solid masonry wall, earthen berm or a
§5200
5200-4
combination of screening wall and earthen berm that is ten (10) feet high minimum,
located perpendicular to the exterior facade of the first service bay nearest to the
highway to extend out a distance of twenty (20) feet beyond the service bay.
1. The screening wall shall be constructed of the same material used predominately on
the building facade that faces the highway.
2. If an earthen berm is used, it shall be designed and constructed to prevent any
drainage and erosion problems. The maximum slope for an earthen berm shall be
3:1 (i.e. three feet width for every foot in height).
e. In addition to the street landscape setback required in Section 7300 and the screening
described in this section, additional landscaping, in the amount of ten (10) percent of the
total area of the property, shall be provided to enhance the appearance from any public
street or highway that abuts the property and minimize the view of the service bays.
f. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed landscaping and screening, the
following documents shall be submitted as part of the application for the specific use
permit:
1. A landscape plan prepared by a registered landscape architect;
2. A line of sight drawing prepared by a qualified design professional; and
3. A perspective rendering or axonometric drawing prepared by a qualified design
professional.
g. Whenever service bay doors face a side property line, a twenty (20) foot wide landscape
buffer shall be provided along the entire side property line. When there are service bay
doors on more than one side of the building, this requirement shall apply to all side
property lines across from service bay doors. The twenty (20) foot landscape buffer
shall be planted at the rate of one approved screening tree for each two hundred (200)
square feet or portion thereof. At the time of planting, each screening tree shall be a
minimum of ten to eleven (10-11) feet in height, six to seven (6-7) feet spread, and a
minimum of three and one-half (3.5) inch caliper measured eighteen (18) inches above
ground. Screening trees shall be chosen from the list in paragraph (1) below. As an
alternative to screening trees, a developer may choose from the canopy trees listed in
Section 7300, as long as the minimum height and caliper requirements above are met. If
canopy trees are utilized, they shall be planted at the rate of one tree for each three
hundred (300) square feet or portion thereof, and shrubs shall be planted between trees
to provide adequate screening. The screening shrubs shall be planted no further apart
than four (4) feet on center in two continuous, alternating rows so that screening should
be effective within two growing seasons. Screening shrubs shall be a minimum of seven
(7) gallon or larger with a minimum height of three-and-a-half (3½) feet at the time of
planting and shall be chosen from the list in paragraph (2) below.
1. Screening Trees: Approved screening trees may not be limbed up and the foliage
must be full-to-the-ground. Approved screening trees include Eastern Red Cedar,
Leyland Cypress, Elderica Pine, Cherry Laurel, and Nelly R. Stevens Holly. The
Landscape Administrator may approve other screening trees.
§5200
5200-5
2. Screening Shrubs: Approved screening shrubs may not be limbed up and the foliage
must be full-to-the-ground. Approved screening shrubs include Waxmyrtle, Dwarf
Waxmyrtle, Burford Holly, Dwarf Burford Holly, Nandina, Texas Sage, Pampas
Grass, Chinese Holly, and other selections of holly which will reach at least five (5)
feet in height. The Landscape Administrator may approve other screening shrubs.
h. Service bay doors shall be painted with a neutral or earth tone color. The developer may
propose an alternate color that the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council
may determine to be appropriate for the building design and not detract from the
aesthetic quality of the development and surrounding properties. The intent of this
provision is to avoid drawing attention to the service bay doors. Glass or transparent
overhead doors shall not be permitted.
i. Vehicles awaiting repair or pickup may be stored overnight only in enclosed spaces.
Notwithstanding, the foregoing, an auto paint and body shop may store vehicles
awaiting repair provided the vehicles are completely behind a screening enclosure.
j. There shall be no outside storage or display of materials, including goods or products
(i.e. tires, batteries, auto parts, etc.) awaiting sale, installation, disposal, finishing or
fabrication.
k. A screening enclosure referenced or required in this section shall be at least six (6) feet
in height and constructed of the same material used predominately on the building
facade.
l. The screening and/or landscaping requirements described above may be modified by the
City Council if they find that the structure is architecturally designed to effectively
screen the service bay doors from view from abutting properties and abutting public
street or highway.
m. The site plan, elevations, landscape plan, line of sight drawing and perspective
rendering/axonometric drawings that are submitted to demonstrate architectural
elements, effectiveness of screening, and architectural details shall be binding on the
development and subsequent expansions.
n. Buildings constructed for any use permitted under this subsection are limited to one
story and maximum height of 35 feet.
E. Set Back Regulations.
1. On federal or state numbered highways or access roads the minimum set back adjacent to
such highways or access road shall be twenty-five (25) feet measured from the right-of-way
line.
2. On all arterial streets as designed in the Thoroughfare Plan adopted by the City Council,
minimum set back adjacent to such streets shall be the same as the approved standard zoning
district except that in no case shall such set back be less than twenty (20) feet from the
property line.
3. All other set backs including interior lot line, setbacks and set backs on minor or collector
streets, shall be in compliance with the approved standard zoning district.
§5200
5200-6
4. On any lot in this district used for non-residential purposes which adjoins any non "FR"
prefix residential district, the minimum setback adjacent to such residential district shall be
fifteen (15) feet and shall meet the screening requirements of Section 7300 of this
Ordinance.
F. Masonry Construction. All development in the Freeway Overlay district shall conform to the
regulations of Section 4600 of this Ordinance. (Ordinance No. 1493, Adopted 8/9/04)
G. Parking Regulations.
1. For each permissible use in this district, off street parking shall be provided in accordance
with all regulations governing the approved standard zoning district and the regulations of
section 7200 of this Ordinance.
H. Sign Regulations. All signs in the Freeway Overlay District shall conform to the regulations in
Section 7100 of this Ordinance and shall pertain only to the principle use or service rendered
or product sold on the premises on which the sign is located, and contain only
information pertaining to either the name of the occupant, the kind of business or the brand
name of the principle commodity being sold, but not including information on subsidiary
products or services, nor information on anything or person. (Ord. No. 1479, 4/12/04)
I. Special Conditions of the "FR" District.
1. No fencing shall be permitted in any required set back abutting a public street except as
required herein or as part of a secondary landscaping theme. The provisions of Section 7300
of this Ordinance shall apply in this district.
2. No outside display of goods, wears or merchandise shall be permitted except where the
primary land use is the show room display and sale of new automobiles, trucks, motorcycles
or boats by an authorized dealer. Repair work, storage facilities, rentals or used merchandise
sales on the same premises shall be allowed only as incidental to an approved primary use.
3. When allowed by the standard zoning district, outside storage shall be completely enclosed
by a screening device as specified in Section 7300 of this Ordinance. No outside storage
shall be permitted in any required setback.
4. No loading dock shall be erected fronting any state or federally numbered highway. Any
loading dock fronting any public street shall be set back from such street, right-of-way line a
sufficient distance so that all loading operations, truck parking and storage, and maneuvering
of vehicles into or out of loading dock spaces shall take place outside of public right-of-way.
5. Refuse Facilities: Any refuse facility or container shall be screened from view of public
streets and highways by screening device as specified in Section 7300 of this ordinance. In
no case may refuse facilities, dumpsters, or other refuse containers be located in the front or
side yard of any business or structure.
6. Utilities: All utilities shall be placed underground except for electrical utilities under the
following conditions:
a. Any transmission line crossing a highway abutting a FR District at an angle of less than
40 degrees from perpendicular with said highway may be placed overhead. For the
§5200
5200-7
purpose of this section, a transmission line shall be that line which is responsible for
bringing electricity from a generating plant to a distribution substation.
b. Any distribution feeder lines crossing a highway abutting a FR District at an angle of
less than 40 degrees from perpendicular with said highways may be placed overhead.
For the purpose of this section, a distribution feeder line shall be that line which is
responsible for bringing electricity from a distribution substation to interconnect with a
distribution line.
c. Any distribution line not within three hundred (300) feet of the centerline of a highway
abutting a FR District may be placed above ground. For the purpose of this section, a
distribution line shall be that line responsible for bringing electricity from a distribution
feeder line to the business or structure.
d. No electrical transformer shall be installed on any pole carrying electrical lines. All
transformer equipment shall be ground-mounted.
e. Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the City of Mansfield or the utility
company to bear the increased cost of underground utility placement required by this
ordinance (as compared to the cost of over head placement).
f. Any electrical utility lines placed prior to the effective date of this ordinance that are
contrary to same are nonconforming.
g. Nothing contained herein is intended to alter the intent of the electrical franchise
agreement ordinance in effect on the effective date of this ordinance.
h. All lines existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance are herein exempted from
provisions of this Ordinance.
7. Approval of a “FR” designation on any given zoning district shall be deemed approval of a
less or more intensive district whichever case applies than approval of such zoning district
without a FR designation.
8. Specific Use permits shall be permitted in this district when in compliance with Section 4400
and 7200 of this Ordinance so long as such specific use permit is provided within the suffix
district applicable to the property within the FR Overlay District, is consistent with the spirit
and intent of the FR Overlay District, and is not a prohibited use within the FR Overlay
District.
5200-8
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§5300
5300-1
Section 5300. MH, Manufactured Home District Regulations.
A. Purpose: To establish and preserve a special and unique form of housing for which
accommodations should be provided. To provide appropriate standards as to density, spacing
and use, a separate district is hereby created and designated for the specific purpose of providing,
at appropriate locations, area for the development of manufactured home Rental communities or
subdivisions for more or less permanent occupancy.
B. Permitted Use: No building or premises in a "MH", Manufactured home zoning district shall be
used and no buildings shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, used, nor shall
a certificate of occupancy be issued, except for the following uses:
1. HUD - Code Manufactured homes, either
a. As a part of a manufactured home rental community as herein specified; or
b. As a part of a manufactured home subdivision which is designed in accordance with the
subdivision ordinance and is shown on a final subdivision plat approved by the City of
Mansfield and filed of record which is specifically for and restricted to manufactured
home development.
2. Accessory buildings and structures incidental to the above use and for the exclusive use of
residents including, but not limited to, community centers, swimming pools, and office.
3. Installation owned and operated by the City of Mansfield, Tarrant County, State of Texas, or
public utility companies, which installations are necessary for the public safety,
governmental services, or the furnishing of utility services to or through a "MH" district.
C. Manufactured Home Rental Community License Required: It shall be unlawful for any
person(s) to maintain or operate within the City of Mansfield any manufactured home rental
community unless such person(s) shall first comply with the following and obtain a license
therefor.
1. Pre-existing Rental Communities: Not withstanding the provisions of this ordinance, a
license shall be issued within 30 days to any manufactured home rental community which
was in operation prior to the adoption of this ordinance for operations only to the extent that
they were carried on such date of adoption. All pre-existing rental communities obtaining
licenses as set out herein shall be considered legal non-conforming uses. At any time that
the ownership of a legally non-conforming manufactured home rental community operating
under this ordinance is transferred, the manufactured home rental community shall be
required to conform with all sections except subsection J and M of this section before a
license to the new owners will be issued. Ownership transfer is defined as a majority stock
transfer or a transfer of title to the real property except for a bonafide gift, devise or descent.
Any manufactured home rental community annexed after the adoption of this ordinance shall
likewise comply as hereinabove described in this section.
2. Application: Application for a manufactured home rental community license shall be in
writing, signed by the applicant, and shall contain the following:
a. The name and address of the applicant and owner if not the same.
§5300
5300-2
b. The location survey and legal description of the manufactured home rental community
by metes and bounds.
c. A complete plan of the rental community with lot numbers.
d. Design and engineering drawings, properly sealed, plans of all buildings, lots and other
improvements constructed including water, sewer, gas, electricity and telephone. All
water and sewer installations shall be in accordance with City standards.
e. Such further information as may be requested by the City to enable the City to determine
if the manufactured home rental community will comply with the legal requirements
f. The application and all accompanying plans shall be filed in triplicate. The City
Building Official, City Engineer, City Fire Marshal and City Planning and Zoning
Commission shall investigate the application and inspect the plans. If the manufactured
home rental community is in compliance with all provisions of this ordinance and all
other applicable ordinances or statutes, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
approve the application. The Building Official at the direction of the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall issue the license.
3. License Renewal: The license application form for a manufactured home rental community
shall be obtained from the Building Official at a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). Such license
shall expire on December thirty-first (31st) of the year in which it is issued. The cost of any
license secured having less than a year to run before the expiration period, as herein
provided, shall be pro-rated at a rate of $2.00 per month. Such or any license shall not be
issued for less than a minimum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Application for renewal of
licenses shall be within thirty (30) days prior to expiration, and a renewal fee paid for a full
twelve (12) months period thereafter.
D. Office Building within a Manufactured Home Rental Community: Each manufactured home
rental community shall be provided with a structure to be known and marked as the office, in
which shall be kept copies of all records pertaining to the management and supervision of the
rental community, as well as all rules and regulations of the rental community and such records,
rules and regulations to be available for inspection.
E. Register of Occupants Within a Manufactured Home Rental Community: It shall be the
duty of the licensee to keep a register containing a record of all occupants located within the
rental community. The register shall contain the following information:
1. Name and address of each occupant and/or owner.
2. Make, model, serial number, year and size of homes.
3. The make, model and year of all recreational vehicles, camping or travel trailers, coaches,
and motor homes used as dwelling, temporary or permanent.
4. The date of arrival and of departure of each of the above.
5. The manager of the rental community shall keep the register available in the office for
inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials
whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The
§5300
5300-3
register records shall be kept up-to-date and shall not be destroyed for a period of two (2)
years following the date of registration.
F. Rules and Regulations for a Manufactured Home Rental Community: It shall be the duty of
the owner of each manufactured home rental community, his agent, representative or manager to
prescribe rules and regulations for the management of the rental community, to make adequate
provision for the enforcement of such rules, and to subscribe to any and all subsequent rules and
regulations which may be adopted for the management of such rental community. Copies of
such rules and regulations shall be furnished to each occupant upon registration and a copy to the
City. In addition thereto, it shall be the duty of the owner, his agent, representative or manage to
comply.
G. It shall be the responsibility of the manufactured home rental community owner or his agent to
maintain said rental community in a safe, clean and sanitary condition and:
1. Provide that each structure be installed in accordance with State of Texas regulations and
skirted within 30 days after being placed on lot or pad.
2. Provide that the City Building Official be notified upon approval of the installations by State
Inspectors.
3. Provide for regular inspection of water and sanitary conveniences.
4. Provide for the collection and removal of garbage, other waste materials and refuge.
5. Provide for the removal of any unsightly, wrecked, abandoned or junked vehicles,
machinery or equipment.
H. License - Revocation and Reissuance:
1. The City Council may revoke any license to maintain and operate a manufactured home
rental community when the licensee has been found guilty by court of competent jurisdiction
of violating any provisions of this ordinance. After such conviction, the license may be
reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction has been remedied and the rental
community is being maintained and operated in full compliance with the law and this
Ordinance, the fee for which shall be set by the City Council.
2. The City Council may revoke any manufactured home rental community license upon
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission in case any of the provisions
hereof are violated. However, before the license may be revoked, the City Council must
give ten (10) day's notice, delivered in person or by registered mail to the holder of the
license, and after ten (10) days, a hearing thereon. After the license has been revoked, the
license may be reissued if the reasons for the revocation have been duly corrected.
I. License Posting: The license certificate issued under the provisions of this ordinance shall be
conspicuously posted in the office of the manufactured home rental community at all times.
J. Area and Height Regulations: All new manufactured home Rental Communities or
subdivisions and all new additions to existing manufactured home rental communities or
subdivisions shall conform to the following:
§5300
5300-4
1. The maximum height of any building or structure in a MH district shall be thirty-five (35)
feet.
2. The minimum site area which may be developed or used for manufactured home purposes
shall be 40 spaces.
3. The minimum lot or site area per manufactured home unit shall be four thousand five
hundred (4500) square feet.
4. The minimum lot width per manufactured home unit shall be fifty (50) feet.
5. The minimum lot depth per manufactured home unit shall be ninety (90) feet.
K. Setback Regulations: Minimum setbacks shall be as follows:
1. The minimum setback for residential use shall be twenty-five (25) from dedicated street
right-of-way, or fifteen (15) feet from any private drive designated or used for access,
circulation, or service within the manufactured home rental community. The minimum
street setback for non-residential use shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
2. The minimum side setback shall be ten (10) feet, provided in any event, there shall be a
minimum space of twenty (20) feet between manufactured homes.
3. The minimum rear setback shall be ten (10) feet provided in any event, there shall be a
minimum space of twenty (20) feet between manufactured home.
4. No structure of any type shall be permitted within ten (10) feet of a boundary of a MH
District.
L. Accessory or Additional Building Regulations: It shall be unlawful for any person operating a
manufactured home rental community or occupying a manufactured home to construct or permit
to be constructed in such rental community or in connection with such manufactured home any
additional structure, building or shelter in connection with or attached to a manufactured home
except, however, awnings of wood or metal may be attached to such manufactured home as well
as portable, prefabricated structures for the express purposes of increasing manufactured home
storage or living area, which meet the following requirements:
1. To secure a building permit from the Building Official.
2. Strength of materials and structure to meet minimum of the City Building Code.
3. Such room shall be completely dismantled and/or removed from the site at the time the
manufactured home to which it is an accessory is moved.
4. Finished in appearance to be as near the same as possible to the manufactured home to which
it is an accessory.
5. The length must not exceed the length of the manufactured home to which it is an accessory.
6. The width shall not exceed the width of the manufactured home.
§5300
5300-5
7. Any structure building or shelter added to or placed on manufactured home site shall meet
all of the setback requirements contained in this ordinance.
8. Only one such room for dwelling purposes per manufactured home shall be permitted.
M. Any manufactured home rental community or subdivision constructed after the adoption of this
ordinance or any extension of addition to an existing manufactured home rental community or
subdivision in the City of Mansfield shall be done in compliance with the following
requirements:
1. Will have MH zoning before consideration.
2. Must comply with all applicable sections of this Ordinance.
3. If extension or expansion of existing rental community, must have a valid license.
4. A preliminary plan or plat of the rental community shall be submitted following the same
guidelines as outlined for Preliminary Plat in the Subdivision Ordinance.
5. Upon approval of said preliminary rental community plan or plat by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, a final rental community plan or plat may be submitted following the
same guidelines as outlined for final plat in the Subdivision Ordinance with following
variances.
a. The number, location and size of all manufactured home spaces.
b. City water and sewer shall have collective or master meters.
c. Centrally-located refuse containers having a capacity of three cubic yards or larger shall
be provided, one for each thirty (30) lots. Such containers shall be designed so as to
prevent spillage, container deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around them. Refuse
and garbage shall be removed from the park at least twice each week. These containers
shall be screened and set apart by at least twenty-five (25) feet from any dedicated
right-of-way or manufactured home.
d. The topography if the entire park site and the surrounding terrain shall dictate the type of
streets and storm drainage. Recommendations will be made at preliminary rental
community planning or platting by the City Engineer and if approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission the type of systems will be shown on the final plan or plat of
the rental community and construction plans.
e. Where curbed streets or drives are not required a minimum of thirty-six (36) feet of
driving surface for all collector streets and a minimum of twenty-six (26) feet for all
minor streets shall be constructed with all weather shoulder on each side upon
requirement of the Commission after recommendation of the City Engineer.
f. Private streets within a manufactured home rental community shall be constructed of
concrete and comply with all applicable Fire Code and City Engineering Standards.
(Ordinance No. 1447, Adopted 10/13/03)
§5300
5300-6
g. A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured
home. Each parking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet.
These spaces may be within the required setback. (Ordinance No. 1447, Adopted
10/13/03)
h. Parking for guests will be allowed on one side of streets or drives only. One side of the
street or drive shall be properly posted for "No Parking". The remaining 20 to 30 feet
(depending on collector or minor designation) shall be striped and marked "Fire Lane".
i. Fire hydrants must follow both of two rules:
1. No structure shall be further away, in a direct line, than 500 feet from a fire hydrant.
2. Hydrant spacing along a water main shall not exceed 500 feet.
j. There shall be provided within the manufactured home rental community open space at a
ratio of 500 square feet for each of the first twenty spaces, and 250 square feet per unit
for all additional manufactured home spaces provided.
k. There shall be constructed and maintain a permanent screening device, not less than six
(6) feet in height on all sides of a manufactured home rental community or subdivision
that abuts an existing zoned single-family tract that is platted for single-family or
existing single-family use and for those portions of the park which directly abut on a
dedicated public street.
l. Each manufactured home shall have an address number permanent in nature and shall be
clearly visible from streets or drives.
m. Bottled gas for cooking and or heating purposes shall not be used at individual
manufactured home lots unless the containers are properly connected by copper or other
suitable metallic tubing. Bottled gas cylinders shall be securely fastened in place. No
cylinder containing bottled gas shall be located in a Manufactured home, under or within
ten (10) feet of any manufactured home and twenty-five (25) feet of any street or drive.
State and local regulations applicable to the handling of bottled gas and fuel oil must be
followed.
n. All manufactured homes shall be connected to sewer, water and electrical systems by
persons licensed in the performance of each job. The connections shall be inspected and
approved by the City Building Official.
o. All structures erected in or placed on a manufactured home rental community or
subdivision shall meet all of the applicable building codes.
p. A minimum of six (6) inch water and sewer lines shall be installed within a
manufactured home rental community or subdivision. The City engineer can require
larger water and sewer lines if the rental community area and density computations
indicate that oversizing is necessary. Manholes shall be spaced every 500 feet along
sewer lines.
q. All utility installations shall be in accordance with current City of Mansfield standards.
§5300
5300-7
r. Street lights within the manufactured home rental community or subdivision shall be
provided along all internal streets at 300 feet intervals. Each fixture shall have a
minimum 200 watt lamp of high pressure sodium.
N. Parking or placing manufactured homes, camping, travel trailer, trailer coach or recreational
vehicle shall be allowed only as follows:
1. Camping or travel trailers will be allowed for temporary occupancy in manufactured home
rental communities, but any lots which travel trailers are placed must conform to
manufactured home lot requirements.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or locate any camping or travel trailer in
any place in the City except within an approved campground or recreational vehicle park as
defined in Section 2200C or in a manufactured rental community as provided in this
subsection.
3. No camping or travel trailer may be placed in a manufactured home rental community for
over seven (7) days out of any period of thirty (30) consecutive days. The owner of the
manufactured home rental community shall keep a record book showing the day and time of
arrival of each camping or travel trailer, the license number, the owner or resident of the
trailer, a description of the trailer, and upon departure, show the date and time of leaving.
Entries shall be made in this book promptly upon arrival of such trailer, and these books
shall be open to inspection by officers of the City at any time. Special camping or travel
trailer parking areas with central dumps for sewage, etc., without the necessity of
conforming with all manufactured home lot requirements for each trailer may be provided in
manufactured home rental communities but only with approval of the City Council for the
specifications of each area. Special camping or travel trailer parking areas shall be subject to
the requirements for records and length of stay.
4. A camping or travel trailer may be placed in an assigned spot or pad site in an approved
camp ground for up to 12 months. At the end of that 12 month period, the camping and
travel trailer must be relocated to another assigned spot or pad site before continuing its stay
in the same camp ground. The same relocation requirement shall apply at the end of each 12
month period during an extended stay.
5. The owner or operator of a camp ground shall not have any ownership or proprietary interest
in any of the camping and travel trailers within his camp ground.
6. It is specifically provided that camping or travel trailers may be located, for storage purposes
only, on the premises of the owner of the camping or travel trailer or City approved storage
area within a manufactured home rental community.
7. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or locate a HUD-Code manufactured home
in any place in the City except in a licensed manufactured home rental community or
manufactured home subdivision as provided in this Section, or in a non-residential district
for purpose of sale provided in Section 4400 of this Ordinance, or in a PR or Single-family
Residential District provided that the following conditions are met:
a. A specific use permit has first been obtained for the placement or location of the HUDCode
manufactured home.
§5300
5300-8
b. The HUD-Code manufactured home is permitted only as a replacement of a pre-existing
single-family house on the same property which has been destroyed to the extent that the
cost of reconstruction or repair exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of
the structure.
c. The application for said specific use permit for the replacement of a destroyed singlefamily
house by a HUD-Code manufactured home must be made within six (6) months
of the loss of the single-family house; documentation on the destruction date of the
single-family house shall be furnished by the applicant in order to complete the
application.
d. The applicant for said specific use permit shall be limited to only the original property
owner suffering from the destruction of a previously destroyed single-family home on
the property to which the specific use permit would apply.
e. Said Specific Use Permit shall become null and void in case the HUD-Code
manufactured home, which is used as replacement, is occupied by someone other than
the applicant within a year from the issuance of the Specific Use Permit.
8. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or locate a mobile home, as defined in
Section 2000M, in any place in the City.
9. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, permanently fix or use a railway coach or car,
street car, bus or other similar construction vehicle or device originally intended for use as a
conveyance, as a dwelling in the city; provided, however that nothing herein shall be
construed so as to apply to a railroad work car, caboose or converted freight car used as a
temporary house or shelter when confined to rails and located on the established
right-of-way of any such railroad doing business as a common carrier.
§5400
5400-1
Section 5400. H, Historic Landmark Overlay District Regulations
A. General Purpose and Description: The City Council hereby finds and declares as a matter of
public policy that the protection, enhancement, preservation and use of historic landmarks is a
public necessity and is required in the interest of the culture, prosperity, education, and general
welfare of the people. The purposes of this district are:
1. To protect, enhance and perpetuate historic landmarks which represent or reflect distinctive
and important elements of the City's and State's architectural, archaeological, cultural, social,
economic, ethnic and political history and to develop appropriate settings for such places.
2. To safeguard the City's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such
historic landmarks by appropriate regulations.
3. To stabilize and improve property values in such locations.
4. To foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past.
5. To protect and enhance the City's attractions to tourists and visitors and provide incidental
support and stimulus to business and industry.
6. To strengthen the economy of the City.
7. To promote the use of historic landmarks for the culture, prosperity , education, and general
welfare of the people of the city and visitors to the City.
B. Historic Landmark Definitions
1. Historic Landmark Overlay District- Any area which (1) contains buildings, structures or
sites which (a) have a special character or have a special historical or cultural interest or
value, (b) represents one or more periods or styles of architecture typical of one or more eras
in the history of the City, and (c) cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a
district of the City; and (2) has been designated as an historic district pursuant to the
provision of this Ordinance. The area of an Historic Landmark Overlay District may include
one or more properties.
2. Rehabilitation - Is the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or
alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those
portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and
cultural values.
3. Restoration - Is the act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a
property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal
of later work or by the replacement of missing earlier work.
4. Preservation - Is the act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing form,
integrity, and material of a building or structure, and the existing form and vegetative cover
of the site. It may include initial stabilization work where necessary, as well as ongoing
maintenance of the historic building materials.
§5400
5400-2
5. Reconstruction - Is the act or process of reproducing by new construction the exact form
and detail of a historic building, structure, or object, or a part thereof, as it appeared at a
specific period of time.
6. Landmark - A building or site of immeasurable value in preserving the cultural heritage, or
an outstanding example of design or a site closely related to an important personage, act or
event in history. Such designation marks the site for preservation and restoration to its
historical character and is intended to discourage modifications, which detract from its
historical significance.
7. Contributing Elements - A building or site which in its historical character contributes to
the district's purpose. Such designation is intended to encourage restoration and
preservation, but also allow and encourage adaptive reuses and encourage continued
economic and social vitality of the district. Any new construction proposed within the
district shall be considered a contributing element.
8. Non-essential Elements - A building or site which, though within the physical boundaries
of the district, does not contribute to the cultural and historic value thereof. Such
designation is meant to provide greater latitude for utilization of the site or structure, but all
modifications shall conform to the guidelines.
C. Landmark Designation Power: The City Council may designate buildings, structures, sites,
districts, areas and lands in the city as historic landmarks and define, amend and delineate the
boundaries thereof. This Ordinance is created as an overlay district to the existing zoning that
exist on the property. The suffix "H" shall indicate the zoning designation of those buildings,
structures, sites, districts, areas and land which the City Council designates as historic
landmarks. Such designation shall be in addition to any other use designation, established in the
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance. The Official Zoning Ordinance Map shall reflect the
designation of historic landmarks by the letter "H" as a suffix to any other use designation
established in the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance.
D. Landmark Designation Criteria: In making such designations as set forth in paragraph C
above, the City Council shall consider, but shall not be limited to, one or more of the following
criteria:
1. Character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of
the City of Mansfield, State of Texas, or the United States.
2. Recognition as a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark, a National Historic Landmark, or
entered into the National Register of Historic Places.
3. Appear to be eligible for the National Register and also may be eligible for designation as a
Recorded Texas Historic Landmark as indicated in the 1983 Tarrant County Historic
Resource Survey; included as an authoritative reference for this purpose.
4. Embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or specimen.
5. Identification as the work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has
influenced the development of the City.
§5400
5400-3
6. Embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail, materials or craftsmanship, which
represent a significant architectural innovation.
7. Relationship to other distinctive buildings, sites or areas which are eligible for preservation
as described in Section 8700, Paragraph E, "Powers and Duties", based on architectural,
historic or cultural motif.
8. Portrayal of the environment of a group of people in an area of history characterized by a
distinctive architectural style.
9. Archaeological value in that it has produced or can be expected to produce data affecting
theories of historic or prehistoric interest.
10. Exemplification of the cultural, economic, social, ethnic, or historical heritage of the City,
State, or United States.
11. Location as a site of a significant historic event.
12. Identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the culture or
development of the City, County, State or Nation.
13. A building, structure, or place that because of its location has become of historic or cultural
value to a neighborhood or community.
E. Designation Procedure
1. Designation of any property as a Historic Landmark Overlay District may be proposed only
by the owner or the authorized agents of the individual property to be designated. Any such
proposal shall be filed with the Planning and Development Director upon prescribed forms
and shall include all data and proposed landmark guidelines required by the Historic
Landmark Commission and the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. The Historic Landmark Commission shall recommend approval, disapproval or modification
of the proposal to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
3. Each proposal shall be considered by the Historic Landmark Commission following a public
hearing. A record of pertinent information presented at the hearing, shall be made and
maintained as a permanent public record. The Historic Landmark Commission shall reach a
decision within sixty (60) days after holding the required hearing. Notice of the time, place
and purpose of such hearing shall be given by the Director of Planning and mailed ten (10)
days prior to the hearing date to the owners of all adjoining property and property owners
included in the proposed designation, using for this purpose the names and addresses of the
last known owners as shown on the latest real property tax records received for the Tarrant
County Tax Appraisal District. Failure to send notice by mail to any such property owners
where the addresses of such owners are not so recorded shall not invalidate any proceedings
in connection with the proposed designation.
4. In making a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission the Historic
Landmark Commission shall consider the conformance or lack of conformance of the
proposed designation with the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Mansfield and with the
purposes and standards of this Ordinance.
§5400
5400-4
5. The recommendation of the Historic Landmark Commission shall be considered by the
Planning and Zoning Commission in the same manner as provided for in an Application for
Rezoning: Action by the Planning Commission shall be as provided in Section 8600 with
respect to rezoning.
6. Action by the Council shall be as provided in Section 8600 with respect to rezoning.
7. Reapplication for "H" status shall be limited as outlined in Section 8600 paragraph E.
F. Procedure to Authorize Erection, Construction, Reconstruction, Alterations of Structures
In A Historic Landmark Overlay District Or Site:
1. No person shall carry out or cause to be carried out on a landmark or in a Historic Landmark
Overlay District, any alteration, demolition, construction, reconstruction, restoration, or
remodeling, nor shall any person make any material change in the appearance on any
existing landmark or in a Historic Landmark Overlay District without a permit issued by the
City Building Official. All applications to the City Building Official for a permit involving
landmarks or Historic Landmark Overlay Districts shall be forwarded immediately by the
City Building Official to the Historic Landmark Commission. Notwithstanding any other
provision, or law, the City Building Official shall not permit any alteration, demolition,
construction, reconstruction, restoration, remodeling, or any material change in appearance
to be carried out on a landmark or in a Historic Landmark Overlay District except pursuant
to a Certificate of Approval issued by the Historic Landmark Commission.
2. The Historic Landmark Commission shall hold a public hearing on all applications for
Certificate of Approval referred to it after notice given in the same manner as prescribed in
paragraph E, subsection 3. A report of the action taken or determination made shall be
forwarded to the City Building Official not later than forty five (45) days after receipt of the
application by the Historic Landmark Commission. If no action is taken by the Historic
Landmark Commission within the forty five (45) day period, the permit shall be issued and
the applicant notified by the City Building Official.
3. The Historic Landmark Commission in considering the appropriateness of any alteration,
demolition, new construction, reconstruction, restoration, remodeling or other modification
of any building shall consider, among other things, the purposes of this Ordinance; the
historical and architectural value and significance of the landmark or Historic Landmark
Overlay District; the design guidelines as approved in this Ordinance under paragraph K,
subsection 1. Landmark Guidelines; the texture, material and color of the building or
structure in question or its appurtenant fixtures, including signs; and the relationship of such
features to similar features of other buildings within a Historic Landmark Overlay District;
and the position of such building or structure in relation to the street or public way and to
other buildings and structures.
4. If after considering the foregoing, the Historic Landmark Commission determines that the
proposed changes are consistent with the criteria for historic preservation established by this
Ordinance, the Historic Landmark Commission shall issue the Certificate of Approval. In
the event of a determination to deny a Certificate of Approval, The Historic Landmark
Commission shall request consultation with the owner for a period not to exceed 90 days for
the purpose of considering means to preservation in keeping with the criteria and design
guidelines. If at the end of that time an acceptable solution has not been achieved, the
Certificate of Approval shall finally be denied and the applicant so notified by letter;
§5400
5400-5
provided the applicant may appeal to the City Council within 20 days of the date of the letter
finally denying the application, and the City Council may, after a public hearing, reverse or
modify the decision of the Historic Landmark Commission but only if it finds that:(a) every
reasonable effort has been made by the applicant to agree to the requirements of the
Commission and(b) owing to special conditions pertaining to the specific piece of property,
denial of the Certificate of Approval will cause undue and unnecessary hardship. The
Secretary of the Interior's STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION and Guidelines for
Rehabilitating Historic Buildings are the minimum guidelines that the Historic Landmark
Commission shall use to evaluate each landmark or Historic Landmark Overlay District.
G. Approval For Demolition Or Removal: If an application is received by the Planning
Department for demolition or removal of any designated historic landmark, it shall be forwarded
to the Historic Landmark Commission upon receipt of the application.
1. Should the Historic Landmark Commission determine that the application involves
improvements to existing buildings not historically and culturally significant and not
contributing to the integrity of the district, it may approve the application for demolition or
removal provided the owner comply with the established guidelines for the landmark or
Historic Landmark Overlay District and the General Purpose of this district in Paragraph A
of this Section.
2. Should the Historic Landmark Commission determine that the demolition or removal
activity will adversely affect any historical, architectural, archaeological, or cultural feature
of the historic landmark, and whether such work is appropriate and consistent with the spirit
and intent of this Section. It shall recommend restrictions or conditions to the demolition or
removal application.
3. The Historic Landmark Commission may recommend the disapproval of the application by
determining that in the interest of preserving historical values, the structure, building or site
should not be demolished, and in that event, the application shall be suspended for a period
not exceeding ninety (90) days from the date of application. Within the suspension period,
the Historic Landmark Commission may request an extension of the suspension period by
the City Council. If the City Council, after notice to applicant and public hearing,
determines that there is reasonable ground for preservation, the Council may extend the
suspension period for an additional period not exceeding one hundred twenty (120) days, to
a total of not more than two hundred forty (240) days from the date of application for
demolition. During the period of suspension of the application, no permit shall be issued for
such demolition or removal nor shall any person demolish or remove the building, structure
or site. If no action is taken by the City Council within (240) days from the date of
application, the demolition or removal permit shall be issued and the City Building Official
shall so advise the applicant.
4. This procedure is to allow the City, the owner and the private sector to explore alternatives
to demolition or removal which may provide viable uses for the subject of the application.
In addition, alternate strategies of ownership and use may be explored with the owner,
including use of other remedies available to the City.
H. Historic Landmarks - Omission of Necessary Repairs:
1. The exterior of a designated historic landmark shall be maintained to insure the structural
soundness of such landmark.
§5400
5400-6
2. If the City Building Official and/or the Historic Landmark Commission finds that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that a designated historic landmark is structurally unsound or
in imminent danger of becoming structurally unsound, the City Building Official will notify
in writing the owner of record of the designated historic landmark of such fact.
3. Upon the giving of ten (10) days written notice to the owner of record of such designated
historic landmark, the Historic Landmark Commission shall hold a public hearing to
determine if the designated historical building is structurally unsound or in imminent danger
of becoming structurally unsound. The Historic Landmark Commission shall request a
report and consider recommendations from the City Building Official. The report may
include evidence of economic hardship or willful neglect.
4. At the conclusion of the hearing, if the Historic Landmark Commission finds that the
designated historic building is structurally unsound or in danger of becoming structurally
unsound and that not valid reason exists as to why the owner cannot or should not undertake
to safeguard the structural soundness of the building, it shall in writing notify the record
owner of the finding.
5. The owner of record of a designated historic landmark who has been notified by the Historic
Landmark Commission that such landmark is structurally unsound or in danger of so
becoming shall within Ninety (90) days of receipt of such notice satisfy the Historic
Landmark Commission that reasonably necessary repairs to safeguard the structural
soundness of the landmark have been effected
6. If the Historic Landmark Commission determines that the building is structurally unsound
but there are valid reasons why the owner cannot or should not undertake to safeguard the
structural soundness of the building, it shall forward to the City Council its recommendation,
as to what action, if any, should be taken on the structure.
7. Any applicant or interested person aggrieved by a ruling of the Historic Landmark
Commission under the provisions of this section may, within thirty (30) days after the ruling,
appeal to the City Council.
I. Suspension Of Building And Demolition Permits Pending Landmark Application: No
building or demolition permit will be granted once the application has been received by the
Planning Department. The Historic Landmark Commission shall notify the City Building
Official within twenty four (24) hours if it deems that destruction of a possible eligible landmark
building or site is imminent. This notification shall be in writing and explain the reason for the
action of the Historic Landmark Commission. This notification authorizes the City Building
Official not to allow any building or demolition permits even though no application for Historic
Landmark Overlay District Zoning has not been applied for by the owner of the particular
landmark building or structure in question.
J. Local Historic Preservation Officer: The Director of Planning or his designee shall serve as
the Local Historic Preservation Officer to act as Executive Secretary to the Historic Landmark
Commission, who shall be the custodian of its records, shall conduct official correspondence and
generally supervise the clerical and technical work of the Historic Landmark Commission as
required to administer this Ordinance. In addition, the Director shall:
1. Carry out, assist and collaborate in studies and programs designed to identify and evaluate
structures, sites and areas worthy of preservation;
§5400
5400-7
2. Consult with and consider the ideas and recommendations of civic groups, public agencies,
and citizens interested in historical preservation;
3. Inspect and investigate structures, sites and areas which are believed worthy of preservation;
4. Submit to the Historic Landmark Commission for public hearing and approval, and
subsequently maintain (and resubmit as required) a list of structures and other features
deemed deserving of official recognition although not designated as historic landmarks or
Historic Landmark Overlay Districts, and take appropriate measures of recognition, and
maintain a documentary inventory;
5. Disseminate information to the public concerning those structures, site and areas deemed
worthy of preservation, and encourage and advise property owners in the protection,
enhancement, perpetuation and use of landmarks and property of historical interest;
6. Consider methods other than those provided for in this Ordinance for encouraging and
achieving historical preservation, and make appropriate recommendations to approval bodies
and other public and private agencies; and
7. Establish such policies, rules and regulations as are deemed necessary to carry out the
purpose of this Ordinance.
K. Building Implementation Procedures:
1. Landmark Guidelines: The following guidelines shall be used by the Historic Landmark
Commission in considering the issuance of a Certificate of Approval for construction,
reconstruction, restoration, remodeling or alteration of landmarks:
a. The Secretary of the Interior’s “Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for
Rehabilitating Historic Buildings” as adopted by Ordinance No. 919.
b. Design Guidelines for Downtown Mansfield as adopted by Ordinance No. 919; said
Design Guidelines are applicable only to historic landmarks within Blocks 1 and 2 of the
Original Town of Mansfield as shown in plat recorded in Volume 63, Page 53-54 of the
Plat Records, Tarrant County, Texas.
c. Design Guidelines for Historic Residential Properties as adopted by Resolution No.
2138. These Design Guidelines are applicable to any historic residential landmark in the
City of Mansfield, regardless of the use of the building. Ord No. 1575, 5/22/06
2. Other specific guidelines promulgated by the Historic Landmark Commission as provided
hereinafter.
3. Promulgation of Guidelines: Following the submission of a set of guidelines by the
applicant with the submittal of the designation request and upon designation by the City
Council, the Historic Landmark Commission shall within sixty (60) days review for approval
such guidelines prepared by the applicant specifically for that district for use by property
owners and the administrative staff in implementing the intent of this Ordinance. A copy of
these guidelines shall be on file in the Office of the Building Official. The guidelines will
classify all structures and sites within the district as one of the following: a) Landmark, b)
Contributing Element or c) Non Essential Element as defined in Paragraph B of this Section.
§5400
5400-8
The guidelines shall establish acceptable physical characteristics of structure, signs, sites and
modifications thereto including layout and location on site, size, shape, materials and
textures, fenestration and interiors where applicable. The Historic Landmark Commission
may suspend action on any requests affecting any Historic Landmark Site or Historic
Landmark Overlay District pending the preparation of the guidelines. Landmark Sites and
Historic Landmark Overlay District guidelines may be reviewed and modified by the
Historic Landmark Commission.
4. General Maintenance and Repair: Ordinary repair or maintenance which does not involve
changes in architectural and historical value, style or general design is exempt from the
provision of this section. It is incumbent upon the Historic Landmark Commission to make
clear to the owner of a landmark site or owners of buildings or Structures within a Historic
Landmark Overlay District to clarify what particular activities would come under the
heading of Ordinary repair or maintenance.
L. Re-designation of a Historic Landmark Overlay District: The re-designation of a Historic
Landmark Overlay District shall follow the same procedure as a request for a Historic Landmark
Overlay District.
M. Coexistence With Other Use Classification: Use Classifications as to all property which may
be included in a Historic Landmark Overlay District shall continue to be governed by the
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City and the procedures therein established.
N. Coexistence with Other Codes and Ordinance: This will not replace or supersede any Local,
State or National code or Ordinance regarding health, life, safety or the general public welfare.
O. Penalty: It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, structurally alter, remodel, renovate,
restore, demolish, raze, or maintain any building, structure, or land in a Historic Landmark
Overlay District in violation of the provisions of this section, and the City in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful
construction, restoration, demolition, razing, or maintenance, to restrain, correct, or abate such
violation, to prevent any illegal act, business, or maintenance on such premises.
P. Liability For Adversely Affecting Historic Structure Or Property
1. In this section, "historic structure or property" means a historic structure or property that:
a. is included on the National Register of Historic Places;
b. is designated as a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark;
c. is designated as a State Archaeological Landmark;
d. is determined by the Texas Historical Commission to qualify as eligible property under
criteria for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places or for designation as a
Recorded Texas Historic Landmark or as a State Archaeological Landmark;
e. is certified by the Texas Historical Commission to other State agencies as worthy of
preservation; or
§5400
5400-9
f. is designated as a historic landmark or placed in a Historic Landmark Overlay District
by the City of Mansfield.
2. A person is liable to the City for damages when the person:
a. demolishes, causes to be demolished, or otherwise adversely affects the structural,
physical, or visual integrity of a historic structure or property; and
b. does not obtain a Certificate of Approval and a demolition or building permit from the
City Building Official as required in Subsection F of Section 5400 before beginning to
demolish, cause the demolition of, or otherwise adversely affect the structural, physical
or visual integrity of the historic structure or property.
3. If the structural, physical or visual integrity of the historic structure or property is adversely
affected to the extent that it is not feasible to restore the structural, physical or visual
integrity substantially to its former level, the damages are equal to the cost of constructing,
using as many of the original materials as possible, a new structure or property that is a
reasonable facsimile of the historic structure or property plus the cost of attorney's,
architect's, and appraiser's fees and other costs related to the enforcement of this Subsection.
If it is feasible to restore the structural, physical, or visual integrity of the historic structure
or property substantially to its former level, the damages are equal to the cost of the
restoration, using as many of the original materials as possible, plus the cost of attorney's,
architect's, and appraiser's fees and other costs related to the enforcement of this Subsection.
4. Instead of accepting monetary damages, the City may permit the liable person to construct,
using as many of the original materials as possible, a structure or property that is a
reasonable facsimile of the demolished historic structure or property or to restore, using as
many of the original materials as possible, the historic structure or property and to pay the
cost of attorney's, architect's, and appraiser's fees and other costs related to the enforcement
of this Subsection.
5. Damages recovered under this Subsection shall be deposited in a special fund in the City
treasury and may be used only to construct, using as many of the original materials as
possible, a structure or property that is a reasonable facsimile of the demolished historic
structure or property; to restore, using as many of the original materials as possible, the
historic structure or property; or to restore another historic structure or property, as
determined by the City.
6. The construction of a facsimile structure or property under Subsection (4) or (5) must be
undertaken at the location designated by the City, which may be the same location as that of
the demolished historic structure or property.
5400-10
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§5500
5500-1
Section 5500. SE, Secondary Freeway Overlay District Regulations
A. General Purpose and Description: This district shall function as an overlay zoning district the
regulations of which are superimposed and shall supersede the regulations of an approved
standard zoning district; such standard zoning districts identified as PR, A, SF-5AC/24, SF-
12/22, SF-9.6/20, SF-8.4/18, SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/18, SF-7.5/16, SF-7.5/12, SF-6/12, 2F, MF-1,
MF-2, OP, C-l, C-2, C-3, C-4, I-l, I-2, MH and PD District.
Where provisions of the Secondary Freeway Overlay Districts shall be applicable to any
property which is adjacent to and within five hundred (500) feet of an existing "FR", Freeway
Overlay District in the City of Mansfield, the Secondary Freeway Overlay District is created as
an overlay district whereby it is recognized that certain specific standards are appropriate and
necessary that such standards shall be superimposed and shall supersede the regulations of an
approved standard zoning district. Where such district regulations are in conflict with the
provisions of these sections, all regulations of the approved standard zoning districts shall be in
effect except as identified in this section.
B. Specific Standards of the Secondary Freeway Overlay District
1. No single-family homes shall be permitted unless a specific use permit is granted by the City
Council under the provisions of Section 6100 of this Ordinance.
2. Outside storage shall be screened with an eight (8) foot opaque fence and shall not be
stacked or raised above the height of the screening fence. The open display of outside
storage without a screening fence is prohibited unless a specific use permit is granted by the
City Council under the provisions of Section 6100 of this Ordinance.
5500-2
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§6100
6100-1
ARTICLE 6. SPECIFIC USE PERMIT, SPECIAL EXCEPTION AND OTHER PERMITS.
Section 6100. SP, Specific Use Permit.
A. Purpose: To provide for uses that require special consideration in certain settings or are of a
public or semi-public character often essential or desirable for the general convenience and
welfare of the community, which without specific consideration may have possible adverse
impact on neighboring properties.
B. Permit Required: A building permit or certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any use
to be located in a zoning district which permits that use only as a specific use permit unless the
specific use permit has first been approved in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
C. Application Procedure: An application for a Specific use permit shall be filed with the
Planning Department in accordance with procedures as set forth in Section 8600 for zoning
ordinance amendment. Ordinance No. 1499, Adopted 9/14/04
D. Site Plan Requirements: The Site Plan shall provide the following information:
1. A complete signed application as provided by the Planning Department or on the City-s
website at: www.mansfield-tx.gov
2. The appropriate fee in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by City Council.
3. On a separate 8 ½” X 11” exhibit, provide a metes and bounds description of the property
included in the zoning change request, including the total acreage, signed and sealed by a
registered surveyor.
4. On a separate 24” X 36” or 22” X 34” sheet, drawn at the same scale as the plan, show the
approximate topography of the plan area, all water courses that will remain in a natural state,
100-year floodway and 100-year floodplain per FEMA and other hydraulic and hydrologic
studies as necessary. Provide two (2) copies.
5. On a separate 24” X 36” or 22” X 34” sheet, drawn at the same scale as the plan, show
proposed and existing water and sanitary sewer locations. Also include the locations and
sizes of private water and sanitary sewer lines. Provide two (2) copies.
6. A separate exhibit and documents indicating the traffic volumes, turning movements,
evaluation of ingress and egress existing and proposed, when required by the City Engineer.
7. An electronic copy of the plan in accordance with current established policy.
8. Fifteen (15) copies of the plan at 24” X 36” or 22” X 34” drawn at an acceptable scale
indicating all significant features of the proposed development to include:
a. A vicinity map locating the property in relationship to existing major thoroughfares.
b. Title block, preferably in the lower right-hand corner, including the following: “Site
Plan for SUP, name of development, survey and abstract number or recorded plat
information, city, county, state, date of preparation, acreage and number of lots”.
§6100
6100-2
c. Acceptable scale: 1” = 20’, 1” = 40’, 1” = 100’ or as approved.
d. Type size is legible at full scale and when reduced.
e. North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity.
f. Name, address, phone and fax of owner/developer and the firm preparing the plan.
g. A map showing the boundary dimensions.
h. Adjacent or surrounding land uses, zoning, streets, drainage facilities and other existing
or proposed off-site improvements, sufficient to demonstrate the relationship and
compatibility of the site to the surrounding properties, uses and facilities.
i. The location and size of all streets, alleys, parking lots and parking spaces, loading areas
or other areas to be used for vehicular traffic and the proposed access and connection to
existing or proposed streets adjacent to the plan area. Include a chart indicating the
number of required parking spaces by use, the method of calculation and the number of
proposed parking spaces.
j. The types of surfacing, such as paving (e.g. concrete, brick, turf, etc.) to be used at the
various locations.
k. The location and size of all fire lanes with all curb radii adjacent to the fire lane labeled.
The nearest fire hydrant dimensioned to the property corner and all proposed fire
hydrants.
l. The location, height, setbacks and minimum floor areas for all buildings, and if nonresidential,
the floor ratio. Include the following building details for non single-family
developments:
(1) Entrance and exits to the building
(2) Architectural renderings or elevations of proposed structures with all exterior
materials for roofs, awnings, walls etc. labeled.
(3) Calculations of the masonry content on each façade and in total for each
building. (Example: Area of front façade = h x 1, percent masonry = 80%)
(4) Distance between buildings and distance from building to property lines.
m. The number, location, and dimensions of the lots; and the setbacks, number of dwelling
units, and number of units per acre (density). A graphic showing a typical lot layout
with size and setbacks.
n. The location of all on-site facilities for liquid waste or method of temporary storage
pending disposal, including existing or proposed septic fields.
o. The location, size and type of each outside facility for waste or trash disposal. If no
facility is shown, provide a note indicating method of disposal and removal.
§6100
6100-3
p. A tree survey locating all protected trees by type, size and species and mitigation plan, if
required by the city’s Natural Resources Management Ordinance. (Refer to the Tree
Preservation Application as found on the city’s website.)
q. A landscape plan showing all landscape setbacks and buffers; parking lot landscaping;
and any additional landscaping proposed. A chart indicating the size, length and width
of the landscape areas, with the required number of plants and the proposed number of
plants should be included on the plan. The landscape plan may be presented on a
separate exhibit on the same sheet size and at the same scale as the site plan.
r. The approximate location and size of greenbelt, open, common, or recreation areas, the
proposed use of such areas, and whether they are to be used for public or private use. If
private, indicate the proposed ownership.
s. The approximate location and size of required Parkland Dedication areas, as required by
the city’s Parkland Dedication Ordinance for residential development.
t. The location, type, and size of all fences, berms, or screening features.
u. A plan, including elevations, showing location, size, height, orientation and design of all
signs regulated by the city’s sign ordinance.
v. The location, size and type of all pedestrian areas, bike paths and sidewalks.
w. The location, size, type and purpose of any outside storage or outside display and
method of screening. Indicate the percentage of outside storage as compared to the
building square footage.
x. Phases of development should be shown and labeled. Provide a development schedule
indicating the start and finish date of each phase and improvements, broken down by use
and acreage.
y. When deemed necessary, the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council may ask
for more information during the review of a Specific Use Permit. Likewise, they may
waive some of the information if the application is a simple request to deviate from the
existing zoning category on the property.
z. If applicable, show the following mandatory owner’s association notes:
(1) A mandatory owners association will be responsible for the maintenance of the
“insert list of private amenities and common areas here”. (Example: screening
fences, common areas, parks, amenity centers, landscaping, etc.)
(2) The Owners Association and associated documents shall be filed in accordance
with the City of Mansfield policies. These documents must be reviewed by the
City Attorney prior to filing the final plat. The documents shall be filed with the
final plat at Tarrant County when deemed necessary by the attorney. The
documents shall be submitted in a timely manner to allow for a minimum of 60
days review. Failure to submit the documents or incomplete documents may result
in delay of construction, acceptance of the subdivision or delay in approval of a
building permit. The City does not accept the responsibility for any delays in
§6100
6100-4
construction, approval or acceptance of the subdivision caused by the failure to
submit the association documents or the inaccuracy of the documents.
Ordinance No. 1499, Adopted 9/14/04
E. Public Hearings: The notification and public hearing process for a Specific use permit is set
forth in Section 8600 of this Ordinance.
F. Conditions for Approval: A Specific use permit shall be issued only if all of the following
conditions have been found:
1. That the specific use permit will be compatible with and not injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property, nor significantly diminish or impair property values within the
immediate vicinity;
2. That the establishment of the specific use permit will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of surrounding vacant property;
3. That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary supporting facilities have
been or will be provided;
4. The design, location and arrangement of all driveways and parking spaces provides for the
safe and convenient movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic without adversely
affecting the general public or adjacent developments;
5. That adequate nuisance prevention measures have been or will be taken to prevent or control
offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and vibration;
6. That directional lighting will be provided so as not to disturb or adversely affect neighboring
properties; and
7. That there are sufficient landscaping and screening to insure harmony and compatibility with
adjacent property.
G. Additional Conditions:
1. The City Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend to the City Council that certain
safeguards and conditions concerning the operation, setbacks, ingress and egress, off-street
parking and loading arrangements, landscaping and screening location, construction of
buildings and uses, term limits, etc. be required.
2. The City Council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance with the
intent of this Ordinance, require such development standards and operational conditions and
safeguards as are indicated to be important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property
and the community as a whole.
H. Time Limit: A Specific use permit issued under this section shall be valid for a period of two (2)
years from the date of issuance and shall become null and void unless construction or use is
substantially underway during said two-year period, or unless an extension of time is approved
by the City Council.
§6100
6100-5
I. Revocation: A Specific Use Permit may be revoked or modified, after notice and hearing, for
either of the following reasons:
1. The Specific Use Permit was obtained or extended by fraud or deception; or
2. That one or more of the conditions imposed by the City Council has not been met or has
been violated.
J. Amendments: The Director of Planning and Development may approve minor variations or
revisions from the original Specific Use Permit which do not increase density, change traffic
patterns, or result in any increase in external impact on adjacent properties or neighborhoods.
The Director of Planning may refer any variation or revision that warrants special consideration
to the City council for its review. If, in the City Council’s determination, the variation or
revision does not constitute a significant change to a Specific Use Permit, no public hearing will
be called and the revision will be deemed approved. The City Council in its sole discretion may
direct any revision to a Specific Use Permit to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its
review and recommendation and, in such event, said revision shall follow the procedures set out
in Section 8600 herein regarding amendments to the Zoning Ordinance. (Ordinance No 1766-
10, 4/27/10)
K. Processing Fee: A processing fee shall be required for the processing of each Specific use
permit request in accordance to the Fee Schedule Ordinance of the City.
6100-6
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§6200
6200-1
Section 6200. Temporary Uses.
A. Purpose: Certain temporary uses of land are essential to the full development and utilization of
the land for its lawful purpose. The temporary uses hereinafter enumerated shall not be deemed
violations of this ordinance when made under the conditions herein provided.
B. Permitted Uses: The permissible temporary uses, the conditions of use and the zoning districts
wherein the same shall be permitted are as follows:
1. Uses allowed in all Districts.
a. Construction Office: Temporary field or construction offices and temporary building
material storage areas to be used solely for on premise construction purposes in
connection with the property on which they are erected or within the same platted
subdivision may be permitted for specific periods of time, not to exceed twelve (12)
months at a time, in accordance with a permit issued by the Building Official for cause
shown. Such temporary uses shall be discontinued by the order of the Building Official
and in no event shall such temporary uses continue to exist on the premises after the
construction for which they were erected is completed.
b. Special Events: Special Events such as shows, exhibitions, contests, parades, or any
outdoor fund raising events or promotions shall only be permitted when a temporary use
permit has been granted by the City Council; however, in no case shall such events be
allowed in excess of seven (7) consecutive days. Such uses shall be subject to any
special conditions imposed by the City Council for the protection of public interest and
welfare of the community.
2. Uses allowed in all Residential Districts.
a. Real Estate Sales Office: Temporary field real estate sales offices may be permitted in
residential subdivisions for specific periods of time when approved by the Building
Official. Such temporary uses may be located in a "Model Home" or a portable building
within the subdivision, but shall be discontinued by the order of the Building Official,
and in no event shall such temporary use continue to exist after the subdivision or the
increment of same in which the use is located shall have been occupied or sold in excess
of 90%.
3. Uses Allowed in C-2, C-3, I-l and I-2 Districts.
a. Carnival or Amusement Rides: The City Council upon receipt of an application, may
issue a permit for temporary carnival or amusement rides. In authorizing such permit,
the City Council may impose certain reasonable conditions to protect the public interest
and welfare of the community and may stipulate that such permit shall be effective for
an indefinite term. Thereafter, the holder of such permit may periodically engage in
such use with the approval of the Building Official without further City Council action
provided:
1. The Building Official shall be given not less than ten (10) days notice of any
proposed operations under the permit.
§6200
6200-2
2. Such operations shall not be conducted for more than eight (8) consecutive days at a
time.
3. Such use shall not be engaged more than twice in a twelve (12) month period.
4. Such use shall conform to all City Council imposed conditions of the permit,
including location, hours of operation, and the number and type of rides and
concessions.
5. The City Council may terminate the permit at any time.
b. Temporary Tent Sales or Assembly: Temporary tent sales by retail establishments or
tent assemblies by City recognized public or semi-public organizations may be permitted
by the Building Official for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. Such temporary uses
shall be discontinued by the order of the Building Official and in no event shall such
temporary uses be allowed in excess of thirty (30) days or more than once a year. All
tent sales or assemblies shall meet the special conditions, if any, imposed by the
Building Official and Fire Marshal for the protection of public interest and welfare of the
community. No tent or similar structure shall be erected in any required yard setbacks or
designated easements.
§6300
6300-1
Section 6300. Special Exception.
A. Purpose: Certain uses are classified as special exceptions and may be permitted in designated
districts when specifically authorized by this section after approval by the Board of Adjustment.
Such special exceptions may be granted in order that the City may develop, in accordance with
the intent and purpose of this Ordinance, that land may be fully utilized for a lawful purpose, and
that substantial justice may be done.
B. Application Required: An application for a special exception shall be filed with the Planning
Department. A building permit or certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any use
designated herein unless an application for special exception has first been approved in
accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The application shall be accompanied by a
site plan, which, along with the application, will become a part of the special exception, if
approved. The accompanying site plan shall be drawn to scale and provide the following
information:
1. A description of the proposed land use, building or structure;
2. The lot configuration with dimensions, indicating property lines, setbacks, easements,
drainage ways, and boundary street(s);
3. The dimension and location of the proposed building or structure, and any other existing
buildings or structures on the property;
4. The square footage of the proposed building or structure, and
5. If the proposed building is intended to be a replacement of a previous building or structure,
the dimension, location and square footage of the previous building or structure.
C. Processing Fee: A fee shall be required for application for special exception in accordance with
the Fee Schedule Ordinance of the City, except for uses listed in Section 6300E.1, for which no
fee shall be required.
D. Public Hearings: The notification and public hearing process to consider the application for a
special exception shall be as set forth in Section 8400 of this Ordinance.
E. Authorized Special Exceptions: The following uses may be allowed as special exceptions
subject to full and complete compliance with all conditions herein provided, together with such
other conditions as the Board of Adjustment may impose.
1. The replacement or reconstruction of a dwelling unit that has a lawful nonconforming use
status due to non-compliance with the minimum floor area requirement of the PR or
residential district where it is located that was damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or
other calamity to the extent that the cost of the reconstruction or repair exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the replacement cost of the structure.
a. Conditions of Approval:
1. The dwelling unit being replaced or reconstructed must have been built before
October 5, 1995;
§6300
6300-2
2. The dwelling unit being replaced or reconstructed conforms with Section 4400, the
Permitted Use provisions of this Ordinance;
3. The floor area in the replacement or reconstructed dwelling unit shall not be less
than the floor area in the dwelling unit immediately before the structural damage or
destruction;
4. The replacement or reconstructed dwelling unit shall not cause a greater
nonconformity to the setback regulations of the zoning district where it is located
than the previous dwelling unit immediately before the structural damage or
destruction; and
5. The granting of the special exception does not change the essential character or
appearance of the neighborhood, or diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood.
2. The placement of heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC) equipment on the
ground or on the roof in such a way that the equipment is visible from the street abutting the
property where the equipment is located or from the boundary of the abutting property.
a. Conditions of Approval:
1. The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception if it finds that there is no
negative impact to the abutting property or traveling public and that the cost to
visually screen the equipment from the abutting property or street on higher
elevation is unreasonable or unfeasible.
3. The placement of trash container or storage area for refuse or material awaiting disposal or
recycling in such a way that the container or storage area is visible from the street abutting
the property where the trash container or storage area is located or from the boundary of the
abutting property.
a. Conditions of Approval:
1. The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception if it finds that there is no
negative impact to the abutting property or traveling public and that the cost to
visually screen the equipment from the abutting property or street on higher
elevation is unreasonable or unfeasible.
4. The reduction or waiver of the required screening for a non-residential use that abuts
property in a residential zoning classification.
a. Conditions of Approval:
1. The non-residential use must be located on properties owned and used by the City,
Mansfield Independent School District or any church.
2. The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception if it finds that there is no
negative impact to the abutting property.
§6300
6300-3
5. A reduction of the 80% minimum masonry construction requirement or deviation from the
masonry material construction requirement imposed on all dwelling units within any SF,
Single-Family Residential or 2F, Two-Family Residential Districts.
a. Conditions of Approval:
1. The proposed construction must accommodate architectural features which are
integral to the building design;
2. All alternate construction materials must have the same durability as masonry; and
3. The granting of the special exception must not diminish or impair property values
within the neighborhood.
6. An increase in the maximum allowable area or height, or a reduction of the minimum
setback requirements for accessory buildings or structures.
a. Conditions of Approval:
1. No special exception may be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless the building
or structure is to be located on a lot of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet in size
or larger.
2. The Board may grant an increase in building area provided that the total building
area resulting from the approval of the special exception shall not exceed four (4)
percent of the square footage of the lot.
3. The Board may grant an increase in height not to exceed twenty-four (24) feet for
buildings or structures located on lots of one-half (0.5) acre to two (2) acres in size,
and not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet for buildings or structures located on lots of
two (2) acres in size or larger.
4. The Board may grant a reduction in the minimum required setbacks to allow an
accessory building to be located no closer than five (5) feet from the side property
line and seven and one-half (7.5) feet from the rear property line, unless the
accessory building or structure is intended to house or contain livestock, in which
case the setbacks established in Section 7800.B.13 shall apply.
5. To grant a special exception, the Board must find that there will be no negative
impact to the abutting properties.
7. The construction of an accessory dwelling in any A, PR or SF zoning district that does not
comply with Section 7800.B.35.
a. Conditions of Approval:
1. Occupancy of the accessory dwelling shall be limited to domestic servants or
caretakers employed on the premises, temporary guests, or family members of the
owner of the premises. Guests may occupy such dwelling no more than 90
consecutive days in any twelve-month period.
§6300
6300-4
2. An accessory dwelling shall not be rented as an apartment or used as a separate
domicile.
3. No more than one accessory dwelling shall be allowed on any lot or tract.
4. The minimum area of the lot on which a detached accessory dwelling is located shall
be 20,000 square feet. There shall be no minimum lot size for accessory dwellings
attached to the main residential building.
5. The habitable floor area of an accessory dwelling shall not exceed fifty (50) percent
of the habitable floor area of the main residential building, provided that the
combined square footage of the accessory dwelling and the main residential building
shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage allowed by the regulations of the zoning
district in which the property is located.
6. The maximum height of an accessory dwelling shall be thirty-five (35) feet. A
detached accessory dwelling shall be limited to one story; however, it may have a
loft or attic.
7. An accessory dwelling must comply with the same minimum side and rear setback
requirements as the main residential building and must be at least seventy-five (75)
feet from the front property line or behind the rear façade of the main residential
building that is furthest from the street. In no case shall an accessory dwelling be
located forward of the main residential building.
8. No separate driveway approach shall be permitted for an accessory dwelling.
(Ordinance No. 1487, Adopted 7/12/04)
9. An accessory dwelling shall be constructed of the predominant building and roofing
materials used on the main residential building.
10. All utilities must be on the same meter as the main residential building (Ordinance
No. 1487, Adopted 7/12/04)
11. The granting of the special exception does not change the essential character or
appearance of the neighborhood, or diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood.
8. Temporary Batch Plants:
1. The Board of Adjustment may grant a reduction in the minimum 300-foot setback
from any park, school, child care center, or residential structure.
2. The Board may allow a temporary batch plant to be located on the property more
than 120 days until a single project is completed.
3. To grant a special exception, the Board must find that there will be no permanent
negative impact to the surrounding properties.
(Ordinance No. 1415, Adopted 2/10/03)
§6300
6300-5
9. The Construction of an accessory building attached to a main residential building by means
other than a continuous assembly and common attic on single-family residential property.
a. Conditions of Approval:
1. The proposed construction must accommodate architectural features which are
integral to the main residential building design;
2. The attached accessory building and main residential building together shall not
exceed the maximum lot coverage allowed by the regulations of the zoning district
in which the property is located;
3. The attached accessory building shall be constructed of the predominant building
materials used on the main residential building;
4. To grant a special exception, the Board must find that there will be no negative
impact to the abutting properties.
Examples of semi-attached accessory buildings
Semi-attached building without architectural features
integral to the main residential building design—
attachment to house is by a simple breezeway.
Semi-attached building with architectural
features integral to the main residential
building design—attachment to house
features arches, multi-level roofline, and
dormer window.
Ordinance No. 1488, Adopted 7/12/04
§6400
6400-1
Section 6400. Industrial Use Permit.
A. Purpose: To provide for industrial uses that require special consideration in certain
settings, which without specific consideration may have possible adverse impact on
neighboring properties.
B. Permit Required: A building permit or certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any
use which is permitted only by an Industrial Use Permit unless the Industrial Use Permit
has first been approved in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the use has
met all the conditions of approval.
C. Application Procedure: An application for an Industrial Use Permit shall be filed with
the Planning Department. Upon receiving a complete application, the Director of
Planning will submit it to the City Council for public hearing and consideration.
D. Site Plan Requirements: The Site Plan shall provide the following information:
1. A complete signed application as provided by the Planning Department or on the
City’s website at: www.mansfieldtexas.gov
2. The appropriate fee in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by City Council.
3. On a separate 8 ½” X 11” exhibit, provide a metes and bounds description of the
property included in the zoning change request, including the total acreage, signed and
sealed by a registered surveyor.
4. On a separate 24” X 36” or 22” X 34” sheet, drawn at the same scale as the plan, show
the approximate topography of the plan area, all water courses that will remain in a natural
state, 100-year floodway and 100-year floodplain per FEMA and other hydraulic and
hydrologic studies as necessary. Provide two (2) copies.
5. On a separate 24” X 36” or 22” X 34” sheet, drawn at the same scale as the plan,
show proposed and existing water and sanitary sewer locations. Also include the
locations and sizes of private water and sanitary sewer lines. Provide two (2) copies.
6. A separate exhibit and documents indicating the traffic volumes, turning movements,
evaluation of ingress and egress existing and proposed, when required by the City
Engineer.
7. An electronic copy of the plan in accordance with current established policy.
8. Fifteen (15) copies of the plan at 24” X 36” or 22” X 34” drawn at an acceptable
scale indicating all significant features of the proposed development to include:
a. A vicinity map locating the property in relationship to existing major thoroughfares.
b. Title block, preferably in the lower right-hand corner, including the following: “Site
Plan for SUP, name of development, survey and abstract number or recorded
§6400
6400-2
plat information, city, county, state, date of preparation, acreage and number of lots”.
c. Acceptable scale: 1” = 20’, 1” = 40’, 1” = 100’ or as approved.
d. Type size is legible at full scale and when reduced.
e. North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity.
f. Name, address, phone and fax of owner/developer and the firm preparing the plan.
g. A map showing the boundary dimensions.
h. Adjacent or surrounding land uses, zoning, streets, drainage facilities and other
existing or proposed off-site improvements, sufficient to demonstrate the
relationship and compatibility of the site to the surrounding properties, uses and
facilities.
i. The location and size of all streets, alleys, parking lots and parking spaces, loading
areas or other areas to be used for vehicular traffic and the proposed access and
connection to existing or proposed streets adjacent to the plan area. Include a
chart indicating the number of required parking spaces by use, the method of
calculation and the number of proposed parking spaces.
j. The types of surfacing, such as paving (e.g. concrete, brick, turf, etc.) to be used at
the various locations.
k. The location and size of all fire lanes with all curb radii adjacent to the fire lane
labeled. The nearest fire hydrant dimensioned to the property corner and all
proposed fire hydrants.
l. The location, height, setbacks and floor areas for all buildings, the floor area ratio
and the following building details:
(1) Entrance and exits to the building
(2) Architectural renderings or elevations of proposed structures with all
exterior materials for roofs, awnings, walls etc. labeled.
(3) Calculations of the masonry content on each façade and in total for
each building. (Example: Area of front façade = h x 1, percent masonry =
80%)
(4) Distance between buildings and distance from building to property lines.
m. The number, location, and dimensions of the lots.
n. The location of all on-site facilities for liquid waste or method of temporary
storage pending disposal, including existing or proposed septic fields.
§6400
6400-3
o. The location, size and type of each outside facility for waste or trash disposal. If
no facility is shown, provide a note indicating method of disposal and removal.
p. A tree survey locating all protected trees by type, size and species and mitigation plan,
if required by the city’s Natural Resources Management Ordinance. (Refer to the
Tree Preservation Application as found on the city’s website.)
q. A landscape plan showing all landscape setbacks and buffers; parking lot
landscaping; and any additional landscaping proposed. A chart indicating the size,
length and width of the landscape areas, with the required number of plants and the
proposed number of plants should be included on the plan. The landscape plan
may be presented on a separate exhibit on the same sheet size and at the same scale
as the site plan.
r. The location, type, and size of all fences, berms, or screening features.
s. A plan, including elevations, showing location, size, height, orientation and design of
all signs regulated by the city’s sign ordinance.
t. The location, size and type of all pedestrian areas and sidewalks.
u. The location, size, type and purpose of any outside storage or outside display
and method of screening. Indicate the percentage of outside storage as compared
to the building square footage.
v. Phases of development should be shown and labeled. Provide a development
schedule indicating the start and finish date of each phase and improvements, broken
down by use and acreage.
w. When deemed necessary, the City Council may ask for more information during
the review of an Industrial Use Permit. Likewise, they may waive some of the
information if the application is a simple request to deviate from the existing zoning
category on the property.
E. Public Hearings: The notification and public hearing process for an Industrial Use Permit
shall follow those for a Specific Use Permit as set forth in Section 8600.C of this Ordinance.
F. Conditions for Approval: An Industrial Use Permit shall be issued only if all of the
following conditions have been found:
1. That the Industrial Use Permit will be compatible with and not injurious to the use
and enjoyment of other property, nor significantly diminish or impair property values
within the immediate vicinity;
2. That the establishment of the Industrial Use Permit will not impede the normal and
orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant property;
3. That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary supporting facilities
have been or will be provided;
§6400
6400-4
4. The design, location and arrangement of all driveways and parking spaces provides for
the safe and convenient movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic without adversely
affecting the general public or adjacent developments;
5. That adequate nuisance or hazard prevention measures have been or will be taken to
prevent or control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and vibration;
6. That directional lighting will be provided so as not to disturb or adversely affect
neighboring properties; and
7. That there are sufficient landscaping and screening to insure harmony and compatibility
with adjacent property.
G. Additional Conditions:
1. The City Council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance with
the intent of this Ordinance, require additional development standards, operational
conditions and safeguards concerning items such as setbacks, ingress and egress, offstreet
parking and loading arrangements, landscaping and screening, construction of
buildings and uses, term limits, air-quality and sewer pretreatment, security measures,
and federal and state permits that may be important to the welfare and protection of
adjacent property and the community as a whole.
H. Time Limit: An Industrial Use Permit issued under this section shall be valid for a period of
two (2) years from the date of issuance and shall become null and void unless construction
or use is substantially underway during said two-year period, or unless an extension of time
is approved by the City Council.
I. Revocation: An Industrial Use Permit may be revoked or modified, after notice and hearing,
for either of the following reasons:
1. The Industrial Use Permit was obtained or extended by fraud or deception; or
2. That one or more of the conditions imposed by the City Council has not been met or
has been violated.
J. Amendments: The Director of Planning may approve minor variations or revisions from
the original Industrial Use Permit which do not increase density, change traffic patterns, or
result in any increase in external impact on adjacent properties or neighborhoods. The
Director of Planning may refer any request for variation or revision that warrants special
consideration to the City council for its review. If, in the City Council’s determination, the
variation or revision does not constitute a significant change to the original Industrial Use
Permit, no public hearing will be called and the revision will be deemed approved. The City
Council in its sole discretion may deny any request for revision to an Industrial Use Permit.
K. Processing Fee: A processing fee shall be required for the processing of each Industrial
Use Permit request in accordance to the Fee Schedule Ordinance of the City.
L. Limitation of Re-applications. No new application for an Industrial Use Permit shall be
heard for a particular parcel of property if within twelve (12) months prior to the date of said
§6400
6400-5
application either an application was denied by the City Council or an application was
withdrawn after the giving of public notice, and such new application currently under
consideration includes property which was all or a part of the previously denied or
withdrawn case, and the application currently under consideration is for the same or a more
intense use as determined by the City; however, on receipt of written request by the original
applicant stating how conditions have changed substantially in the community since prior
consideration of his proposal so as to justify an earlier review of this matter, the City
Council may waive the mandatory delay period and authorize the acceptance of a new
application.
M. Postponement of Public Hearings at Applicant's Request: A request for postponement
of a scheduled public hearing on an application for Industrial Use Permit shall follow
those for a Specific Use Permit as set forth in Section 8600.F of this Ordinance.
§7100
7100-1
ARTICLE 7. SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS.
Section 7100. Sign Standards.
A. Purpose: To establish regulations and minimum standards which directly relate to the function
of the signs and to the intensity of development of each particular zoning district.
B. Permit Requirements: No sign, unless herein excepted, shall be located, constructed, attached,
or painted until a building permit application has been approved by the Planning Department and
issued by the Development Services Department in accordance with the requirements of this
section.
C. Sign Classifications and Definitions: As used in the Schedule of Sign Standards contained in
Table 7100 D, the following sign construction types and definitions shall apply:
1. Classifications:
a. Wall Sign: A sign which is attached or affixed to the wall of a building or is an integral
part of the wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to and
not more than twelve inches (12") from said wall; providing, however, that electric wall
signs may project not more than eighteen inches (18") from said wall. A wall sign shall
not extend above or beyond the parallel face to which the sign is attached.
b. Projection Sign: A sign which is attached or affixed to a building wall or structure other
than a pole and extends or projects there from a maximum of four (4) feet.
c. Pole Sign: A sign supported by and placed upon not more than two (2) poles or
standards. Extra poles or standards in excess of two (2) may be added with the approval
of the Building Inspector.
d. Directional Sign: A temporary pole or ground sign that directs vehicular traffic. The
sign may display arrows, words, or other symbols to indicate direction to the location of
developments, subdivisions, model homes, garage sales, neighborhood information or
businesses. (Ordinance No. 1586, Adopted 8/28/06)
e. Reader Board Sign: A changeable copy sign with stripes or devices attached to the face
of the sign to hold readily movable letters and numerals. The sign may be internally or
externally illuminated.
f. Ground Sign: A sign which is supported by more than two (2) columns, poles, uprights
or braces in or upon the ground and is not a part of a building.
g. Monument Sign: A freestanding, low profile sign with a solid base; any poles or
supports must be concealed.
h. Unified Development Sign: A freestanding sign that is supported from the grade to the
bottom of the sign with a solid base and is used to identify multiple tenants within a
unified development. (Ordinance No. 1479, Adopted 4/12/04)
2. Definitions:
§7100
7100-2
a. Sign: Any object, device, structure, or part thereof, visible from outdoors, which is used
to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including
words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, banners, flags, fixtures, colors, illumination, or
projected images. Definitions of particular functional and locational types of signs are
listed in this subsection.
b. Advertising Sign: A sign which is a primary use of land (not accessory use) and which
directs attention to a business, product, activity or service which is not conducted, sold,
offered or located on the premises where the sign is located.
c. Agricultural Sign: An accessory sign identifying the farm or ranch on which it is placed
and advertising the produce, crops, animals or poultry raised or quartered thereon.
d. Apartment Name Sign: An accessory sign for the identification of an apartment
building or complex of apartment buildings and located on the premises.
e. Construction Sign: A temporary sign identifying the development on the premises
and/or the property owner, architect, contractor, engineer, landscape architect, decorator
or mortgagee engaged in the design, construction or improvement of the premises on
which the sign is located. A real estate sign shall not be construed as a construction
sign. (Ordinance No. 1570, Adopted April 24, 2006)
f. Development Sign: A temporary sign related to the promotion of new development and
located only on the premises involved in the development. Builder or contractor names
may be displayed on the sign provided that at least 50% of the sign area is devoted
towards displaying the name or promotional information of the development being
advertised.
g. Directory Sign: An accessory sign consisting of building identification and business
names of the individual tenants. Ordinance No. 1479, Adopted 4/12/04)
h. General Business Sign: An accessory sign or graphic device which advertises only
commodities or services offered on the premises where such sign is located and where
such sign is not of the billboard, poster panel or painted bulletin type but is a sign
designed specifically for the location.
i. Institutional Sign: An accessory sign, which provides public interest information and/or
advertisement related to a school, church or similar public or quasi-public institution
located on the same premise where the sign is located.
j. Electronic Message Center (EMC): A sign that utilizes computer generated messages
or some other electronic means of changing copy.
k. Name Plate: An accessory sign showing only the name and/or address of the owner or
occupant of the premises on which it is erected or placed.
l. Real Estate Sign: A temporary accessory sign pertaining to the sale or rental of property
and advertising property only for use for which it is legally zoned.
§7100
7100-3
m. Political Sign: The term "political sign" shall be deemed to mean any sign erected for
the purpose of advertising a political candidate or ballot measure; espousing a political
cause; or expressing a person’s or group’s viewpoint or opinion on a political issue.
n. Temporary Sign: A non-permanent sign which is intended to be displayed for a short
period of time only. The term temporary sign shall include but not be limited to search
lights, banners, bullhorns, pendants, spinners, balloons, streamers or other kinds of wind
signs. Specific permitting and display standards for temporary signs are listed in Section
7100.J.2, Promotional Signage (Ordinance No. 1453, Adopted 10/13/03)
o. Wind Sign: A temporary accessory sign, which achieves movement and thus attracts
attention by action of wind currents.
p. Sign Area: The entire area within a circle, triangle or parallelogram enclosing the
extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character,
together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display
or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed;
excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Where a sign
has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of
the sign, except that where two faces are placed back to back and are at no point more
than two (2) feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one
face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are
of unequal area.
q. Flashing Sign: A sign or part thereof, operated so as to create flashing, change in light
intensity, color or copy or intermittent light impulses more frequent than one every ten
(10) seconds and further provided that Electronic Message Centers as herein above
defined shall not constitute flashing signs. It is further provided that a sign which
creates intermittent light impulses which convey time of day and/or temperature only
shall not constitute a flashing sign.
r. Sign Height: The measurement from the ground level to the highest point of the sign.
Ordinance No. 1479, Adopted 4/12/04)
s. Lighting: As the term is used in Table 7100 D hereof, the illumination of a sign face by
the light source exterior to and not a part of such face or a source of light not exposed to
the eye.
t. Motion: As the term is used in Table 7100 D hereof, the moving or rotating of a sign or
portion thereof, or the giving of the perception of motion, other than a electronic
message center as herein above defined.
u. Required Setback: The distance from the property line, right-of-way line or street curb
of all streets adjacent to the premises on which a sign is located.
v. Sign Structure: Any part of a sign, including the base, supporting columns or braces,
display surface, or any other appendage thereto.
w. Portable Sign: A sign whose principal supporting structure is intended, by design, use
or construction, to be used by resting upon the ground for support and which may be
easily moved or relocated for reuse. Portable signs shall include but not be limited to
§7100
7100-4
signs mounted upon or designed to be mounted upon a trailer, bench, wheeled carrier or
other non-motorized mobile structure, with or without wheels, and A-frame and other
similar signs, resting or leaning on the ground or other structures, but not permanently
attached thereto. (Ordinance No. 1453, Adopted 10/13/03)
x. Kiosk Sign: A free-standing structure located in public rights-of-way that features the
City of Mansfield Identification Panel at the top of each structure and displays
directional information to new homes, Mansfield Independent School District facilities,
and municipal or community events or facilities. (Ordinance No. 1454, Adopted
10/13/03)
y. Sign Panel: An individual sign placard displaying directional information on a kiosk
sign. (Ordinance No. 1454, Adopted 10/13/03)
z. Subdivision Sign: A sign located at the entrance of a subdivision that displays the name
of the subdivision. (Ordinance No. 1479, Adopted 4/12/04)
aa. Neighborhood Information Sign: A temporary sign erected within the boundaries of a
platted residential subdivision at the subdivision entrance or on homeowner’s association
lots for the sole purpose of providing information to property owners concerning events
within the subdivision.
bb. Window Sign: Any sign that is plainly visible from the outside of the building and
located on either the external surface of the window or on or within twenty-five (25)
inches of the internal surface of the window. This definition does not apply to the
display of building addresses, business hours of operation, the logos of accepted credit
cards, “closed” and “open” signs, “for sale”, “for lease”, and similar real estate signs,
and “now hiring” signs.
cc. Human Sign: A sign held by or attached to a human being who stands or walks on the
ground at a business or other location. A human sign includes a person dressed in a
costume for the purpose of advertising or otherwise drawing attention to an individual,
business, commodity, service, activity or product.
dd. Temporary Realtor Open House Directional Sign: A temporary sign used for
directing realtors and potential homebuyers to homes for sale within the City which are
open for public viewing.
ee. Inflatable Sign: A sign made from a non-porous bag or tube of tough, light material,
including fan-blown and lighter-than-air or gas filled inflatable objects that may be
connected with a tether, displaying graphics, symbols or written copy, or a combination
of graphics, symbols and written copy.
ff. Blade Banner Sign: A sign made of non-rigid material such as canvas or vinyl
supported by a single vertical pole or frame mounted on the ground, and shall include a
feather, teardrop, wave or flag sign, or any sign of similar construction and use.
D. Schedules of Sign Standards:
No sign shall be erected, placed, displayed or located except in accordance with the Schedules of
Sign Standards contained in Table 7100D and the provisions of Sections 7100E through 7100K.
§7100
7100-5
TABLE 7100D SCHEDULE OF SIGN STANDARDS
1) PERMANENT SIGNS
TYPE OF SIGN
ZONING DISTRICT
WHERE PERMITTED *
SIGN CLASSIFICATION
PERMITTED
MAXIMUM AREA IN
SQUARE FEET
MAXIMUM HEIGHT IN
FEET
MAXIMUM WIDTH IN
FEET
MINIMUM SETBACK
FROM STREET RIGHTOF-
WAY LINE IN FEET**
MINIMUM SETBACK
FROM SIDE OR REAR
PROPERTY LINE IN
FEET**
MAXIMUM QUANTITY/
MINIMUM
SPACING
LIGHTING
FLASHING
MOTION
ADDITIONAL
REGULATIONS
INSTITUTIONAL ALL DISTRICTS M, W 50 10 10 10 15
ONE PER STREET FRONTAGE
PLUS ONE WALL SIGN ON THE
PRINCIPAL BUILDING
YES NO NO SEE NOTES (2) (6) (7)
(10) & (11)
APARTMENT
NAME MF-1, MF-2 M, W 50 10 10 10 15 ONE PER STREET ENTRANCE YES NO NO SEE NOTES
(2) (3) (4) (7) (10) & (11)
NAME PLATE ALL DISTRICTS P, W 2 N/A NONE N/A N/A NONE NO NO NO SEE NOTE (6)
GENERAL
BUSINESS
C-1, C-2,
C-3, C-4,
I-1, I-2
W NONE N/A SEE NOTE (1) N/A N/A ONE PER STREET FRONTAGE
PER INDIVIDUALLY OWNED
LOT OR TRACT PLUS ONE
WALL SIGN PER TENANT WHO
OCCUPIES SUCH LOT OR
TRACT
YES NO YES SEE SECTION 7100E
M, PR 50 10 10 10 15 YES NO YES SEE NOTES (7) (10) &
(11)
ADVERTISING C-3, I-1, I-2 P, G 600 40 NONE 10 15 SEE SECTION 7100F YES NO YES SEE NOTE (5)
AGRICULTURAL A M, W 32 10 10 10 15 ONE PER STREET FRONTAGE NO NO NO SEE NOTE (10)
SUBDIVISION
ALL DISTRICTS
M, W 32 6 10 N/A N/A
ONE SIGN PER STREET
ENTRANCE TO THE
SUBDIVISION
NO NO NO SEE NOTES (6) & (10)
DIRECTORY OP M, W 32 6 10 10 15 ONE PER STREET FRONTAGE YES NO NO SEE NOTES (10) & (11)
WINDOW
ALL NONRESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
N/A
SEE
NOTE
(12)
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES NO NO TEMPORARY
ELECTRONIC
MESSAGE
CENTER/READER
BOARD SIGN
C-2, C-3,
I-1, I-2 M LIMITED TO 50% OF THE SIGN AREA SEE NOTES (8) (9) (10)
& (11)
NOTES:
(1) Width not to exceed 75% of building or store front.
(2) Permitted on face of fence or wall in required front setback.
(3) For building identification only.
(4) Not applicable to rental single-family or two-family dwellings.
(5) Specific use permit required.
(6) Signs permitted in residential districts are also permitted in the PR district.
(7) On lots with direct frontage along U.S. 287 and S.H. 360 monument signs may have a maximum height of 15 feet and a maximum sign area of 75 square feet. The sign must be located along
the highway frontage of the lot.
(8) Electronic Message Centers/Reader Boards may be used by institutional uses in any zoning district.
(9) Signs for theaters advertising current and coming attractions shall be exempt from the percentage restriction on Electronic Message Center and Reader Board signs.
(10) See section 7100.K.13 for further regulations on monument signs.
(11) No freestanding sign may be located within 400 feet of another freestanding sign on the same lot or tract, measured along the street right-of-way lines.
*Signs in any Historic Landmark District must comply with the provisions and approval procedures shown in Section 5400 of this ordinance.
(12) The total sign area of window sign(s) shall not obscure more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total window area on each façade. Doors shall not contain signage for any message other than
business name, hours of operation and payment method, and such signage shall not exceed four (4) square feet in total area.
**Where the width of an easement is greater than the required setback, the sign must be located outside of the easement.
LEGEND:
M – MONUMENT SIGN
P – POLE SIGN
W – WALL SIGN
G – GROUND SIGN
PR– PROJECTION
SIGN
§7100
7100-6
TABLE 7100D SCHEDULE OF SIGN STANDARDS
2) TEMPORARY SIGNS TYPE OF SIGN
ZONING DISTRICT
WHERE PERMITTED
SIGN CLASSIFICATION
PERMITTED
MAXIMUM AREA IN
SQUARE FEET
MAXIMUM HEIGHT IN
FEET
MAXIMUM WIDTH IN
FEET
MINIMUM FRONT
SETBACK IN FEET
MINIMUM SIDE
SETBACK IN FEET
MAXIMUM QUANTITY/
MINIMUM
SPACING
LIGHTING
FLASHING
MOTION
MAXIMUM DURATION
ADDITIONAL
REGULATIONS
REAL ESTATE
ALL
RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
P, W, G 16 6 NONE 10 15 ONE PER 60’ OF STREET
FRONTAGE;
MAXIMUM TWO PER
STREET FRONTAGE
NO NO NO TEMPORARY-UNTIL
SALE OR RENTAL
OF PROPERTY
SEE NOTES
ALL NON- (1) (4)&(11)
RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
P, W, G 32 12 NONE 10 15 YES NO NO
CONSTRUCTION
ALL
RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
P, W, G 32 12 NONE 10 15
ONE PER SITE OR STREET
FRONTAGE
YES NO NO
TEMPORARY-UNTIL
CONSTRUCTION IS
COMPLETED
SEE NOTE (4)
& (5)
ALL NONRESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
P, W, G 32 12 NONE 10 15
TEMPORARY-UNTIL
CERTIFICATE OF
OCCUPANCY IS
ISSUED, OR UNTIL
MULTI-TENANT
DEVELOPMENTS ARE
75% COMPLETE
SEE NOTE (5)
& (6)
DEVELOPMENT ALL DISTRICTS P, G 100 20 NONE 10 15 MAXIMUM TWO PER
DEVELOPMENT YES NO NO TEMPORARY FOR
DURATION OF PERMIT
SEE NOTES
(2) (3) & (4)
WINDOW ALL NONRESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
N/A SEE
NOTE (9) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES NO NO TEMPORARY SEE NOTE (9)
NEIGHBORHOOD
INFORMATION
ALL
RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
P, G 4 3 NONE NONE NONE
TWO SIGNS PER STREET
ENTRANCE TO A
RESIDENTIAL
SUBDIVISION; MAXIMUM
OF THREE SIGNS ON ANY
HOMEOWNER’S
ASSOCIATION LOT WITH
A MNIMUM 50’ DISTANCE
BETWEEN SIGNS
NO NO NO
TEMPORARY
SEE NOTES
(4), (7) & (8)
POLITICAL
ALL DISTRICTS ALL 36 8 NONE NONE NONE
N/A
NO NO NO TEMPORARY
SEE NOTE
(10)
NOTES:
(1) Size limited to 4 square feet on occupied residential property.
(2) For new residential subdivisions only.
(3) Must setback at least 50 feet from the nearest single family home.
(4) Signs permitted in residential districts are also permitted in the PR district.
(5) For developments larger than 25 acres, one additional sign may be added for each 25 acres
(6) See Section 7100J.14 for further regulations on non-residential construction signs
(7) See Section 7100.H for further regulations on neighborhood information signs
(8) Properties in a PR district that are occupied by a residential use or subdivision shall be treated the same as it is in a residential district
(9) The total sign area of window sign(s) shall not obscure more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total window area on each façade
(10) These regulations only pertain to political signs on private property; see Section 7100J.7 for regulations pertaining to political signs on public property, easement or right-of-way
(11) See Section 7100.K.16 for further regulations on real estate signs
LEGEND:
M – MONUMENT SIGN
P – POLE SIGN
W – WALL SIGN
G – GROUND SIGN
PR – PROJECTION SIGN
§7100
7100-7
E. Special Sign Standards for Multi-Tenant Office or Retail Strip Buildings
One (1) additional wall sign may be permitted for a business at the corner or end of a multitenant
office or retail strip building subject to the following regulations:
1. The additional wall sign shall be located on the side façade of the multi-tenant office or retail
strip building. The side façade shall be defined as any façade that is at an angle of more than
45 degrees to the front façade. The front façade shall be defined as the façade on which
most of the tenant spaces have their main entrances.
2. The additional wall sign shall not be allowed on the following:
a. on the rear façade of a multi-tenant office or retail strip building;
b. on any facade that is parallel or nearly parallel to the front façade of the multi-tenant
office or retail strip building; or
c. on any façade that faces an abutting residential zoning district or an abutting PR zoning
district occupied by single-family homes.
3. The location of an additional wall sign on an irregular or non-traditional shape building shall
require the approval of the Zoning Administrator for compliance with the intent of this
section of the Zoning Ordinance.
4. The size of the additional wall sign shall not exceed the size of the primary sign on the front
façade of the tenant space; and in no case shall the additional wall sign exceed 75% of the
width of the wall or store front on which the additional wall sign is placed.
5. The additional wall sign shall be located on the tenant space served by the sign.
6. The additional wall sign shall only advertise a single tenant.
7. The additional wall sign shall not co-exist with any other signs on the same building façade
that advertise other tenants or the multi-tenant office or retail strip building.
F. Special Standards for Advertising Signs:
1. Advertising sign structures erected in the C-3, I-l and I-2 Districts shall be placed a
minimum of four hundred feet (400') apart when erected so as to face the same direction. No
such structure shall be located within four hundred (400) feet of a residential zoning district
boundary line if the face of the sign is placed at an angle of less than ninety (90) degrees to
the district boundary line, nor shall such structure be located within two hundred (200) feet
of a general business sign. (i.e. pole sign or ground sign).
2. Advertising sign structures erected in the C-3, I-1 and I-2 Districts placed within six hundred
(600) feet of the right-of-way of a state or federally controlled highway or freeway shall be
permitted when in compliance with the following:
a. Placed a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any interchange of intersection.
§7100
7100-8
b. Placed a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any other advertising sign on the
same side of the highway or freeway and two hundred (200) feet from any general
business sign, pole sign or wall sign (on premise).
c. Placed no closer than five hundred (500) feet to any park, forest, playground or scenic
area as designated by a governmental agency having and exercising such authority,
which is adjacent to any highway.
3. Review of Advertising Signs: Prior to the issuance of a sign permit by the Development
Services Department, a sign permit application for an advertising sign shall be submitted,
reviewed and approved for a Specific Use Permit by both the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council. Additionally, applicants proposing advertising signs
shall obtain an Outdoor Advertising License from the Texas Department of Transportation,
prior to the issuance of any sign permits for advertising signs in compliance with the Federal
Highway Beautification Act of 1965.
4. Before the issuance of a sign permit, an Outdoor Advertising License shall be obtained for
an off-site development sign from the Texas Department of Transportation by the sign owner
in compliance with the Federal Highway Beautification Act of 1965.
G. Special Sign Standards for Unified Development Signs:
1. Eligible Properties: A unified development sign may be erected in the C-2, C-3, I-1, or I-2
District for a unified development consisting of two (2) or more abutting platted lots that are
used for a retail center or a combination of retail/commercial establishments.
2. Criteria for Approval: In determining whether to approve multiple lots as a unified
development, the Director of Planning must find that the following criteria have been met:
a. All areas to be included in a unified development must be part of a clearly defined,
comprehensively planned retail/commercial development. Attributes of a unified
development include:
i. Common name identification to the public;
ii. Shared driveway access and parking; and
iii. Physical layout of the development results in a cohesive development
b. A unified development shall consist of at least ten (10) acres.
c. At least one of the lots being included in a unified development must have frontage on
U.S. 287 or State Highway 360.
d. The area shall not be the combination of disparate premises joined solely for the purpose
of erecting a unified development sign.
e. Developments that are comprised of a single retail/commercial establishment shall not
be considered as a unified development.
§7100
7100-9
f. Developments that are comprised of predominantly office or industrial uses shall not be
considered as a unified development.
g. There shall be no existing or future pole signs or ground signs within the unified
development.
3. Maximum Sign Area: The maximum area of a unified development sign shall be based on
the size of the unified development as depicted in the table below:
Minimum Size of
Unified Development
Maximum Area of Unified
Development Sign
10 to 19.99 acres 100 sq. ft.
20 to 29.99 acres 200 sq. ft.
30 acres or more 300 sq. ft.
In addition to the maximum sign area listed above, an additional sign area of fifty (50)
square feet shall be allowed on a unified development sign to display the name of the unified
development.
4. Maximum Height: The maximum height of a unified development sign shall be thirty-five
(35) feet.
5. Minimum Setback: The minimum setback for a unified development sign shall be as
follows:
a. Ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line.
b. Fifteen (15) feet from the side or rear lot line.
c. Where the width of an easement is greater than the required setback, the sign must be
located outside of the easement.
6. Maximum Quantity: Only one unified development sign shall be permitted per unified
development. Deviation from this requirement shall be accomplished only through an
approved Planned Development.
7. Co-existence with Other Signs:
a. A unified development sign may be permitted on the same lot as a monument sign and
may co-exist with other monument signs in the unified development provided that it
shall not be closer than thirty (30) feet to any monument signs in the unified
development.
b. There must be no pole or ground signs within the unified development. After the
approval of a master sign plan and before the construction of a unified development
sign, all existing pole or ground signs within a unified development must be removed.
8. Master Sign Plan: Before obtaining a permit and erecting a unified development sign, the
applicant shall submit a master sign plan to the Planning Department for review. A non§
7100
7100-10
refundable administration fee of $250.00 shall accompany the plan submittal. The master
sign plan shall contain the following information:
a. Name of the unified development;
b. Site plan showing lots, street rights-of-way, driveway access, parking, and physical
layout of the development;
c. Description of the unified development demonstrating compliance with the criteria of
approval shown in Section 7100.G.2;
d. The location, size, height and type of all proposed and existing signs in the unified
development;
e. Any existing pole or ground signs that must be removed and the consent of the sign
owner for the removal; and
f. Any other information required by the Director of Planning to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this section.
9. Approval and Appeal Process:
a. The Director of Planning shall be responsible for the approval of a proposed master sign
plan and unified development sign.
b. Any decision made by the Director may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
c. The Director may defer the approval of a unified development, a master sign plan or a
unified development sign to the Planning and Zoning Commission for any reason.
d. Any decision made by the Planning and Zoning Commission may be appealed to the
City Council.
10. Sign Permit Issuance: A permit for a unified development sign shall not be issued until
construction starts on the first building within the unified development.
11. Miscellaneous Provisions:
a. The unified development sign shall be located outside of any visibility sight triangle and
access drives.
b. The support base and structure for a unified development sign shall be constructed of
masonry material.
c. Electrical equipment, irrigation equipment, controller, writing or conduit on a unified
development sign shall be concealed within the unified development sign base or sign
structure, except that emergency power disconnects may be located on the exterior of the
sign provided that they are located on the part of the sign opposite and furthest from the
street.
§7100
7100-11
d. The bottom of the unified development sign shall rest directly on the support base with
no space in between.
e. The base of the unified development sign shall have the same or greater width as the
sign.
f. Only those properties and businesses within the boundaries of the unified development
shall be included on the unified development sign.
g. A unified development sign shall not be considered as an off-site sign even if some of
the properties and businesses included on the sign are not located on the lot where the
sign is erected.
Ordinance No. 1479, Adopted 4/12/04
H. Special Sign Standards for Neighborhood Information Signs: Neighborhood Information
Signs may be erected within the boundaries of a platted residential subdivision without a permit
provided the following regulations are met:
1. No neighborhood information signs shall be erected for a period of time exceeding fourteen
(14) days.
2. All neighborhood information signs must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the
event displayed on the sign.
3. No signs advertising the private sale of goods, services or real estate shall be allowed.
Without limiting the foregoing, signs for garage sale events are not neighborhood
information signs and must be permitted under Section 7100.J.3.
4. No neighborhood information signs shall be located:
a. in City right-of-way or in the public median of any City right-of-way;
b. within a visibility triangle or in such a way as to block or obscure from vision any traffic
or safety sign or signal;
c. within fifty (50) feet from another neighborhood information sign when located on the
same lot; or
d. on private property without the permission of the property owner.
5. No more than two neighborhood information signs are permitted at each subdivision
entrance.
6. No more than three neighborhood information signs are permitted on each homeowner’s
association lot.
7. No neighborhood information sign shall exceed the following dimensions:
a. Height – thirty-six (36) inches, as measured from the ground level.
§7100
7100-12
b. Size of sign – four (4 square feet.
8. Neighborhood information signs shall be made of durable, weatherproof material. Dirty,
torn, faded, dented or otherwise poorly maintained signs shall be removed.
9. Neighborhood information signs may display the neighborhood event name, date, time and
contact information plus directional arrows, words or other symbols to indicate directions.
10. No lighting shall be allowed.
11. This section does not grant any right of access to or use of subdivision entries. Property
owner permission is required before erecting any neighborhood information signs. If the
property owner objects to the existence of the sign, the sign shall not be allowed on the lot of
the property owner objecting to the sign. Also, the City may, notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions, designate certain area as no sign zones for the purpose of protecting the public’s
health, safety and welfare.
12. Neighborhood information signs found in violation of any of the above requirements may be
impounded by the City and, at its option, disposed of.
(Ordinance No. 1586, Adopted 8/28/06)
I. Special Sign Standards for Electronic Message Center:
1. Electronic Message Centers (EMC) shall be equipped with a sensor or other device that
automatically determines the ambient illumination and shall be programmed to automatically
dim to within 0.3 footcandles over ambient illumination at night as measured per the EMC
Illumination Measurement Criteria of the International Sign Association.
2. The applicant receiving a sign permit for an EMC shall provide a report demonstrating
compliance with the requirements in Paragraph 1 above from a third party consultant prior to
final inspection approval of the EMC.
3. When a complaint is received, the owner or operator of an EMC shall, if required by the
City, provide an updated report to verify compliance with the requirements in Paragraph 1
above within five (5) business days.
J. General Provisions:
1. No sign other than kiosk signs, political signs, traffic and safety signs or signals, street name
signs, and other signs erected by a public officer shall be erected in the right-of-way of any
public or private street or alley. (Ordinance No. 1479, Adopted 4/12/04)
2. The provisions herein contained are applicable to location, size, use and placement of signs
and shall otherwise be considered supplementary to other City of Mansfield codes and
Ordinance pertaining to the erection, maintenance and operation of signs in the City, except
where the provisions contained herein are in direct conflict with the provisions of such codes
and such ordinances, in which event, conflicting provisions of such codes and ordinances are
hereby repealed.
§7100
7100-13
3. Signs shall be permitted for all Nonconforming uses in accordance with the regulations and
standards specified in this Ordinance. Any sign used in conjunction with a Nonconforming
use of land or buildings, if such sign is not in accordance with the provisions of this section,
shall be deemed a separate Nonconforming use of land, and shall be subject to the provisions
of Sections 7100.L and 7700 of this ordinance. Ordinance No. 1479, Adopted 4/12/04)
4. No revolving beam or beacon of light resembling any emergency vehicle light shall be
permitted to be erected as part of any sign display in any zoning district.
5. Obstruction to View: No sign shall be erected, constructed, or maintained so as to constitute
an obstruction of the vision or sight of motor vehicle drivers or pedestrians at any street
intersection, street crossing or point of traffic concentration. A sign in the direct line of
vision or sight of any motor vehicle driver or pedestrian from any point in a traffic lane
within fifty (50) feet of any traffic control sign shall not be permitted.
6. All signs of any nature whatsoever, whether temporary or permanent, when situated within
fifteen feet (15') of the curb or edge of any street shall either:
a. Have a clear height of eight and one-half feet (8-1/2') from the ground to the bottom of
the sign; or
b. Have a height of not more than two and one-half feet (2-1/2') measured from the top of
curb to the top of the sign; provided, that wall signs may be permitted on a wall which
complies with setback and height requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
7. No high intensity light shall be permitted as part of a sign display visible from an adjacent
street in any zoning district; except signs giving public service information such as but not
limited to date or temperature may be permitted. Lighting shall be shielded to prevent beams
or rays from being directed at any portion of a traveled roadway or an occupied residential
area and shall not be of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair vision.
8. Sign regulations for any development placed in a Planned Development District shall be
established by the Planned Development ordinance and shall specify the maximum height,
setback, general types and area of such signs permitted.
9. All signs must be constructed from substantial materials, free from defects, using accepted
practices of good workmanship. All parts of a painted sign shall be painted with two (2)
coats of good quality water-resistant paint. All signs are subject to all requirements
contained in the City of Mansfield's Code of Ordinances and are subject to inspections
during and after construction.
10. All signs shall be maintained in good appearance and safe structural condition. The general
area in the vicinity of any sign shall be kept free and clear of sign materials, weeds, debris,
trash and litter. Maintenance or replacement of sign copy or structural repairs shall be
conducted in a manner to protect adjacent properties from debris and litter. Torn or ragged
signs shall be repaired, covered or removed.
11. All signs with the exception of permitted off-premise signs shall pertain only to the principle
use, service rendered, or product sold on the premises on which the sign is located and
contain only information pertaining to either the name of the occupant, or the kind of
business, or the brand name of the principle commodity being sold, but not including
§7100
7100-14
information on subsidiary products or services, nor information on anything or persons not
located on the premises.
12. Notwithstanding any provision in this ordinance to the contrary, any sign authorized in this
ordinance is allowed to contain a political or noncommercial message in lieu of any other
message.
13. A permanent sign on an awning shall be permitted in place of a wall sign, provided that the
sign is affixed flat to the surface of the awning. No awning sign shall be allowed in addition
to a wall sign and an awning sign and wall sign shall not be allowed on the same facade.
(Ordinance No. 1479, Adopted 4/12/04)
14. No sign other than kiosk signs and signs erected by a City of Mansfield official shall display
the registered logo of the City of Mansfield.
K. Sign Permitted in all Zoning Districts: The following regulations shall apply in addition to the
requirements of Sections 7100.D and 7100.I. Signs listed in this section are permitted in all
zoning districts and shall not require permits unless required herein and shall not be counted
when calculating the quantity of signs and the total allowable sign area, provided, that such sign
shall conform with all other applicable regulations:
1. Subdivision Signs: Reserved for future use (Ordinance No. 1479, Adopted 4/12/04)
2. Promotional Signage: Promotional signage may be displayed for grand openings, special
events, sales and promotions, provided that the following regulations are met:
a. Before erecting or placing a promotional signage display, a permit must be obtained as
required in Section 7100.M. Application for permit must be made on a form provided
by the Building Inspection Department. The application must be accompanied by a
sketch or diagram showing the exact location of the display, any message being
displayed, plus the configuration and boundary of the premises where the display will be
erected or placed. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must
be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions.
b. Each business, institution or occupied tenant space shall be allowed one (1) promotional
signage display three (3) times per calendar year, for a maximum period of fourteen (14)
days per display. A minimum of ninety (90) days shall be required between each
promotional signage permit. The fourteen (14) day display period will commence on
the first day promotional signage is displayed. In the case of a special promotion for a
grand opening event, a display period may be extended to twenty-one (21) days
provided that the promotion begins within the first three (3) months of the date of
issuance of a certificate of occupancy or business license and the grand opening is
limited to the address noted on the certificate or license.
c. All signage used for a promotional signage display must be removed at the end of the
display period.
d. Promotional signage may include any temporary sign allowed by this Ordinance
e. Promotional signage shall be contained on the property of the applicant and shall not
extend into the City right-of-way. In the case of a multi-tenant building, promotional
§7100
7100-15
signage must be placed directly in front of the lease or tenant space being advertised,
and shall not be placed in front of any other lease or tenant space. Signage shall not be
located in any sight visibility triangle or visibility easement, nor shall any combustible
materials be placed in contact with lighted signs or any electrical fixtures.
f. Promotional signage shall not display information on any activity, event or person not
located on the premises where the signage is permitted.
g. Torn or severely weathered promotional signage shall not be permitted.
h. Inflatable signs may be used in a promotional signage display subject to the following
regulations:
1. Inflatable signs shall be ground-mounted.
2. Inflatable signs shall not be placed in a slight visibility triangle or in a manner that
obstructs visibility necessary for safe traffic maneuvering.
3. Inflatable signs must be set back from any property line, parking lot, sidewalk, or
fire lane by a minimum distance equal to five (5) feet plus the height of the
inflatable sign.
4. Inflatable signs shall not be placed under any overhead utility lines.
5. Inflatable signs shall be kept in good repair and remain securely attached in such a
manner to withstand wind loads.
i. The quantity of signs in a promotional signage display shall be limited to a maximum of
one (1) inflatable sign or three (3) of any other type of temporary sign per display.
j. A separate permit is required for each fourteen (14) day period that promotional signage
will be used.
3. Garage Sale Signs: Signs pertaining to garage sales shall comply with the
regulations in the Code of Ordinances.
4. Public Information Signs: Signs of a public or non-commercial nature, which shall include
but not be limited to community service information signs, help wanted signs, public transit
service signs, public utility information signs, safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs,
signs indicating scenic or historical points of interests, and all signs erected by a public
officer in the performance of a public duty may be erected in all zoning districts without a
permit. All public information signs except signs erected by a public officer shall not exceed
an area of thirty two (32) square feet.
5. Flags:
a. Official flags of government jurisdiction, flags indicating weather conditions and flags
which are emblems of on-premise business firms and enterprises, religious, charitable,
public and nonprofit organizations may be erected in all zoning districts without a
permit. No more than one (1) United States flag, one (1) State of Texas flag, and one (1)
emblematic flag shall be permitted on a single property at the same time.
§7100
7100-16
b. No single flag shall exceed fifty (50) square feet in area.
c. Flagpoles are accessory structures that are incidental to a principal use or building and
shall not be permitted on vacant property without a principal use or building.
d. The maximum height of a flagpole in any zoning district shall be thirty-five (35) feet.
e. A flagpole may be located anywhere on a premise provided that the flagpole shall not be
located closer than ten (10) feet to any property line or within any easement.
6. Plaques: Commemorative plaques by historical agencies recognized by the City, County or
the State of Texas may be erected in all zoning districts without a permit.
7. Political Signs: Political signs may be erected on private property with the consent of the
property owner, subject to the provisions in Table 7100D, Schedule of Sign Standards.
Political signs may also be erected on any public property, easement or right-of-way subject
to the following conditions:
a. Political signs shall be made of durable, weatherproof material. Dirty, torn, faded,
dented or otherwise poorly maintained political signs shall be removed.
b. Political signs shall not be illuminated or have any moving elements.
c. Political signs shall not be located:
1. in any city park or city facility;
2. in any easement or right-of-way where the adjacent to any city park or city facility;
3. in any easement or right-of-way where the adjacent property owner objects to the
presence of the political sign;
4. in any drainage easement or right-of-way;
5. in any street median;
6. in any state or federal right-of-way;
d. A political sign for any candidate, political, action or issue shall be located at least one
hundred (100) feet from another political sign for the same candidate, political action or
issue except when such signs are located at opposite corners of a street intersection.
e. Political signs for a candidate, political action or issue for which a resident of Mansfield
is not entitled to vote are prohibited.
f. The restrictions in subsection d. and e. do not apply to political signs at a designated
voting location and in the public easement or right-of-way immediately adjacent to the
designated voting location.
g. Political signs for an official election shall be removed within fourteen (14) days after
the election or election runoff.
§7100
7100-17
8. Sign on Vehicles: Signs on trucks, buses or passenger vehicles which are used in the normal
conduct of business which are bearing current license plates, which are traveling or lawfully
parked upon public right-of-ways, or any other premises for a period not exceeding four
hours or for a longer period where the primary purpose of such parking is not the display of
any sign.
9. Kiosk Signs:
a. The City Council may, by duly executed license agreement, grant the exclusive right to
design, erect and maintain kiosk signs within Mansfield.
b. Kiosk signs must be designed and constructed according to the specifications contained
in the aforementioned license agreement.
c. Prior to erecting any kiosk sign, the licensee shall submit a sign location map to the
Director of Planning and Director of Public Works for approval.
d. Kiosk sign installations shall include breakaway design features as required for traffic
signs in the street right-of-way.
e. Advertisement or price information is prohibited on kiosk signs.
f. No signs, pennants, flags or other devices for visual attention or other appurtenances
shall be attached to kiosk signs.
g. Kiosk signs shall not be illuminated.
h. Individual sign panels on kiosk signs shall have a uniform design and color.
i. Kiosk signs shall not interfere with the use of sidewalks, walkways, bike and hiking
trails; shall not obstruct the visibility of motorists, pedestrians or traffic control signs;
shall not be installed in the immediate vicinity of street intersections; and shall comply
with the requirements of the twenty-five (25) foot visibility triangle or other visibility
easements.
10. Holiday or Festive Decorations: String lights or strip lighting and banner for recognized
holiday or festive decorations may be erected in all zoning districts without a permit for a
period not to exceed 60 days.
11. Signs not visible: All signs not visible from off the property may be erected in all zoning
districts without a permit.
12. On-premise Informational Signs: Non-commercial signage, such as “Enter,” “Exit,” “One-
Way,” or “Drive-Thru,” signs, that are used to direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic may be
placed on the premises served by the signs provided that the following regulations are met:
a. On-premise informational signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and three (3)
feet in height.
b. On-premise informational signs shall not display any commercial message, including
business name, graphic or logo.
§7100
7100-18
c. On-premise informational signage may be located anywhere on the premises, except in
city right-of-way, easements or visibility triangles or visibility easements.
13. Monument Signs
a. Before erecting or placing a monument sign, a permit must be obtained as required in
Section 7100.M. Application for permit must be made on a form provided by the
Development Services Department. The application must be accompanied by a sketch
or diagram showing the exact location of the monument sign, any message being
displayed, plus the configuration and boundary of the premises where the sign will be
erected or placed. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must
be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions.
b. A monument sign shall have a solid base at least two (2) feet tall and the base shall have
the same or greater width as the sign. The height of the sign base shall be included when
measuring the sign height.
c. Electrical equipment, irrigation equipment, controller, wiring or conduit on a monument
sign shall be concealed within the monument sign base or sign structure, except that
emergency power disconnects may be located on the exterior of the sign provided that
they are located on the part of the sign opposite and furthest from the street.
d. Except for the sign area, monument signs shall be constructed of masonry material to
match the primary building material. If the primary building is not masonry, the sign
shall be constructed of brick, stone or split-face cement masonry units.
e. The street address number of the building being served by a monument sign shall be
displayed on the sign where it is legible from the street. The street address number shall
not be included in the calculation of the signage area.
14. Non-residential Construction Signs
a. The provisions of this section shall apply to development on any property owned and
used by the City or the Mansfield Independent School District, regardless of zoning.
b. For developments larger than ten (10) acres with frontage along U.S. 287, S.H. 360 or a
4-lane thoroughfare or larger, as shown on the City’s Master Thoroughfare Plan,
construction signs may have a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet and a maximum sign
area of sixty-four (64) square feet.
c. When multiple signs are permitted, the allowable sign area for each sign may be
aggregated into one (1) or more larger signs. No single sign shall have a sign area
greater than one hundred thirty-two (132) feet.
d. Permits shall be valid for a period not longer than thirty-six (36) months. If display
exceeds this time period, the applicant must re-apply for a new permit and pay all
applicable fees.
15. Temporary Realtor Open House Directional Signs
§7100
7100-19
a. Temporary realtor open house directional signs must be no larger than twenty-four
(24) inches by eighteen (18) inches in size (three square feet) and cannot be higher than
three (3) feet above grade. Sign must no be placed closer than thirty (30) feet
from an intersection, measured from the edge of the right-of-way line along any street,
and must not be placed in the median. Signs must not be placed any closer than
three (3) feet from the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement.
b. These signs must not obstruct the vision of traffic on the roadway. Any signs
determined to be in a location that causes an immediate hazard to public safety must be
immediately removed by the city.
c. Signs must only direct traffic to properties located within the city limits.
d. The sign must contain the words “open” or “open house”, as well as a directional arrow.
The signs must contain the name of the realty company, the name of the listing agent
and a current phone number (cell phone) in a font size and manner that is smaller and
less prominent than the “open”, “open house” and directional information.
e. No more than four (4) of these signs shall be posted for each address, including a sign on
the property at which the open house is being held.
f. These signs must be kept in good repair. These signs must be made of metal and/or
plastic. These signs must not be made of wood or paper. The signs must be selfsupporting
and placed into the ground. The signs must not be placed on a utility pole,
streetlight pole, sign pole, fence, tree, or any other manmade or natural feature. The
signs must not be illuminated.
g. Placement of these signs shall only be allowed on Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays and City
holidays, and shall be removed no later than two (2) hours after the open house event.
For the purpose of the subsection, a city holiday is any day recognized as an official
holiday by the City of Mansfield. The list of official holidays observed by the City of
Mansfield shall be maintained for public viewing on the City’s official website.
16. Real estate signs shall comply with the following regulations:
a. Real estate signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) days following the close of a sale
of the property.
b. Real estate signs shall be maintained in good condition. Dull or peeling paint or damage
to the material used for such signs shall be sufficient cause for the City to require repair
or replacement or impoundment.
L. Prohibited Signs: It shall be unlawful to erect, place, attach, paint, write stamp, paste or
maintain:
1. Any sign, including a human sign, which is not included under the types of signs permitted
in Section 7100.D or in Section 7100.J.
2. Any sign, with the exception of approved advertising signs, political signs and kiosk signs,
which advertises or publicizes goods, services, establishments, persons and activities not
located on the premises upon which the sign is maintained.
§7100
7100-20
3. Any search lights, bullhorns, pendants, spinners, balloons, banners, streamers, flags or other
wind signs, any string lights or strip lighting except as permitted uses under the provisions of
Section 7100.
4. Any portable sign, or directional sign which is not included under the types of signs
permitted in Section 7100.D through Section 7100.J.
5. Any signs, advertisement, poster, placard or handbill upon any lamp post, electric light,
railway, telephone or telegraph pole, fire hydrant, shade tree, stone cliff or other natural
object, or boxing covering public utilities, or on any bridge, pavement, sidewalk or
crosswalk.
6. Any sign, advertisement, poster or other matter on privately or publicly owned property
without having obtained the written permission of the owner, agents, or occupants of the
premises, and without having complied with other provisions of this Ordinance pertaining
thereto.
7. Any sign or sign structure which constitutes a hazard to public safety or health.
8. Any sign which obstructs free ingress or egress from a fire escape, door window or other
required exit way.
9. Any sign which interferes with any opening required for ventilation.
10. Any sign which makes use of words such as stop, look, one way, danger, yield or any other
similar words, phrases, symbols, lights or characters in such a manner as to interfere with,
mislead or confuse the vehicular traffic.
11. Any structure or part thereof, or any device or representation attached to, painted on, or
represented on a building, fence, pole or other structure, which is used as or in the nature of
an announcement, direction, advertisement, or other attention getting purposes, and which is
not originally designed or intended to be a sign.
12. Any wall sign except a name plate sign, on the rear façade of a building or on any façade
that is parallel or nearly parallel to the front façade of a building. For the purpose of this
provision, a front façade shall be defined as the face on which a business, tenant or occupant
has the main entrance.
M. Continuation and Discontinuation of Nonconforming Signs: All non-conforming permanent
signs, legally existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, may continue to exist, provided
that no non-conforming sign:
1. shall be changed to another Nonconforming sign.
2. shall be structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign or so as to significantly and
materially change the shape, size, type or design of the sign.
3. shall be re-established after damage or destruction if the estimated expense of reconstruction
exceeds 50% of the reproduction cost.
And further, provided that signs which are Nonconforming because they have flashing lights
§7100
7100-21
or intermittent illumination shall be given ninety 90 days from the date of the adoption of
this Ordinance to be brought into compliance with this Ordinance.
And further, provided that signs which are specifically prohibited in Section 7100.K shall be
discontinued or removed by the owners of said signs within one hundred eighty (180) days
from the date of the adoption of this Ordinance.
N. Application for Permit: The application for a sign permit shall be made by the owner or tenant
of the property on which the sign is to be located, or his authorized agent, or a sign contractor
licensed by the City. Such applications shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the
Development Services Department and shall be signed by the applicant. Every application for
approval shall be accompanied by a plan or plans drawn to scale and including:
1. The dimensions of the sign and, where applicable, the dimensions of the wall surface of the
building to which it is to be attached.
2. The dimensions of the sign's supporting members.
3. The proposed height of the sign.
4. The proposed location of the sign in relation to the face of the building, in front of which or
on which it is to be erected.
5. The proposed location of the sign in relation to the boundaries of the lot upon which it is to
be situated. This requirement shall not apply to wall signs.
6. Any other electrical, structural and architectural data as applicable. Upon obtaining a
building permit, the owner or his authorized agent shall sign a statement indemnifying and
holding the City harmless for any damages which may result from the placement of said sign
including attorney fees and all costs of litigation.
O. Permit Required, Exceptions: No permit shall be required for the erection or alteration of the
following:
1. Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet of display surface on a building, stating merely the
name and occupation of an occupant, or other community service information.
2. Non-illuminated and non-electrical signs not exceeding 32 square feet used solely to
advertise the sale or rental of the premises on which such signs are located.
3. Signs or markers used by a public utility holding a franchise from the City for community
service information.
4. Temporary non-commercial signs or banners authorized by the Director of Planning for a
period not to exceed 30 days.
5. The changing of the advertising copy or message of a reader board sign or a painted or
printed sign. Electric signs shall not be included in this exception.
6. The repainting, non-electrical repair or cleaning maintenance of a sign.
§7100
7100-22
P. Approval of a Certificate of Occupancy for each new business, facility or office desiring to
continue using an existing sign shall be contingent upon approval of a sign permit.
Q. Permit Fees: A permit fee shall be paid to the Development Services Department for each sign
permit issued as set forth in the Mansfield Fee Schedule Ordinance.
R. Removal of Signs:
1. Signs found in violation of any of the requirements of this section shall be impounded and
disposed of.
2. The Inspector shall cause to be removed any sign that endangers the public safety, such as
an abandoned, dangerous, or materially, electrically, or structurally defective sign, or a
sign requiring a permit for which no permit has been issued. The Inspector shall provide
notice which shall describe the sign and specify the violation involved and which shall
state that, if the sign is not removed or the violation is not corrected within ten 10 days, the
sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions in this section.
3. Any time periods provided in this section shall be deemed to commence on the date of the
notice.
4. Notwithstanding the above, in situations when the Inspector determines that a dangerous
or defective sign may cause imminent peril to life or property, he may order the immediate
removal of such sign without notice.
5. Any person who relocates, removes or defaces any lawfully erected sign shall be subject
to the penalties as prescribed by this ordinance.
6. Notwithstanding the above, illegal banners or temporary signs may be impounded by the
City after notice is attempted to the owner or party responsible for the sign.
7. In addition to fines and charges of removal and storage of violating signs, the City may
cause the removal or disposal of same found on any public property, easement or right-ofway
without notice to the owner of the sign.
§7200
7200-1
Section 7200. Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards.
A. Purpose: To assure that adequate off-street parking and loading areas are provided with the
construction, alteration, remodeling or change of use of any building or change in the use of
land.
B. General Provisions:
1. Any person establishing an off-street parking facility or applying for a building permit for
construction, reconstruction, or alteration of the use of any building, other than a single or
two family residence, shall submit to the building inspector three copies of a plot plan
designating the number, dimensions, and location of off-street parking spaces and curb cuts
to be provided.
2. The plot plan shall be submitted to the Planning Department by the Building Inspector, and
the Director of Planning and Development shall approve or disapprove the off-street parking
facilities and curb cuts.
3. Required off-street parking for residential uses in any PR, Single-Family Residential, 2F,
MF-1 and MF-2 Districts shall be provided on the lot or tract occupied by the use being
served. For non-residential uses in the aforementioned districts and for permitted uses in all
other zoning districts, except the C-4, Downtown Business District, off-street parking shall
be provided on the lot or tract occupied by the use being served or upon a tract dedicated to
parking use by an instrument filed for record and consolidated under a single certificate of
occupancy with the main use. Such off-premise parking facility shall be located in the same
or less restrictive zoning district as the use being served, and all or part of such facility shall
be located within a distance not to exceed three hundred (300) feet to an entrance to the
building or use being served, measured along the shortest available pedestrian route with
public access.
4. Any existing building or use that is enlarged, structurally altered, or remodeled to the extent
of increasing or changing the use by more than fifty (50) percent as it existed at the effective
date of this Ordinance shall be accompanied by off-street parking for the entire building or
use in accordance with the off-street parking regulations set forth in this section. When the
enlargement, structural alteration, or remodeling is to the extent that the use is not increased
or changed by more than fifty (50) percent, additional off-street parking shall only be
required for the increased or changed floor area or use.
5. Existing parking spaces may not be used to satisfy additional off-street parking requirements
of this chapter unless the existing spaces proposed for use in meeting the requirements of
this Ordinance exceed the number required for the building or use for which the existing
spaces are associated. All parking associated with a building or use from which the spaces
are drawn must meet all requirements of this ordinance.
6. Head-in Parking: The following provisions shall apply to all head-in parking adjacent to a
public thoroughfare:
a. Head-in parking spaces so situated that the maneuverings of a vehicle in entering or
leaving such spaces is done on a public street or within public right-of-way shall not be
classified as off-street parking in computing any parking requirements herein.
§7200
7200-2
b. Except in the C-4, Downtown Business District, the construction of head-in parking as
described in subparagraph (a) hereof shall be prohibited hereafter. All such head-in
parking facilities in existence at the time of the enactment of this section are hereby
declared to be a Nonconforming use of land subject to the provisions of Article VIII of
this ordinance.
c. Off-Street parking facility related to single or two family dwellings and zero lot line
dwellings shall be exempted from this section.
7. No off-street parking facility shall be located, either in whole or in part, in a public street or
sidewalk, parkway, alley or other public right-of-way.
8. No off-street parking or loading space shall be located, either in whole or in part, within any
fire lane required by ordinance of the City. Tandem parking is prohibited unless specifically
authorized by this ordinance.
9. No required off-street parking facility or loading space shall be used for sales, non-vehicular
storage, repair or service activities.
10. Lighting facilities, if provided, shall be so arranged as to be reflected away from motorists
traveling in an adjacent street and from property zoned or used for residential purposes.
11. No pavement shall be permitted in the City rights-of-way or in any required setback where
parking facilities are prohibited unless such pavement is intended for use as a drive approach
approved for access to property or such pavement is required to meet minimum City
sidewalk standards. (Ordinance No. 1447, Adopted 10/13/03)
12. For all multi-family and non-residential uses, parking spaces shall be striped or otherwise
clearly designated on the parking facility surface, and shall not include any fire lane or other
area necessary for aisles or maneuvering of vehicles.
13. All facilities used for parking, loading, unloading, driveways and all other vehicular access
shall have a pavement constructed of concrete and comply with all applicable Fire Code and
City Engineering Standards; except those for; a) a single-family residential property that is
required to provide a fire apparatus access driveway, and b) uses in the C-4 Downtown
Business District may be constructed of alternative equivalent strength material approved by
the Director of Planning, provided that the drive approach from the street be constructed of
concrete. The pavement shall always be maintained in good condition and repair.
(Ordinance No. 1447, Adopted 10/13/03)
14. All dumpster pads and loading area in front of dumpsters shall be constructed with at least
six (6) inches of concrete pavement on a scarified and compacted sub grade. The concrete
pavement shall be reinforced with three-eighth (3/8) inch steel bars spaced eighteen (18)
inches on center each way or six by six (6 x 6), #6 gauge welded wire fabric. An approved
paving fiber may be substituted for the reinforcing steel. Chairs shall be used to support
reinforcement. (Ordinance No. 1447, Adopted 10/13/03)
15. In determining the required number of parking spaces, fractional spaces shall be counted to
the nearest whole space. Parking spaces located in buildings need for repair garages or auto
laundry stalls shall not be counted as meeting the required minimum parking.
§7200
7200-3
16. Where several different property uses will share a joint parking area, the off-street parking
requirements shall be the composite or sum of the requirements for each type of use and no
off-street parking space provided for one type of use or building shall be included in
calculation of off-street parking requirements for any other uses of buildings.
17. Floor-Area of structure devoted to off-street parking of vehicles shall be excluded in
computing the floor area for off-street parking requirements.
18. In all districts, the required off-street parking for all permitted uses, except institutional uses
and uses permitted in the C-4, Downtown Business District, shall be available to customers,
employees, tenants, clients and occupants of a use on a prearranged basis, other than an
hourly or fee basis, as free or contract parking.
19. No vehicle shall be parked on a lot or tract occupied by a single-family dwelling, two-family
dwelling or townhouse, unless the area upon which such vehicle is parked is paved with a
concrete surface. Except for the expansion joints, the paved concrete surface must be
constructed as a solid, continuous span of concrete from edge to edge of the paved parking
area.. However, a paved parking area shall not be required for a vehicle parked in a side or
rear yard enclosed by an opaque screening fence at least six (6) feet in height or complies
with Section 7200.B.21 below.
20. Additional Residential Driveway Standards:
a. The maximum width of a paved driveway devoted to off-street parking in the front yard
or side yard with street frontage of a lot occupied by a single-family dwelling shall not
exceed twenty (20) feet plus a paved extension into the yard between the driveway and
the nearest property line, not to exceed twelve (12) feet in width. Except for expansion
joints, the paved extension must be constructed as a solid, continuous span of concrete
from the edge of the driveway to the furthest edge of the paved extension.
b. An existing lawful nonconforming driveway that does not conform with the
requirements in Paragraph 19 above may be extended into the yard between the
driveway and the nearest property line, not to exceed twelve (12) feet in width, using the
same materials as the existing driveway (e.g. gravel, paver, etc.). However, an existing
parking area of entirely grass cannot be extended unless the extension conforms with the
pavement requirements in Sub-paragraph (A) above.
c. Circular driveways shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in width.
d. All residential drive approaches shall be constructed to the width and construction
standards established by the City Engineering Department.
21. No vehicle shall be parked on a lot or tract occupied by a single-family dwelling, two-family
dwelling or townhouse when such vehicle is greater than 25 feet in overall length (including
tongue), unless one of the following conditions are met:
a. The vehicle is parked in a building, either attached to the main residential building or
detached, completely enclosed by three walls and a roof, and the open side of the
building shall have an opaque gate at least six feet in height. A building used to meet
the foregoing requirement shall comply with all applicable area, height and setback
requirements for attached or detached accessory buildings; or
§7200
7200-4
b. The vehicle is parked behind the rearmost façade of the residence and is more than fifty
(50) feet away from any property line. The pavement and screening requirements of this
section shall not apply to a vehicle parked in accordance with this provision; or
c. The vehicle is parked at least seventy-five (75) feet from the front property line and at
least ten (10) feet from side and rear property lines. No setback will be required from a
side or rear property line where the abutting property is zoned for non-residential uses.
The pavement and screening requirements of this section shall not apply to a vehicle
parked in accordance with this provision.
22. No vehicle rated to have a carrying capacity exceeding one ton shall be parked on a lot or
tract occupied by a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or townhouse, unless such
vehicle is being actively loaded or unloaded.
23. Vehicles parked between a dwelling and the street shall comply with the following:
a. No Other Vehicle shall be parked between the front property line of a lot or tract
occupied by a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or townhouse and the portion
of the front façade of the residence, including features such as entryway, front porch,
side-entry or J-swing garage, or any structure protruding from the residence that is
furthest from the street.
b. No Other Vehicle shall be parked on a driveway between the side property line of a
corner lot or tract occupied by a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or
townhouse and the façade of the residence closest to the street, unless the vehicle is
parked behind an opaque fence and gate at least six (6) feet in height.
24. No vehicle shall be parked on a lot or tract occupied by a single-family dwelling, two-family
dwelling or townhouse when such vehicle is situated on blocks, jacks or anything other than
the wheels or mechanism that are originally designed to equip such vehicles for traveling
purposes.
25. Non-Conforming Status and Exemptions:
a. Any lawful unpaved driveway that was in existence prior to November 10, 1997, shall
be exempted from the paving requirements of this section.
b. Any Other Vehicle greater than twenty-five (25) feet in length that was lawfully parked
on a lot or tract occupied by a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or townhouse
prior to November 10, 1997, shall be exempted from the provisions of Section
7200.B.21 above provided that such vehicles are not located over a public side walk, or
within a public right-of-way or visibility triangle as defined in Section 7300.I.36.
c. Any Other Vehicle that was lawfully parked between the front property line of a lot or
tract occupied by a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or townhouse and the
façade of the residence that is closest to the street prior to March 28, 2006, shall be
exempted from the provisions of Section 7200.B.23 above, provided that such vehicles
are not located over a public side walk, or within a public right-of-way or visibility
triangle as defined in Section 7300.I.36.
§7200
7200-5
d. A vehicle lawfully parked under the provisions of Paragraph (b) or (c) above may be
replaced by another vehicle of the same type and same dimensions by the same owner or
occupant of the property; provided, however, that the exemptions permitted under
Paragraphs (b) and (c) above shall automatically terminate upon a change in ownership
or occupancy of a property occupied by a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling
or townhouse upon which the vehicle is parked.
e. Any Other Vehicle parked on a lot or tract, occupied by a single-family dwelling, twofamily
dwelling or townhouse, that is at least one-half (1/2) acre in size and fronts on an
asphalt roadway with bar ditches shall be exempt from Section 7200.B.21, regarding
maximum vehicle length and from the provisions of Section 7200.B.21, Sub-Paragraphs
b and c regarding the minimum setbacks for vehicles from the side and rear property
lines, provided that such vehicles are parked behind the portion of the front façade of the
residence that is furthest from the street and are parked on pavement or are screened
from view of the street or adjacent residential properties by an opaque screening fence at
least six (6) feet in height.
26. The parking of any vehicles that are prohibited by the aforementioned regulations and not
exempted by the above provisions shall be discontinued or removed by the owners of the
property upon which the vehicles are parked. No non-conforming use status shall be
acquired by such vehicles.
27. It is not a violation of the aforementioned regulations if 1) a recreational vehicle is parked on
a driveway or other lawful parking area for up to seventy-two (72) hours before or after a
trip for loading, unloading or maintenance so long as such vehicle is parked in compliance
with all relevant parking regulations; or 2) a recreational vehicle of a visiting out-of-town
guest is parked at a residence for up to seventy-two (72) hours. Upon the application of the
resident, the City Manager or his designee may approve a reasonable extension of time for
the parking of a visiting guest’s recreational vehicle based on special circumstances or undue
hardship.
28. The minimum off-street parking requirement for a single-family dwelling located in the PR
District shall be the same as that imposed on a similar structure in any Single-Family
Residential District.
(See Section 7200B, Parking Group Table)
§7200
7200-6
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§7200
7200-7
SECTION 7200B PARKING GROUP TABLE
Use
Number
of Parking
Spaces
Required
For each
Additional
Requirements
1. RESIDENTIAL
a. Single-Family Dwelling 2 Dwelling unit
b. Two-Family Dwelling 2 Dwelling unit
c. Townhouse 2 Dwelling unit
d. Garage Apartment 1 Dwelling unit
e. Apartment or Multi-family
Dwelling
2 Dwelling unit for first 50
units; thereafter 1.75 parking
spaces for each unit
f. Boarding or Rooming House 1 Rooming unit
g. Hotel, Motel or Tourist Court 1 Guest room or residential unit
up to 100 units then 0.75 per
unit over 100; 50% of these
spaces may be counted to
satisfy the parking
requirements of accessory
uses
h. Manufactured Home or
Mobile Home
2 Lot, plot, tract or stand
i. Private Dormitory 1 Two occupants for designed
occupants
j. Zero-lot-line Dwelling 2 Dwelling unit
2. INSTITUTIONAL
a. Community or Welfare
Center
1 200 sq. ft. of floor area
b. School
i) Elementary
ii) Junior High
iii) Senior High
iv) Trade/Vocational
1
1
1
1
20 students
18 students
1.75 students
Student
c. College or University 1 4 day students
§7200
7200-8
SECTION 7200B PARKING GROUP TABLE
Use
Number
of Parking
Spaces
Required
For each
Additional
Requirements
d. Public Assembly Hall with
fixed seating
1 4 seats
e. Public Assembly Hall without
fixed seating
1 100 sq. ft. of floor area
f. Church 1 4 seats in sanctuary or
auditorium
g. Kindergarten, Day Nursery or
Child Care Center
1 8 pupils
h. Hospital–acute or chronic
care
1 1½ beds
i. Hospital–alcoholic, narcotic,
psychiatric patients
1
1
2 employees or attendant,
plus
10 residents
j. Age Restricted Senior Living
Facility
1½ Dwelling unit
k. Library or Museum 1 300 sq. ft. of public area
l. Fraternity or Sorority 1 200 sq. ft. of floor area
m. Student Religious Center 1 250 sq. ft. of floor area
n. Nursing or Assisted Living
Facility
1 6 beds
o. Mortuary or Funeral Chapel 1 4 seats in chapel
p. Labor Union 1 300 sq. ft. of floor area
3. RECREATIONAL, SPECIAL ENTERTAINMENT
a. Theater 1 4 seats
b. Bowling Alley 4 Lane
c. Pool halls, Coin-machine
Arcades, Other Commercial
Amusements (indoor)
1 100 sq. ft. of floor area
§7200
7200-9
SECTION 7200B PARKING GROUP TABLE
Use
Number
of Parking
Spaces
Required
For each
Additional
Requirements
d. Commercial Amusements
(outdoors)
1 600 sq. ft. of site area
exclusive of building
e. Ballpark, Stadium 1 8 seats
f. Lodge, Fraternal
Organization
1 200 sq. ft. of floor area
g. Golf Course Minimum of 30 spaces
h. Driving Range or Miniature
Golf
1 Space for each driving tee
4. PERSONAL SERVICE AND RETAIL
a. Personal Service Shop 1 200 sq. ft. of floor area
b. Retail Store or Shops (Inside) 1 250 sq. ft. of floor area for the
first 3,000 sq. ft.; thereafter
one (1) space for each
additional 300 sq. ft.
c. Furniture Sales, Appliance
Sales and Repair
1 400 sq. ft. of floor area
d. Open Retail Sales 1 600 sq. ft. of site area
exclusive of buildings
e. Coin-operated or
Self-service Laundry or Dry
Cleaning
1 3 washing machines
5. FOODS AND BEVERAGE SERVICES
a. Eating Place (inside), eating
only; no drive-through
service
1 100 sq. ft. of floor area Minimum of 12
spaces
b. Eating Place with drivethrough
service, Bar, Night
Club, and Private Club
1 75 sq. ft. of floor area Minimum of 4
spaces; for drivethrough
window,
see Section
7800.B.36 for
stacking
requirements
§7200
7200-10
SECTION 7200B PARKING GROUP TABLE
6. BUSINESS SERVICES
a. Bank 1 300 sq. ft. of floor area
b. Savings & Loan or Similar
Institution
1 400 sq. ft. of floor area
c. Medical, Dental Clinic
or Office
1 150 sq. ft. of floor area Minimum of 5
spaces
d. Other Office,
Business or Professional
1 300 sq. ft. of floor area Minimum of 5
spaces
7. AUTOMOTIVE AND EQUIPMENT
a. Service Station, including
incidental car wash
1 200 sq. ft. of floor area Minimum of 4
spaces
b. Motor Vehicle Repair,
Garage or Shop (indoors)
1 500 sq. ft. of floor area Minimum of 5
spaces
c. Motor Vehicle Parts &
Accessory Sales (indoors)
1 200 sq. ft. of floor area
d. Motor Vehicle Parts &
Accessory Sales (outdoors)
1 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area
e. Vehicle or Machinery Sales
(indoor)
1 500 sq. ft. of floor area
f. Vehicle or Machinery Sales
(outdoors)
1 5000 sq. ft. of floor area
g. Self Service Car Wash 2 tandem
spaces
Wash Bay
Machine Car Wash 1 150 sq. ft. of floor area 2/3 of the
minimum spaces
shall be tandem
spaces for cars
awaiting wash or
vacuum
§7200
7200-11
SECTION 7200B PARKING GROUP TABLE
8. STORAGE, WHOLESALE AND MANUFACTURING
a. Brick or Lumber Yard or
Similar Area
1 1,000 sq. ft. of site area
b. Open Storage of Sand,
Gravel, or Petroleum
1 2,000 sq. ft. of site area
c. Warehouse & Enclosed
Storage
1
1
3,000 sq. ft. of floor area plus
300 sq. ft. of office area, if
any
d. Outside Storage 1 5,000 sq. ft. of site area used
for outside storage
e. Commercial or Wholesale
Operations
1
4
1,000 sq. ft. of floor area or
for each 5 employees on
largest shift, whichever is
greater
f. Manufacturing Operations 1
4
1,000 sq. ft. of floor area or
for each 5 employees on
largest shift, whichever is
greater
g. Mini-Warehouse 1 300 sq. ft. for manager’s
office or quarters
§7200
7200-12
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§7200
7200-13
29. Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards: The number of off-street parking spaces required
for each building or use shall be determined by reference to the following table of parking
groups. Parking groups are identified for each building or use in Section 4400 B. For any
use not listed, or where the listed regulations are not applicable in the judgment of the
Director of Planning and Development, the parking requirements shall be determined by the
Director of Planning and Development. Computations of required parking spaces by the
Director of Planning and Development shall be final.
30. The design and dimensions of off-street parking areas shall be in accordance with the
following table of minimum dimensions. Minimum stall widths shall be nine (9) feet, except
for residential and all day office parking which may utilize stalls eight and one-half (8-1/2)
feet in width, provided that minimum aisle widths are increased by one (1) foot. In addition,
the dimensions of up to twenty (20) percent of the total number of off-street parking spaces
may be reduced to eight (8) feet in width and sixteen (16) feet in depth to accommodate
compact automobiles. All dimensions below are in feet.
Angles (Degrees) 0 30 45 60 90
Stall, Parallel to Aisle 23.0 18.0 12.7 10.4 9.0
Stall, Perpendicular to Aisle 9.0 16.5 19.0 20.0 18.0
Aisle Width, One-Way 12.0 12.0 12.0 16.0 24.0
Aisle Width, Two Way 22.0 22.0 22.0 24.0 24.0
Cross Aisle, One-Way 11.0 11.0 11.0 11.0 11.0
Cross Aisle, Two-Way 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0
31. Off-street parking spaces shall be clearly marked according to the stall layout on file in the
Development Services Department.
32. Parking spaces abutting on adjoining property line or street right-of-way shall be provided
with wheel guards or bumper guards so located that no part of a normally parked vehicle will
extend beyond the property line. When wheel guards are used, they shall be centered 2.5
feet from the property line for 90 degree parking, 2.3 feet for 60 degree parking, and 2.0 feet
for 45 degree and 30 degree parking.
33. Approval of the parking area layout and design of all off-street parking areas shall be by the
Director of Planning and Development. The Director of Planning and Development shall
determine that spaces provided are usable, and that the circulation pattern of the area is
adequate.
34. Buildings and land uses within the C-4, Downtown Business District shall be exempt from
requirements to provide off-street parking; provided that existing parking spaces shall be
preserved and; provided that when off-street parking is furnished, it shall be approved by the
Director of Planning and Development
35. Pedestrian access to buildings shall be provided from rights-of-way and parking areas by
means of a pathway leading to at least one public entrance. Such pathway shall be cleared of
all obstructions related to construction activity prior to the opening of the building to the
general public.
C. Special Off-Street Parking Provisions
§7200
7200-14
1. Required off-street parking space may be located behind the minimum required front yard in
any 2F, MF-1 or MF-2 District.
2. Required off-street parking space may be located in the minimum required front yard in any
PR, A or Single-Family Residential District.
3. A11 required off-street parking spaces shall be located completely behind the property line
of any district classification provided in this Ordinance.
4. In all non-residential district, surface parking may extend to the front property line except as
prohibited by other sections of this Ordinance.
D. Handicapped Parking Regulations
1. Where curbs exist along pedestrian pathway, as between a parking lot surface and sidewalk
surface, inclined curb approaches or curb cuts having a gradient of not more than one (1)
foot in twelve (12) feet and width of not less than four (4) feet shall be provided for access
by wheelchairs. The maximum allowable slope of an accessible pathway for disabled
individuals shall not exceed 1:20 or 5% gradient.
2. A parking lot servicing each entrance pathway shall have a number of level parking spaces,
as set forth in the following table:
Parking Spaces For The Disabled
Required Number of
Total Space in Lot Reserved Spaces
Up to 50 1
51 to 100 2
over 100 3% of total
3. Location: Parking spaces for disabled individuals, both employee and visitor, should be the
spaces within the lot, closest to an accessible building entrance, and be connected to this
entrance by an accessible path. Such parking spaces shall not include any fire lane aisles or
other maneuvering areas for vehicles.
4. Parking spaces for individuals with physical disabilities shall be 96" wide with a 60" wide
access aisle. Access aisles may be shared by two accessible parking spaces.
5. Access aisles shall be marked to prevent vehicle parking within their limits.
6. The maximum allowable slope of an access aisle shall be 1:50.
7. Access aisles shall have a smooth transitions with adjoining walkways, either by joining at a
common level or by use of curb ramps at maximum allowable slope of 1:12.
8. The minimum clear width of pathways adjacent to parking spaces shall not be reduced by
vehicle overhang. Wheelstops, railings, billiards, or other devices, shall be provided, to
insure clear width.
§7200
7200-15
9. Identification: Accessible parking spaces shall be designed as reserved for the handicapped
through display of identification signs. Each such sign must display a profile of a
wheelchair with occupant and at least the words "Handicapped Parking" and be placed so
that it will not be obscured by parked vehicles. The signs shall conform to the standard size,
weight, and length as set forth in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
10. Care in planning should be exercised so that individuals in wheelchairs and individuals using
braces and crutches are not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked cars.
E. Bonus for Landscaping of Off-Street Parking Facilities. The minimum off-street parking
requirements shall be reduced up to a maximum of ten (10) percent of the requirement for those
parking facilities designed to accommodate twenty (20) or more vehicles where a percent of the
total parking area has been retained and developed as landscaped open space area. The percent of
the landscaped open space area shall determine the maximum percent reduction, which will be
permitted in the total number of off-street parking spaces.
F. Off-Street Loading Regulations.
1. The owner and the occupier of any property upon which a business is located shall provide
loading and unloading areas of sufficient number and facility to accommodate on such
business premises all vehicles that will be reasonably expected to simultaneously deliver or
receive materials or merchandise, and of sufficient size to accommodate all types of vehicles
that will be reasonable expected to engage in such loading or unloading activities.
2. Any person desiring a building permit for the construction, alteration, or change of use of the
land or any business building or structure shall submit a plot plan to the Building Official
designating the number, dimensions and locations of all loading areas and all proposed
avenues of ingress and egress to the property from adjacent public thoroughfares. The
Building Official shall not issue such permit if it is determined that the proposed loading and
unloading facilities will present a direct or indirect hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
3. Required off-street loading facilities may be adjacent to a public alley or private service
drive, or may consist of a berth within a structure.
4. No portion of a loading facility may extend into a public right-of-way or into an off-street
parking facility elsewhere herein required.
5. The off-street loading spaces or truck berths shall provide maneuvering areas on site to
prevent any blockage of public right-of-way.
6. Buildings and land uses within the C-4, Downtown Business District shall be exempt from
the off-street loading requirements of this Ordinance, unless an owner or occupier of
business property elects to provide off-street loading facilities, in which event, such facilities
shall be approved as provided in these regulations.
7200-16
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§7300
7300-1
Section 7300. Landscaping and Screening Requirements
A. Purpose: To promote safety, to protect the character and stability of residential, commercial,
institutional and industrial areas, to conserve the value of land and buildings of surrounding
properties and neighborhoods, to foster a pedestrian environment, and to enhance the aesthetic
and visual image of the community.
B. Non-conformity: Existing landscaping and screening that was lawful on or before May 12,
2005, but which does not conform to the regulations of this ordinance after its passage, shall be
lawful non-conforming in regards to landscaping and screening.
C. Exemptions: Except as stated elsewhere, all residentially zoned properties in a preliminary or
final plat approved before May 12, 2005, shall be exempt from the requirements of Section
7300. This exemption does not apply to schools, churches or government facilities on
residentially zoned properties.
D. Scope: The standards and criteria contained in Section 7300 are the minimum standards for all
new development. Any area within a Planned Development District or Overlay District
containing landscaping standards shall be regulated by the standards of the Planned
Development District or Overlay District. The provisions of this section shall be administered
and enforced by the Landscape Administrator of the City of Mansfield. All construction
proposals, landscaping, screening and fencing shall be shown on a Landscape Plan as required
by this section and in compliance with the Natural Resources Management Ordinance.
E. New Development: For the purpose of this ordinance, new development shall include any new
construction on a vacant lot; or any new construction that expands or enlarges an existing lawful
nonconforming use. Any expansion or enlargement of a lawful nonconforming use shall
upgrade landscaping and screening on the site to meet all applicable regulations of Section 7300,
to the extent practical. However, it is not the intent of this Section to require the removal of
existing permanent improvements such as buildings, screening walls, retaining walls, parking
lots or other pavement in order to meet the requirements of this Section. Additionally, where
open space exists and plantings are required, plantings shall be provided unless in the opinion of
the Landscape Administrator, the plantings are deemed impractical. The Landscape
Administrator may waive the landscape requirements on a case-by-case basis if unique
circumstances exist on the property that make application of these regulations unduly
burdensome on the applicant. These regulations may be waived only if there will be no adverse
impact on current or future development and will have no adverse impact on the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
F. Permits: Prior to the issuance of a building, paving or construction permit for any development
other than those in the PR, SF, 2F or MH Zoning Districts, a landscape plan prepared by a
Registered Landscape Architect shall be submitted along with the applicable permit to the
approving department for review. The Landscape Administrator may waive the requirement for
the Registered Landscape Architect for projects involving enlarging or altering an existing
development or sites under one (1) acre. Until the Landscape Administrator approves a
landscape plan, no permits shall be issued for building, paving, or construction. Prior to the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any building or structure, all screening and
landscaping shall be in place in accordance with the landscape plan.
G. Enforcement: If at any time after the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or a business
license, the installed landscaping or irrigation does not conform to the landscape requirements at
§7300
7300-2
the time of building permit issuance, the City will issue notice to the property owner, tenant or
agent, stating the violation and describing the action required to comply with this section. If the
landscaping is not installed or replaced as directed, the property owner, tenant, or agent shall be
in violation of this Section.
H. Security: Landscaping should not impede natural surveillance of property or create blind spots
or hiding spots. The basic concepts of Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design
(CPTED) should be used when laying out a site or planning for trees, shrubs, lighting, and
fencing. The Landscape Administrator may consider alternatives to landscape plantings and
plant locations when security issues are presented.
I. General Standards: The following criteria and standards shall apply to all landscaping,
landscape materials, and installation, whether intended for residential or non-residential
development:
1. Development should be sensitive to its natural surroundings. The natural contours should be
followed to the greatest extent possible to minimize grading. Graded slopes should be
rounded and contoured to blend with the terrain.
2. Develop attractive landscaping by incorporating the following criteria:
a. Reduce clutter of little plants and disorganized planting.
b. Establish patterns/spacing of trees to provide a visual rhythm, linear edge, and
organization.
c. Use a limited range of tree species to provide a unified image and cohesive character for
comprehensive developments.
d. Use specialty-landscaping themes to help distinguish special areas/developments.
e. Use landscaping selectively to soften harsh appearance of some buildings and parking
lots at sidewalks edge.
3. No parking or equipment is permitted in any buffer yard, street landscape setback or any
landscaped medians, islands or areas. Decorative fences and walls may be considered as part
of the landscaping if coordinated as part of the overall landscape plan as long as they do not
overtake the plantings.
4. Signs and sidewalks are permitted in buffer yards, street landscape setback and landscape
medians, islands or areas in compliance with all other aspects of the Zoning Ordinance.
Landscaping shall be situated to prevent interference with signage; likewise ground or
monument signage shall be incorporated into the landscape design to ensure compatibility.
5. No portion of the required landscape setback shall be located within the street right-of-way.
6. Non-living landscaping materials such as wood chips and mulch should be used in, around,
and under trees, shrubs, and other plants. Rock, crushed granite and gravel may be
considered landscape materials if approved by the Landscape Administrator as part of a
comprehensive design theme, meeting aesthetics and functional criteria.
§7300
7300-3
7. Curbing or other protective devices or barriers shall be installed to protect landscape buffer
strips and street landscape setbacks from vehicular encroachment. In order to accommodate
drainage, curbing does not have to be continuous. No automobile or other type of vehicle
shall be driven on any landscape buffer strip or street landscape setback
8. Landscaped medians or islands with raised curbs shall be used to define parking lot
entrances; the ends of all parking aisles; the location and pattern of primary internal access
driveways; and to provide pedestrian refuge areas and walkways.
9. Plant materials shall conform to the standards of the Recommended Plant List in Sub-section
7300.BB.
10. During the months of June through August, only containerized trees may be planted, unless
the Landscape Administrator authorizes an alternative.
11. Required trees are encouraged to be placed along the south and west sides of any residential
property to increase energy efficiency.
12. Grass seed, sod and other materials shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious
pests and insects.
13. Ground shall be prepared in a manner consistent with accepted planting procedures prior to
the installation of sod, grass seed or other materials.
14. In all zoning districts except the PR, SF, 2F and MH Zoning Districts, plastic, rubber or nondurable
edging shall be prohibited. Concrete, metal and other durable edging shall be
provided between planting beds and other landscaped areas.
15. Ornamental trees shall have three trunks or canes with a minimum caliper of one (1) inch as
measured six (6) inches above grade at time of planting.
16. Ornamental trees shall have a minimum crown spread of fifteen (15) feet at maturity.
Ornamental trees having a mature crown spread of less than fifteen (15) feet may be
substituted by grouping the trees to create the equivalent crown spread of fifteen (15) feet.
17. Canopy trees shall be a minimum caliper of three and one half (3.5) inches as measured six
(6) inches above grade and seven (7) feet in height at time of planting.
18. Canopy trees shall have a minimum crown spread of twenty-five (25) feet at maturity.
19. Non-dwarf variety shrubs shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in height measured above
grade at time of planting. Dwarf variety shrubs shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height
measured above grade at time of planting.
20. Hedges required by this section shall be planted and maintained to form a continuous,
unbroken, solid visual screen of three (3) feet in height measured above grade within
eighteen (18) months of planting. The design of the plantings may meander or curve within
the required landscape setback or buffer yard.
21. Landscaping, except required grass and low ground cover, shall not be located closer than
two (2) feet from the edge of any parking space.
§7300
7300-4
22. Evergreen vines not intended as ground cover shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height
measured above grade at time of planting.
23. Grass areas shall be sodded, plugged, sprigged, hydro-mulched, or seeded, except that solid
sod shall be used on slopes and in swales or when necessary to prevent erosion. Grass areas
shall be established with complete coverage within a six-month (6) period from planting, and
shall be re-established, if necessary, to ensure grass coverage of all areas.
24. Grass or ground cover planted in the street landscape setback shall extend to the street
pavement or curb.
25. Ground cover used in-lieu-of grass shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished
appearance and reasonable completed coverage within one (1) year of planting.
26. All landscaped areas shall be irrigated in accordance with the requirements of this section.
Natural areas or areas identified as “no disturbance zones” need not be irrigated.
27. Earthen berms with small vertical differentials may have side slopes not to exceed three-toone
(3 feet of horizontal distance for each 1 foot of height). Earthen berms with larger
vertical differentials shall be coordinated with the City Engineer for appropriate slope
criteria. All berms shall contain necessary drainage provisions and be approved by the City
Engineer.
28. The City has final approval for the placement of all trees. With the exception of street trees,
trees shall be planted as far away from public utility lines as possible while still within the
required landscape area, unless approved by the Landscape Administrator and City Engineer.
If approved, alternative-planting methods, such as the use of root barriers, may be required.
29. Where overhead utilities exist or are planned, ornamental trees may be required instead of
large canopy trees, at a replacement density of three ornamental trees for each canopy tree.
No tree which has a mature height of twenty-five (25) feet or greater shall be planted
beneath an existing or proposed overhead utility line.
30. Landscaping may be situated on or within a public utility or drainage easement provided that
the plantings or improvements shall first be approved by city staff before installation, and
that any public utility, including the city, shall have the right to remove and keep removed
all or part of any plantings or improvements which may endanger or interfere with its
respective systems within said easement and shall not be liable for damages or replacement
of such growths or improvements.
31. For mature trees overhanging or adjacent to streets, fire lanes or other access ways, a
minimum fourteen (14) foot vertical clearance shall be maintained.
32. For mature trees overhanging or adjacent to walkways and paths, a minimum nine (9) foot
vertical clearance shall be maintained.
33. The property owner shall be responsible for mowing and maintenance of berms.
34. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy and live-growing condition at all times.
The following Landscaping Maintenance Note shall be placed on each landscape plan:
“Landscaping Maintenance: The property owner, tenant or agent, shall be responsible for
§7300
7300-5
the maintenance of all required landscaping in a healthy, neat, orderly and live-growing
condition at all times. This shall include mowing, edging, pruning, fertilizing, irrigation,
weeding, and other such activities common to the maintenance of landscaping. Landscaped
areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds and other such materials not a part of the
landscaping. Plant materials that die shall be replaced with plant materials of similar
variety and size.”
35. Obstruction Prohibited: No fence, screen, free standing wall or other visual barrier shall be
so located or placed that it obstructs the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching any
street, alley or drive intersection. A visual barrier shall be deemed as any fence, wall hedge,
shrubbery, etc., higher than thirty-six inches (36") above ground level at the property line,
except single trees having single trunks, which are pruned to a height of seven feet (7') above
ground level.
36. Visibility Triangle Required: No fence, screen wall or visual barrier shall be located or
placed where it obstructs the vision of motor vehicle drivers approaching any street or
driveway intersection. At all street or driveway intersections clear visibility shall be
maintained across the lot for a proper distance along both streets or driveways as required by
the Mansfield Roadway and Access Management Design Criteria.
J. Xeriscaping: The use of xeriscaping is intended to promote prudent use of the City’s water
resources and reduce the need for additional water system infrastructure and to help ensure
viability of required plantings during periods of drought. All landscaping shall comply, where
feasible, with the following requirements designed to reduce water usage.
1. Required plant materials shall be selected from those identified as native plants, and those
that have been adapted to the local climate and conditions. Native plants and planting
practices are identified through the “Texas SmartScape” program (a program developed
through the North Central Texas Council of Governments {NCTCOG} Regional Storm
Water Management Program). Texas SmartScape is an interactive multimedia tool on
compact disk that can be used to select native and adapted plants for North Texas. The CD
is available from the NCTCOG or the information may be downloaded from the NCTCOG
Storm Water web site at www.dfwstormwater.com.
2. Where specific conditions reduce the likelihood that these plant materials will survive, other
plants may be substituted with approval of the Landscape Administrator.
3. Plants not recommended in the “Texas SmartScape” program may be substituted with the
approval of the Landscape Administrator. The applicant may be required to provide
substantiation as to the hardiness, adaptability and water demands of the plant when used.
4. For maximum reduction in water usage, xeriscape plants should not be interspersed in plant
massings with plants requiring higher water usage. Applicants should design irrigation
systems and watering schedules that supply the appropriate amount of water, without overwatering.
5. Permeable pavement in low-traffic areas or overflow parking may be approved by the
Landscape Administrator and by the City Engineer where conditions are favorable to
filter storm water and reduce run-off. Adequate strength of the permeable pavement
must be proven by the applicant to ensure pavement life.
§7300
7300-6
K. Irrigation:
1. All development shall be irrigated by an underground automatic system that may include
a drip irrigation system. This system shall adhere to the manufacturers’ specifications
and the rules and regulations established by the City of Mansfield’s Landscape Irrigation
Ordinance and by Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) or successor
agency.
2. An irrigation system must be designed by an irrigator licensed by the State of Texas.
3. All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired,
serviced, and operated in a manner that will promote water conservation as defined by
the Landscape Irrigation Ordinance.
4. Development in the PR, SF, 2F and MH zoning districts in which the first plat was
approved on or before November 12, 2012, shall be exempt from the requirements of
this Subsection K.
L. Pedestrian Mobility: Walkways and paths shall be incorporated into site and landscape
designs to provide for pedestrian mobility.
1. In the OP, C-1, C-2 and C-3 zoning districts and the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts within
the Freeway Overlay District, internal pedestrian walkways shall be provided where
multiple buildings are developed in a comprehensive development..
2. At a minimum, walkways shall connect to focal points of pedestrian activity including,
but not limited to, street crossings, buildings and store entry points, and shall feature
adjoining landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, ground
covers or other such materials. The walkways may be intersected by vehicular drives.
3. Additionally, internal pedestrian walkways, not less than six (6) feet in width, shall be
provided along the full length of the building, along any façade featuring a customer
entrance. Other walkways to bring customers from parking areas to the customer
entrance should be provided.
4. Internal pedestrian walkways shall maintain a minimum unobstructed width of three (3)
feet, unless specified otherwise.
5. The portion of an internal pedestrian walkway immediately adjacent to the customer
entrance of a building, individual suite or tenant space shall be protected from weather
by architectural features such as awnings or arcades.
6. Some internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from driving surfaces using
durable, low maintenance materials such as pavers, bricks, colored or scored concrete to
enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the walkways.
Pavement strength must be at least equal to the adjacent pavement.
7. Pathways intended for joint pedestrian and bicycle use should have a minimum pathway
width of ten (10) feet.
§7300
7300-7
8. Not withstanding the above, churches, schools and government facilities shall provide
internal pedestrian walkways appropriate to their traffic circulation patterns (i.e. pick up and
drop off areas); where they connect to neighborhoods and as needed for multiple ingress and
egress points to their type of land use.
9. In the design and construction of all walkways and paths, the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA) Guidelines shall be followed.
M. Central features and community spaces: Each retail, service, office and industrial
establishment in the OP, C-1, C-2, and C-3 zoning districts and the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts
within the Freeway Overlay District shall contribute to the establishment or enhancement of
community and public spaces.
1. Retail or service developments with less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of building
area and office or industrial developments shall provide at least one of the following central
features and community spaces: patio/seating area, xeriscaping, pedestrian plaza with
benches, window shopping walkway (covered or partially covered), outdoor playground
area, water feature, clock or bell tower, or other such deliberately shaped area, a focal feature
or amenity that, in the judgment of the Director of Planning, adequately establishes or
enhances a community and public space.
2. Retail or service developments of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or greater building
area shall provide at least two of the central features and community spaces mentioned
above.
3. Each area, focal feature, or amenity shall be sized appropriately to fit the design,
activity, occupants and population of the development.
4. These areas, focal features, or amenities shall have direct access to the internal
pedestrian walkways and shall not be constructed of materials that are inferior to the
principal materials of the building and landscape.
5. When approving central features and community spaces, the Director of Planning, may
allow sharing of features or spaces based on a comprehensively planned retail or service
development when the size and location of the features and spaces are deemed
appropriate in his judgment.
N. Application Procedure: A landscape plan shall accompany an application for a building,
paving, or construction permit and shall be submitted to the appropriate department for
review in accordance with the specified submittal requirements. The landscape plan shall
provide the following information:
1. Appropriate title and page numbers;
2. Title block to include the street address, lot and block numbers, subdivision name, city,
state and date of preparation;
3. Name and address of property owner;
4. Name and address of person preparing plan with proof of qualifications;
§7300
7300-8
5. Written and graphic scale at a minimum of 1” = 40’ or greater;
6. North arrow;
7. Boundaries of the area covered by the landscape plan with dimensions;
8. Location and size of existing or proposed public or private streets or alleys;
9. Location of existing or proposed structures, pavement, walkways, and driveways;
10. Location of existing or proposed easements;
11. Location of existing or proposed drainage ways, and significant natural features;
12. The width of all required or proposed landscape buffer yards shown and labeled;
13. The width of all required or proposed landscape setbacks shown and labeled;
14. The size and type of all screening, included construction details, shown and labeled;
15. Location, size and species of all trees to be preserved with protection measures identified
on plans;
16. Location, quantity, size and name of all proposed landscape features, including plants,
paving, benches, screens, fountains, statues, earthen berms, ponds (to include depth of
water), topography of the site and any other proposed feature;
17. Maintenance note, see Sub-Section 7300.F.34.
18. Enhanced pavement proposed labeled;
19. Berms delineated with one (1) foot contour intervals.
20. Irrigation sleeves on the landscape, irrigation, paving and site plans.
21. Parking calculations to determine the number of trees required in the parking areas.
22. Landscape calculations to explain how the numbers and types of plants were determined.
23. Any other pertinent information deemed necessary by the Landscape Administrator or
City Engineer.
24. Plant list shown in a similar format as shown in “Section 7300-DD: Typical Plant
Material List”.
O. Buffer Yard and Screening: All developments, except those in the C-4, Downtown
Business District, are required to provide buffer yards and screening in accordance with the
provisions of this subsection.
1. Buffer Yard: A buffer yard is a strip of land, together with a specified amount of
planting and any structures that may be required between land uses to eliminate or
minimize conflict between the uses.
§7300
7300-9
2. Buffer yards shall be located within and along the outer perimeter of a lot or boundary
line and entirely on private property. No part of any screening device shall be located in
public right-of-way.
3. Only those structures used for buffering and /or screening purposes shall be located
within a buffer yard. The buffer yard shall not include any paved area, except for
pedestrian sidewalks or paths or vehicular drives that may intersect the buffer yard and
which shall be the minimum width necessary to provide pedestrian or vehicular access.
4. The Landscape Administrator in cooperation with the City Engineer may allow an
alternative type, location or configuration of buffer yard or screening wall or device to
avoid potential interference with public utilities or flood water conveyance. The
alternative recommendation shall meet the intent of this section to screen or buffer uses.
Wood fencing or chain link fencing are not permitted alternatives. Preservation of
existing natural areas and vegetation may be considered as alternatives to separate
incompatible land uses.
5. Trees, shrubs, and ground cover shall be planted in the buffer yard by the developer or
owner of the developing property according to the type of buffer yard required.
6. In order to determine the type of buffer yard and screening required, the developer must
know the zoning and proposed use of his property and the zoning and existing use of any
adjacent properties. The developer must first find either the zoning or proposed use of
the property being developed in the first column of the table below, then look for the
zoning or existing use of any adjacent property in the top row of the table. The types of
required buffer yards and required screening are listed horizontally across from the
proposed use or zoning of the property being developed and under the corresponding
column heading depicting the zoning or existing use of the adjacent properties.
7300-10
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§7300
7300-11
7. Types of Required Buffer Yards and Screening:
SF, 2F,
PR w/Res
MF,
Townhouse
OP, C-1,
C-2
C-3, I-1,
I-2
Existing
Church,
School, or
City Use
Vacant PR MH
SF, 2F, PR w/Res
NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
NA NA SW8** SW8** WF6 NA NA
MF, Townhouse
BY50 BY10 BY10 BY10 BY10 BY50 BY10
SW6 NA SW6** SW6** SW6 NA SD6
OP, C-1, C-2
BY20 BY10 BY10* BY10* BY10 BY20 BY10
SW8 SW6 NA NA SW6 NA SW6
C-3, I-1, I-2
BY30 BY10 BY10* BY10* BY10 BY30 BY10
SW8 SW6 NA NA SW6 NA SW6
Church, School, or
City Use
BY10 BY10 BY10 BY10 BY10 BY10 BY10
SD6 SD6 NA NA NA NA NA
MH
BY20 BY10 BY10 BY10 BY10 BY20 BY10
SD6 SD6 SW6** SW6** SD6 SD6 SD6
* Tree plantings are reduced by 50%. When plantings are reduced, trees must be staggered between properties.
** Not applicable if adjacent property is vacant.
PR w/Res means a lot or tract that is zoned PR and occupied by a residential use.
§7300
7300-12
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
7300-13
8. BY10: Minimum 10 (10) foot wide buffer yard with one tree planted for every twentyfive
(25) linear feet or portion of said landscape buffer strip.
9. BY20: Minimum twenty (20) foot wide buffer yard with one tree planted for every
twenty-five (25) linear feet or portion of said landscape buffer strip.
10. BY30: Minimum thirty (30) foot wide buffer yard with one tree planted for every
twenty-five (25) linear feet or portion of said landscape buffer strip
11. BY50: Minimum fifty (50) foot wide buffer yard with a double row of plantings. One
row shall contain deciduous canopy trees placed at one (1) tee per fifty (50) linear feet.
A second row shall contain evergreen canopy trees placed at one (1) tree per fifty (50)
linear feet..
12. Buffer yards are not required within the same multi-family residential, town home or
manufactured home subdivision on separately platted lots.
13. Where the adjacent property is in a Planned Development District, the required buffer
yard and screening shall be determined by the uses permitted in the Planned
Development District that abut the property being developed.
14. When a lot line is adjacent to two zoning districts, the required buffer yard shall comply
with the more restrictive requirement.
15. Existing manufactured home rental communities or subdivisions are exempt from the
buffer yard requirements.
16. For developments in the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts, which are not abutting any
properties in a residential zoning classification or a PR zoning classification that is
occupied by a residential use, the required buffer yard may be waived in lieu of a
designated landscaped area of at least ten (10) percent of the total lot area. This
landscaped area shall contain additional plant materials to enhance customer walkways,
building fronts, outdoor seating areas or other similar areas preferably in front of or to
the side of buildings or in parking areas.
17. When a shared drive or building is situated along or over a common property line, the
Landscape Administrator may allow a substitute of either
a. a drive aisle median strip adjacent to the shared drive as described later in this
section; or
b. require a landscape area with the equivalent square footage and trees as in the
required buffer yard to be placed anywhere else on the site in addition to all the
other required landscaping.
18. A seven and one-half (7-1/2) foot screening wall construction and maintenance easement
shall be provided by the developer of any residential development submitted after the
approval date of this ordinance that abuts non-residential zoning in order to facilitate the
construction and perpetual maintenance of the masonry screening wall that is required
on the non-residential property under the provisions of this Ordinance.
19. SW6: Minimum six (6) and maximum eight (8) foot tall screening wall.
7300-14
20. SW8: Eight (8) foot tall screening wall.
21. The SW6 and SW8 screening walls required in this section shall be constructed of the
following materials:
a. Brick, stone or split-face concrete masonry unit;
b. Pre-cast concrete wall or pour in place concrete wall with a similar appearance as
brick, stone or split-face concrete masonry unit;
22. SD6: Minimum six (6) foot and maximum of eight (8) foot screening device.
23. The SD6 screening devise required in this section shall be constructed of the following
materials.
a. Wood – Cedar or redwood only;
b. Masonry – Brick, stone, decorative or split-face block only;
c. Pre-cast concrete wall or pour-in-place concrete walls with a similar appearance as
wood or masonry;
d. Wrought iron or tubular steel provided that screening shrubs (able to screen up to six
(6) feet in height within eighteen (18) months of planting) are placed adjacent to the
fence on private property;
e. Combination of two or more of the above construction materials; or
f. Other alternate construction materials provided that the Planning and Zoning
Commission explicitly authorize them.
24. Notwithstanding the above, the school district may use chain link fencing with slats that
provide ninety (90%) percent opaqueness.
25. Construction Design of the screening wall and device shall be in accordance with the
following:
a. Screening device shall be constructed with cedar or redwood panels and supported
by horizontal rails of the same materials. Galvanized steel posts with concrete
footings shall be placed at intervals of no longer than eight (8) feet on center. The
galvanized steel posts shall be a minimum15 to 18 gage and minimum 2-3/8” in
diameter. There shall be at least three (3) horizontal rails for a six (6) foot high
fence and four (4) horizontal rails for an eight (8) foot high fence. A hole with a
minimum diameter of ten (10) inches and a minimum depth of twenty-four (24)
inches shall be required for the concrete footings.
b. The side of a screening device with horizontal rails and posts shall not face the
adjacent property or street along the perimeter of the development.
c. When a screening wall is built in phases for a development, the color, height, style
and exterior finish for all phases shall be as closely similar as possible, and shall, in
no case, be incompatible. The screening wall shall be equally finished on both sides.
7300-15
d. All screening walls required by this section shall be constructed of materials with
earth tone colors or traditional masonry colors. Screening walls with nontraditional
masonry colors shall be prohibited.
e. Smooth-face concrete masonry units (i.e. haydite blocks) shall not be permitted as
construction material for screening.
f. The screening wall or device shall be designed and constructed to prevent any
drainage or erosion problems.
g. A metal “L” or similar support bracket shall be situated under the bottom row of
brick or stone of the screening wall.
h. The height of a screening wall or device shall be measured from the ground level at
the bottom of the wall or device. However, a screening wall or device erected on
top of a retaining wall or structure shall not exceed six feet (6) in height as measured
from the bottom of the screening wall or device to the top thereof.
i. Designs for the SW6 and SW8 shall be prepared and sealed by a professional
architect or engineer and designed in accordance with the City of Mansfield
Building Code.
26. The owner of the property with the required screening shall be responsible for the
maintenance of the screening in a structurally sound condition. This provision does not
relieve abutting property owner of liability for damage caused by such owner or his
employees, agents, or contractors.
P. Street Landscape Setback:
1. When any townhouse is constructed on a lot in a MF-1 or MF-2 District, a twenty-five
(25) foot wide landscape setback shall be provided along the entire boundary of the lot
that abuts a public street. The setback shall not include any paved area, except for
pedestrian walkways or paths or vehicular drives that may intersect the setback and
which shall be the minimum width necessary to provide pedestrian or vehicular access.
2. When any apartment or multiple family dwelling other than townhouse is constructed on
a lot in a MF-1 or MF-2 District, a fifty (50) foot wide landscape setback shall be
provided along the entire boundary of the lot that abuts a public street. The setback shall
not include any paved area, except for pedestrian walkways or paths or vehicular drives
that may intersect the landscape setback and which shall be the minimum width
necessary to provide pedestrian or vehicular access. Other building setbacks may also
apply; refer to Table 4500B.
3. When any land use is established on a lot in the OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 and I-2 Zoning
Districts, a twenty (20) foot wide landscape setback shall be provided along the entire
boundary of the lot that abuts a public street, exclusive of driveways and access ways at
points of ingress and egress to and from the lot.
4. When a church, school or other facility owned or operated by a government entity is
established on a lot in a PR or residential zoning district, a twenty (20) foot wide
landscape setback shall be provided along the entire boundary of the lot that abuts a
public street, exclusive of driveways and access ways at points of ingress and egress to
and from the lot.
7300-16
5. Within the required landscape setback, one (1) canopy tree shall be provided for each
forty (40) feet or portion thereof, except that for any apartment or multiple family
dwelling other than townhouse, one (1) canopy tree and one (1) ornamental tree shall be
provided for each forty (40) feet or portion thereof.
6. Trees within the landscape setback may be clustered, however no spacing shall be
greater than fifty (50) feet.
Q. Parking Lot Perimeter Landscaping:
1. In the MF-1, MF-2, OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts and all nonresidential
development such as churches, schools and public facilities in any zoning
district, all parking lot, vehicular use and maneuvering areas that are not screened by onsite
buildings shall be screened from view of public streets in accordance with the
following requirements:
a. The screening shall be a minimum height of three (3) feet, at maturity, (in case of
plants) above the grade of the parking lot, vehicle use and/or maneuvering areas.
b. The screening shall consist of one or a combination of the following:
1. Screening shrubs, and/or
2. Sodded berms
c. The screening may occur within the street landscape setback.
d. Wheel stops shall be provided for parking spaces adjacent to the screening to
prohibit any vehicle from overhanging the planting area.
R. Parking Lot Internal Landscaping: Any parking lot that contains ten (10) or more parking
spaces shall provide internal landscaping except as prescribed hereinbelow.
1. A ratio of one canopy tree for every ten (10) parking spaces shall be provided
throughout any surface parking lot.
2. Planting areas for trees within the parking rows of a surface parking lot shall be achieved
by one or both of the following:
a. A continuous landscaped median strip, at least six (6) feet wide (back-of-curb to
back-of-curb) between rows of parking spaces. Trees shall be placed at intervals no
greater than forty (40) feet apart or fraction thereof.
b. Landscape islands, at least the minimum size of a regular parking space of nine by
eighteen feet (9’ X 18’) or one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet. No more than
fifteen (15) contiguous spaces shall be located together without a tree-island.
3. Parking lots that are designed with planted or raised landscape islands shall design the
islands so as not to interfere with the opening of car doors in adjacent spaces.
4. Every required landscape island must include one (1) canopy tree.
5. Notwithstanding the above, parking lots for a church, school, government facility and
uses in the C-4, Downtown Business District shall provide internal landscaping only
7300-17
when such parking lots contain twenty (20) or more parking spaces and only at a ratio of
one canopy tree for every twenty (20) parking spaces.
S. Parking End Caps: One (1) landscape island shall be located at the terminus of each row of
parking and shall contain one (1) tree. Rows with head-to-head parking arrangements shall
have two (2) islands and two (2) trees. Refer to the graphic below.
T. Drive Aisles into Non-residential Developments: A landscape median strip with a
minimum width of six (6) feet (back-of-curb to back-of-curb) shall be incorporated in the
parking lot design to separate the parking area and the drive aisle with direct connection to
the street. One (1) tree shall be planted for every forty (40) linear feet or fraction thereof.
U. Foundation Area and Ground Equipment Landscaping:
1. In the OP, C-1, C-2, and C-3 Zoning Districts; and the I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts
within the Freeway Overlay District; and all non-residential development such as
churches, schools and public facilities in any zoning district, a minimum four (4) foot
wide landscape area is required adjacent to or within ten (10) feet of all building facades
with customer entrances and building facades facing a public street, (exclusive of
driveways, access walks, and service and delivery areas).
2. Planting should emphasize softening large expanses of building walls, accenting
building entrances and architectural features, and screening mechanical equipment and
shall include a variety of grass, ground cover, plants, flower beds, shrubs, and trees.
7300-18
3. Where extended roofs or canopies are used to provide a covered walkway adjacent to a
building, foundation plantings are not required under the extended roofs or canopies.
However, landscaping is recommended to separate vehicular areas from building.
4. Plantings shall be situated around, along or adjacent to the low wing walls or screening
walls required in Sections 7301.A.2 and 7301.B.
V. Drive-through windows: Where drive-through lanes are situated parallel to a public street,
a landscape median with a minimum width of three (3) feet (from back of curb to back of
curb) shall be situated adjacent to and parallel with the drive-through stacking lanes that are
visible from the adjacent public streets. Each median shall be planted with a minimum of
five (5) gallon shrubs placed at three (3) feet on center to create a minimum three (3) foot
high screening hedge. The screening is intended to visually screen cars stacked in drivethrough
stacking lanes waiting for service as well as menu boards and reduce noise from
outdoor speakers associated with drive-through windows. Where multiple drive-through
stacking lanes are provided, the screening shall be placed adjacent to the outer most lane.
W. Detention/Retention Ponds:
1. Detention and retention ponds, or other holding areas that are part of a storm/surface
water system, shall be enhanced as an amenity of the development.
2. When not designed as an integral part of a landscape plan or featured as an amenity (i.e.,
water features in a wet bottom basin or recreation/open space in a dry bottom basin) all
detention ponds, retention ponds, or other similar holding areas shall be screened from
view from any existing or future public street and from adjoining property. Screening
may be accomplished using landscape materials that compliment the overall design of
the site or screening walls or devices that match the predominant building materials used
on the adjacent buildings or landscaping. When screening walls or devices are used,
provisions should be made for safety, access and maintenance of any pond areas
3. The development of any storm/surface water system shall be in accordance with all
applicable design criteria established by the Public Works Department.
X. Street Intersection landscape areas: For all development in the OP, C-1, C-2, and C-3
Zoning Districts; and the I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts in the Freeway Overlay District; and
all MF zoning Districts, where parcels are located at the intersection of two (2) streets where
at least one street has a right-of-way width of sixty (60) feet or larger as shown on the City’s
most recent Thoroughfare Plan, a thirty (30) foot landscape setback shall be provided
parallel to the minimum visibility triangle required by the Mansfield Roadway and Access
Management Criteria. No landscaping shall interfere with any visibility triangles.
Y. Other landscape areas: For all development in the OP, C-1, C-2, and C-3 Zoning Districts
and the I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts in the Freeway Overlay District, a minimum of ten
(10%) percent of each lot shall be devoted to living landscaping which shall include grass,
ground cover, plants, flower beds, shrubs and trees. Required street landscape setbacks,
intersection landscaping, foundation landscaping and landscape buffer yards may be
included in this calculation. Parking lot internal and perimeter landscaping shall not be
included in the calculations unless an area exceeds the minimum requirement of this Section,
then the additional area may be included.
Z. Residential Tree Requirements:
7300-19
1. Every lot in a PR and SF Zoning District shall provide a minimum number of canopy
trees per lot as follows:
a. For lots containing 9,600 square feet or less, provide three (3) canopy trees. At
least two (2) trees shall be placed in the front yard.
b. For lots containing 9,601 square feet or greater, provide four (4) canopy trees. At
least two (2) trees shall be placed in the front yard.
2. Every dwelling unit in the 2F District shall provide a minimum of two (2) canopy trees
per unit. At least one (1) tree shall be placed in the front yard of each dwelling unit.
3. All required trees shall be planted prior to approval of final inspection or occupancy of
the applicable dwelling unit.
AA. Residential Foundation Plantings:
1. In the PR, SF and 2F Zoning Districts and any town house development, shrubs shall be
planted along a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the length of the foundation of a
dwelling unit for any part of the foundation that faces a street. This does not include any
part of a foundation that is not visible from the street after fencing.
2. In the MF-1 and MF-2 Zoning Districts, a single row of shrubs is required along the
entire façade of each multi-family residential or accessory building, excluding access
driveways or pedestrian ways.
3. In MF-1 and MF-2 Zoning Districts, evergreen shrubs shall be planted around HVAC
units, meters, transformers, and other utility units; trash containers, refuse or recycling
storage facilities; pool equipment, or service areas, as well as around and adjacent to the
screening walls required by Section 7301. Openings or access to the equipment shall not
be obstructed. The height of the shrubs required herein shall not be less than the height
of the meters being screened.
4. Unless specified otherwise, the above screening shrubs shall be a minimum of two (2)
feet in height at the time of planting and not of a dwarf variety.
BB. Residential lawn requirements:
1. In the PR, SF and 2F Zoning Districts the front, side and rear yards adjacent to the
house, that is outside of any rear yard fencing shall be planted with grass or ground
cover, exclusive of driveways, sidewalks, flower beds, gardens, etc. prior to final
inspection. Regardless of the zoning district, for lots over twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet, the area around the house extending twenty-five (25) feet from the pad, shall
be planted with grass or ground cover, exclusive of driveways, sidewalks, flower beds,
gardens, etc. prior to final inspection.
2. In the MF District, all lawns shall be sodded or planted in ground cover, exclusive of
driveways, sidewalks, flowerbeds, gardens, etc. prior to final inspection.
3. All residential lawns and landscaping shall be irrigated with an underground irrigation
system as specified in Section 7300.K. of this Ordinance. On large area lots, the area of
irrigation may be limited to 12,000 square feet.
7300-20
CC. Preservation Credits:
1. The following preservation credits shall be considered when developing around existing
quality trees.
2. Quality trees preserved on a site meeting the herein specifications may be credited
toward meeting the tree requirement of any landscaping provision of this section for that
area within which they are located, according to the following table:
Diameter (DBH) of Existing Tree Credit against Tree Requirement
6" to 8" 2 trees
9" to 15" 3 trees
16” to 30” 4 trees
31" to 46" 5 trees
47" or more 8 trees
3. For purposes of this section, the Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) dimension shall be
measured at four and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the ground, and shall be rounded to the
nearest whole number.
4. Existing trees, not on the approved tree list, may receive credit if authorized by the
Landscape Administrator.
5. Credit will be revoked where trees intended for preservation credits are damaged due to,
among other things, construction, broken branches, and soil compaction or soil cut/fill.
6. In order to receive credit for existing trees in a parking area, the island or area around the
trunk of the tree must be enlarged and sized properly to ensure the best scenario for
survival.
7. Prior to any construction or land development, the developer shall clearly mark all trees
to be preserved. Protective barriers shall be installed and maintained throughout the
development process. The developer shall not allow the movement of heavy equipment
or the storage of equipment, materials, debris, or fill to be placed within the drip line of
any trees. This is not intended to prohibit the normal construction required within
parking lots.
8. During construction, the developer shall not allow cleaning of equipment or material
under the canopy of any existing tree or group of trees. There shall be no disposal of
any waste material such as, but not limited to, paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete,
mortar, etc., under the canopy of any existing tree or group of trees.
9. No attachment or wires of any kind, other than those of a protective nature, shall be
attached to any tree.
10. If any tree that was preserved and used as a credit toward landscaping requirements is
later removed for any reason, it shall be replaced by the number of trees for which it was
originally credited. Replacement trees shall have a minimum trunk caliper of three (3)
inches.
DD. Prohibited Plant List: The Plants listed below shall not be used to fulfill the planting
requirements of this Ordinance.
7300-21
Trees
Arizona Ash Fraxinus velutina “Arizonia”
Bois D’arc Maclura pomifera
Cottonwood Populus deltoides
Siberian Elm Ulmus pumila
Silver Maple Acer saccharinum
Mimosa Albizzia julibrissen
Mulberry Morus alba
Lombardy Poplar Populus nigra italica
Chinese Tallow Sapium sebiferum
Arborvitae Thuja accidentalis
Willow all species
Shrubs
Euonymus Euonymus japonicus
Ligustrum Ligustrum japonicum
Pittosporum Pittosporum tobbira
Loquat Eriobotrya japonica
Oleander Nerium oleander
EE. Recommended Plant List: All plants used to satisfy this ordinance shall be of a species
common or adaptable to this area of Texas. The following is a list of recommended
plants. Plant material not on this list must be approved by the Landscape Administrator
before installation.
Canopy-type Trees
American Elm Ulmus americana
Bald Cypress Taxodium distichum*
Black Hickory Carya texana
Black Oak Quercus velutina
Black Walnut Juglans nigra
Blackjack Oak Quercus marilandica
Bur Oak Quercus macrocarpa
Cedar Elm Ulmus crassifolia*
Chinese Pistache Pistacia chinensis
Chinquapin Oak Quercus muehlenbergi*
Dawn Redwood Metasequoia glyptostroboides
Durand Oak Quercus sinuata var. sinuata*
Eastern Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana
Big Tooth Maple Acer grandidentatum*
Gingko Ginko biloba*
Green Ash Fraxinus pennsylvanica
Gum Bumelia Bumelia lanuginosa
Lacebark Elm Ulmus parvifolia*
Lacey Oak Quercus glaucoides
Live Oak Quercus fusiformis*
Pecan Carya Illinoensis
Post Oak Quercus stellata*
River Birch Betula nigra
7300-22
Rusty Blackhaw Viburnum rufidulum
Sawtooth Oak Quercus accutisima*
Shumard Red Oak Quercus shumardi*
Southern Magnolia Magnolia grandiflora
Sweet Gum Liquidambar styraciflua*
Green Ash Fraxinus pennsylvanica
Texas Ash Fraxinus texensi
Texas Oak Quercus texana
Texas Walnut Juglans microcarpa
*Recommended for Street Tree plantings.
Medium/Ornamental Trees
Afghan Pine Pinus eldarica
Austrian Pine Pinus nigra
Bigelow Oak Quercus sinuata
Black Cherry Prunus serotina
Carolina Buckthorn Rhamnus caroliniana
Cherry Laurel Prunus caroliniana
Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia indica
Deciduous Holly Ilex decidua
Desert Willow Chilopsis linearis
Eve’s Necklace Sophora affinis
Flowering Crabapple Malus hybrida
Goldenrain Tree Koelreuteria paniculata
Hercules Club Zanthoxylum dava-herculis
Japanese Black Pine Pinus thunbergii
Japanese Maple Acer palmatum
Mexican Buckeye Ungnadia speciosa
Mexican Plum Prunus mexicana
Native Hawthorns Crataegus spp. (Green, Cockspur, Downy,
Reverchon and Littlehip)
Persimmon Diospyros virginiana
Ponderosa Pine Pinus ponderosa
Possumhaw Holly Ilex decidua
Prairie Flame-leaf Sumac Rhus lanceobta
Redbuds Cercis Spp.
Rusty Blackhaw Viburnum Viburnum rufidulum
Savannah Holly Ilex opaca ‘Savannah’
Shantung Maple Acer truncatum
Slash Pine Pinus elliottii
Southern Wax Myrtle Myrica cerifera
Texas Buckeye Aesculus arguta
Vitex Vitex agnus-castus
Yaupon Holly Ilex vomitoria
Shrubs
Dwarf Burford Holly Ilex burfordii ‘nana’
Dwarf Chinese Holly Ilex cornuta ‘Rotunda’
Dwarf Chinese Holly Ilex cornuta ‘Rotunda’
7300-23
Dwarf Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia indica
Dwarf Wax Myrtle Myrica pusilla
Dwarf Yaupon Ilex vomitoria ‘Nana’
Dwarf Yaupon Ilex vomitoria ‘nana’
Eleagnus Eleagnus ebbengii
Flowering Quince Chanomeles ‘Texas Scarlet’
Forsythia Forsythia intermedia
Foster Holly Ilex x attenuata ‘Foster’
Glossy Abelia Abelia grandiflora
Japanese Barberry Berberis thunbergi
Nandina Nandina Domestica
Nellie R. Stevens Holly Ilex x ‘Nellie R. Stevens’
Pampas Grass Cordateria Selloana
Photinia Photinia Fraseri
Red Barberry Berberis thunbergii
Red Yucca Hesperaloe parvifolia
Sea Green Juniper Juniperus chinensis ‘Sea Green’
Sea Green Juniper Juniperus Chinensis ‘Sea Green’
Spiraea Spiraea spp.
Spiraea Spiraea prunifolia
Tam Juniper Juniperus sabina ‘Tamariscifolia’
Tam Juniper Juniperus sabina ‘Tam’
Texas Sage Leucophyllum frutescens
Texas Sage Leucophyllum frutescens ‘nana’
Variegated Chinese Privet Ligustrum sinense ‘Variegata’
2005 Draft Landscape Ordinance Revisions §7300
7300-24
FF. Landscape Plan Summary Charts: These charts shall be completed with information and provided on every landscape plan submittal.
They represent the minimum amount of information required. The charts may be amended from time to time, as needed, without
revising the ordinance.
SUMMARY CHART - BUFFERYARDS/SETBACKS
Location
Of
Buffer
Yard or
Setback
Required/
Provided Length
Bufferyard
or Setback
Width/Type
Canopy
Trees
Ornamental
Trees Shrubs
Screening
Wall/Device
Height &
Material
North Required
Provided
East Required
Provided
South Required
Provided
West Required
Provided
*Note any credits used in calculations:
a.
Other comments:
1.
2.
3.
2005 Draft Landscape Ordinance Revisions §7300
7300-25
SUMMARY CHART – INTERIOR LANDSCAPE
Landscape
Area
(in Sq Ft)
% of Landscape
Area
Canopy Trees Ornamental
Trees
Shrubs Ground Cover
(in Sq Ft)
Required
Provided
*Note any credits used in calculations:
a.
Other Comments:
1.
2.
3.
SUMMARY CHART – INTERIOR PARKING LOT
LANDSCAPING
# Of Required Parking Spaces
# Of Provided Parking Spaces
# of Tree Islands Provided
*Note any credits used in calculations:
a.
Other Comments:
1.
2.
2005 Draft Landscape Ordinance Revisions §7300
7300-26
*EXISTING TREE CREDIT SUMMARY
Applied to
Canopy Trees Understory
Trees
Trees @ 6" - 12" DBH
Trees @ Greater than 12" DBH
2005 Draft Landscape Ordinance Revisions §7300
7300-27
GG. Typical Plant Material List Summary Charts:
QNTY SYM COMMON NAME BOTANICAL NAME SIZE HT NOTES
CANOPY TREES
?? CE Cedar Elm Ulmus crassifolia 4” cal. Single trunk
?? BO Bur Oak Quercus macrocarpa 4” cal. Single trunk
?? LB Lace Bark Elm Ulmus parvifolia 4” cal. Single trunk
?? ST Sawtooth Oak Quercus accutisima 4” cal. Single trunk
?? BC Bald Cypress Taxodium distichum 4” cal. Single trunk
ORNAMENTAL TREES
?? AP Austrian Pine Pinus nigra 30 gal. 6’–8’ Full branch pattern
?? ST Shantung Maple Acer truncatum 30 gal. 8’-10’
?? VT Vitex Vitex agnus-castus B&B 6’-8’
?? SH Savannah Holly Ilex opeca 15 gal. 8’-10’
?? DH Possumhaw Holly Ilex decidua B&B 6’-8’
SHRUBS
?? EL Eleagnus Eleagnus ebbengii 3 gal. Plant 30” on center
?? NH Nellie R. Stevens Holly Ilex x ‘Nellie R. Stevens’ 5 gal. Plant 5’ on center
?? TS Texas Sage Leucophyllum frutescens 5 gal. Plant 3’ on center
?? RY Red Yucca Hesperaloe parvifolia 5 gal. As shown
?? TJ Tam Juniper Juniperus Sabina 3 gal. Plant 3’ on center
GROUNDCOVERS
?? CJ Creeping Juniper Juniperus horizontalis 3 gal. Plant 24” on center
?? MH Maidenhair Grass Miscanthus spp. 3 gal. Plant 3’ on center
?? WC Winter Creeper Euonymus fortunei 4” pot Plant 12” on center
?? VC Virginia Creeper Parthenocissus quinquefolia 1 gal. 3’ O.C. under existing Post Oak
§7300
7300-28
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§7301
7301-1
Section 7301. Supplemental Requirements for Screening of Mechanical Equipment and
Service Areas.
A. Equipment Screening:
1. Multi-family Residential Development:
a. Exposed conduit, ladders, utility boxes, stack pipes and drain spouts shall be painted to
match the primary color or color sequence to aid in blending with the color of the
building.
b. All buildings designed with parapet walls or other similar architectural elements shall be
constructed to a height of not less than one (1’) foot above the horizontal plane of the
highest (after-installation height) roof-mounted mechanical unit, HVAC and/or other
equipment (e.g. satellite dishes, solar panels, etc.). If free clearance or otherwise
unobstructed flow or space is required by the Fire or Building Code, equipment should
be positioned beyond the parapet wall so as not to be visible.
c. Electrical transformers, gas meters and other service areas shall be screened from view
of a public street or adjacent property.
d. In all multi-family developments, heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC)
equipment on the roof shall be screened so that they are not visible from the street or the
boundary of the abutting property.
e. The screening of HVAC equipment on the ground shall utilize construction materials
that match the predominant material used on the building; no wood or chain-link fences
shall be allowed.
2. Non-residential development: The provisions in this subsection shall apply to new buildings
or new developments in the OP, C-1 through C-4 Zoning Districts, Planned Developments
and in the I-1 or I-2 Zoning Districts that are within the Freeway Overlay District or within
three hundred (300) feet from the boundary of any property in a residential zoning
classification or a PR zoning classification.
a. Exposed conduit, ladders, utility boxes, stack pipes, drain spouts and gas meters shall be
painted to match the primary color or color sequence to aid in blending with the color of
the building.
b. For new buildings and developments with building permit applications submitted on or
after September 14, 2004, parapet walls or other similar architectural elements shall be
constructed to a height of not less than one (1’) foot above the horizontal plane of the
highest (after-installation height) roof-mounted mechanical unit, HVAC and/or other
equipment (e.g. satellite dishes, solar panels, etc.). If free clearance or otherwise
unobstructed flow of space is required by the Fire or Building Code, equipment should
be positioned within the parapet wall so as not to be visible from the street or abutting
properties. For new buildings and developments in the C-4 Zoning District, this
requirement will not apply to the sides of the building that are not facing a street.
c. For new buildings and developments with building permit applications submitted on or
after September 14, 2004, all ground-mounted service equipment such as air
§7301
7301-2
conditioners; electrical transformers, telephone line pedestals and gas meters; trash
compactors; satellite dishes and other service areas (e.g. grease collection areas/facilities,
box storage, plastic container storage, storage racks, etc.) shall be located behind the
building, or if located on the side of the building shall not be forward of the midpoint of
the side building elevation, except that switch gear devices may be located at any place
on a property.
d. All ground-mounted service equipment and service areas shall be screened from view of
public rights-of-way and abutting properties as follows:
1. When any portion of an electrical transformer or telephone line pedestal is located
within five (5) feet of a building, the transformer or pedestal shall be screened by a
screening wall.
2. Electrical transformers and telephone line pedestals located more than five (5) feet
from a building, gas meters, and satellite dishes shall be screened by a screening
wall or by a hedgerow of dense evergreen shrubbery or plant materials to form a
visual screen using plant materials approved by the Landscape Administrator.
3. Switch gear devices shall be screened by a hedgerow of dense evergreen shrubbery
or plant materials to form a visual screen using plant materials approved by the
Landscape Administrator.
4. All other types of service equipment and service areas shall be screened by a
screening wall.
e. Developments for which building permit applications were submitted prior to September
14, 2004, shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection, provided that all
heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC) equipment on the ground or on the
roof shall be screened so that they are not visible from the street abutting the property or
the boundary of the abutting properties.
f. Where ground-mounted service equipment and service areas are screened by a screening
wall, the wall shall be constructed of materials that match the predominant material used
on the building; no wood or chain-link fences shall be allowed. The wall shall be
landscaped in compliance with Section 7300 of this ordinance. The base of the wall
shall be elevated four (4) inches from grade, excluding columns, to accommodate
ventilation and drainage.
g. Screening of ground-mounted service equipment and service area, whether by a wall or
landscaping, shall be of a height not less than the height of the equipment being
screened.
h. Screening walls and landscape screening shall adhere to policies and standards for
access, operational clearances, safety and ventilation of the utility company and/or
equipment owner.
i. The cost of installing, maintaining, and replacing screening walls and/or landscaping
required by this subsection shall be the responsibility of the property owner or
developer, and not the responsibility of the utility company providing service to the
property. A utility company shall not be responsible for the replacement of any required
§7301
7301-3
screening wall or landscaping removed by the utility company to permit reasonable
access to the service equipment.
Ordinance No. 1585, Adopted 8/28/06
3. All development:
a. The fencing, screening or enclosure of individual rooftop equipment shall not be
permitted.
b. The developer shall provide a line-of-sight drawing with building permit application
upon request by city staff to ensure compliance with the provisions in this subsection.
c. In case that visual screening of HVAC equipment cannot be achieved due to topographic
differences between abutting properties, or between the property and the abutting street,
the developer or owner may appeal to the Board of Adjustment for a special exception as
set forth in Section 6300 of this ordinance.
B. Trash containers, Refuse or Recycling Storage Screening:
1. Trash container and storage area for refuse or material awaiting disposal or recycling shall be
visually screened on three sides with a fence or wall not less than the height of the trash
container or the refuse or materials being stored. The remaining side shall be equipped with
an opaque gate.
2. The screening shall utilize construction materials that match the predominant material used
on the building; no wood or chain-link fence materials shall be allowed except for the
opaque gate. (Ordinance No. 1484, Adopted 5/10/04)
3. In case the visual screening required above cannot be achieved due to topographic
differences between abutting properties, or between the property and the abutting street, the
developer or owner may appeal to the Board of Adjustment for a special exception as set
forth in Section 6300 of this ordinance.
C. Loading Dock and Truck Berth Screening
1. In C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning, all loading docks and truck berths not totally screened by an
intervening building shall be screened from view from the public streets that abut the
property where the loading docks and truck berths are located.
2. The developer shall provide a line-of-sight drawing with building permit application upon
request by city staff to ensure compliance with the provisions in this subsection.
3. Screening shall be accomplished by an opaque screening wall, earthen berm or a
combination of screening wall and earthen berm with a minimum height of ten (10) feet,
unless the developer shall present evidence to prove that an alternate height is sufficient due
to the unique configuration of the site.
4. Screening shall be of a length to screen the maximum size truck or tractor-trailer that can be
accommodated on site.
§7301
7301-4
5. The screening shall utilize construction materials that match the predominant material used
on the building; no wood or chain-link fences shall be allowed. (Ordinance No. 1484,
Adopted 5/10/04)
Ordinance No. 1534, Adopted April 27, 2005
§7302
7301-5
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§7302
7302-1
Section 7302. General Provisions for all Fences and Free Standing Walls.
A. General Provisions.
1. Property Owners' Responsibility:
a. Required screening fences and walls shall be perpetually and adequately maintained or
replaced by the owner or user of the more intensive zoned property.
b. All structurally unsound fences, when not required by this Ordinance, shall be repaired,
replaced or removed by the owner or user of the property upon which the fence is
located.
c. The construction of a fence or wall shall not preclude the property owners’ responsibility
to maintain and keep the following area free and clear of debris and high weeds:
1. The area between the fence and property line or between parallel fences; and
2. The area between the fence and the edge of the street.
2. Front Yards: No fence or free standing wall greater than thirty-six inches (36") in height
shall extend into the required front yard except for decorative fences or security fences
meeting the following requirements:
a. Fences thirty-six inches (36") or more above the finished grade of the lot shall not be
more than twenty-five percent (25%) solid.
b. The primary fencing material shall be of wrought iron, exposed aggregate tilt wall, fired
masonry, approved wood rail construction or other material approved by the City
Building Official.
3. Side Fence and Free Standing Wall Setbacks: No fence or wall greater than thirty-six inches
(36") in height shall be located less than fifteen feet (15') from any side property line that is
adjacent to a public street unless:
a. The subject lot backs up to the rear property line of another lot, in which case no side
fence setback is required.
b. The subject lot backs up to an access easement or alley right-of-way, in which case a
ten-foot (10') visibility triangle shall be required.
4. Rear Fence and Free Standing Wall Setbacks: Fences and walls meeting all of the above
requirements may be erected on the rear property line except, however, lots whose rear
property line abut a public street on which one of the immediate adjacent lots maintains its
required front yard, then no fence nor wall greater than thirty-six inches (36") in height shall
be located within fifteen feet (15') of the subject lots rear property line or closer to the street
right-of-way than the front setback line of the adjacent lot, whichever is closer.
B. General Restrictions Concerning all Fences and Free Standing Walls.
§7302
7302-2
1. No fence, screen, free standing wall or other visual barrier shall be constructed or placed in
such a manner as would endanger the health or safety of the general public.
2. Obstruction Prohibited: No fence, screen, free standing wall or other visual barrier shall be
so located or placed that it obstructs the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching any
street, alley or drive intersection. A visual barrier shall be deemed as any fence, wall hedge,
shrubbery, etc., higher than thirty-six inches (36") above ground level at the property line,
except single trees having single trunks, which are pruned to a height of seven feet (7') above
ground level.
3. Twenty-Five Foot (25') Visibility Triangle Required: No fence, screen wall or visual barrier
shall be located or placed where it obstructs the vision of motor vehicle drivers approaching
any street intersection. At all street intersections clear vision shall be maintained across the
lot for a distance of twenty-five feet (25') back from the property corner along both streets.
4. The side of the fence with exposed posts or rails shall be oriented away from view from the
adjacent property and public streets.
5. After December 10, 2012, all new wood privacy fences and the replacement or repair of
existing wood privacy fences shall comply with the following requirements:
a. A permit must be obtained prior to the construction of a new wood privacy fence of five
(5) feet in height or greater.
b. Fence planks or panels must be at least five-eights of one inch (5/8”) in thickness.
c. Fence planks or panels must have at least one inch (1”) gap between the ground and the
wood to prevent rotting and decay.
d. All vertical posts shall be two and three-eights inch (2-3/8”) minimum outside diameter
standard pipe gage galvanized steel.
e. Vertical posts shall be spaced eight feet (8’) on center or less and set into concrete post
footings. The minimum depth of the concrete post footings shall be twenty-four (24)
inches for fences that are six feet (6’) in height and thirty-six (36) inches for fences that
are eight feet (8’) in height.
f. Vertical slats shall be nailed or screwed to horizontal bracing stringers running from
vertical post to post. The size of the stringers shall be no less than one-and-a-half 1.5”)
by three-and-a-half inches (3.5”). One stringer will be required for every two feet (2’) in
height. Fences that are six feet (6’) in height shall have three (3) horizontal stringers.
Fences that are eight feet (8’) in height shall have four (4) horizontal stringers.
g. All materials shall be securely fastened (i.e. vertical boards to horizontal stringers,
stringers to vertical posts) and be free from rot, rust, vandalism and other sources of
decay.
§7302
7302-3
h. Fence should be designed such that it does not cause a drainage problem.
i. A wood fence erected for the purpose of screening the perimeter of a subdivision as
required by the Subdivision Control Ordinance shall be governed by the Subdivision
Control Ordinance.
j. The replacement or repair of an existing wood privacy fence that is less than fifty (50)
percent of the total linear footage of fencing on the property shall be exempt from the
above requirements in Section 7302B.5, except that a permit shall be required for any
fence construction greater than six (6) feet in height.
6. Barbed Wire Prohibited: Fences constructed of barbed wire and walls topped with broken
glass or similar material shall be prohibited, except that:
a. A security fence not less than six (6) feet in height may be topped with barbed wire
when located on property zoned for non-residential purposes;
b. A barbed wire fence may be erected or maintained on property that held livestock on
January 1, 2004, and will continue to hold livestock in the future. The property owner
shall have the burden of proof that livestock existed on site on January 1, 2004; and,
c. A barbed wire fence may be erected or maintained on any property in excess of 20 acres
that held livestock or was otherwise under agricultural use on January 1, 2004, and will
continue to hold livestock or otherwise continue in agricultural use in the future. The
property owner shall have the burden of proof that livestock existed on the site or that
another agricultural use was in effect on the site on January 1, 2004. For purposes of
§7302
7302-4
Subpart c, “agricultural use” shall mean that the property owner has and maintains an
agricultural exemption on the property granted by Tarrant Appraisal District”.
(Ordinance 1474 – Adopted February 23, 2004)
7. Electrical Fences Prohibited: No fence shall be electrically charged in any form or fashion.
8. Eight Foot (8') Maximum Height: No fence in a residential district shall exceed eight feet
(8') in height above ground level at the fence line. However, fences that are erected on top
of retaining walls shall not exceed six feet (6’) in height as measured from the bottom of the
fence to the top of the fence. (Ordinance No. 1468, Adopted 1/26/04)
9. Public Property: No fence, guy wire, brace or any post of such fence shall be constructed
upon or caused to protrude over property that the city or the general public has dominion and
control over, owns or has an easement over, under, around or through, except upon utility
easements which are permitted to be fenced.
10. Swimming Pools Fencing: All swimming pools shall, at all times, be completely surrounded
by a fence, wall or barrier not less than four (4) feet in height with no openings, holes or
gaps that will allow a sphere four (4) inches in diameter to pass through. Gate openings
directly into such enclosure shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices
capable of keeping such gates securely closed at all times when not in use; said latching
devices to be no less than three (3) feet above grade. The door of any dwelling that is
forming part of the enclosure need not be equipped with self-closing and self-latching
devices.
Ordinance No. 1534 – Adopted April 27, 2005
§7400
7400-1
Section 7400. Residential Proximity Standards
A. Purpose: To protect the property value and lifestyle of citizens living in the proximity of nonresidential
developments without placing undue hardship on developers of non-residential
developments.
B. Applicability:
1. The provisions of Sections 7400C through 7400I shall apply to any development in an OP,
C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 or I-2 zoning classification when abutting any property in a residential
zoning classification or a PR zoning classification that is occupied by a residential use.
2. The provisions of Sections 7400G and 7400H shall apply to any development in an OP, C-1,
C-2, C-3, I-1 or I-2 zoning classification when located along a street with a fifty (50) or sixty
(60) foot right-of-way across from residential lots or tracts that front on such street. (Ord.
No. 1534, Adopted 4-27-05)
3. The provisions of Sections 7400C.2 and 7400D shall apply to any residential development in
a residential zoning classification or a PR zoning classification when abutting any property
in an OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 or I-2 zoning classification as specified hereinafter; however,
they shall not apply to residential developments that were preliminary or final platted or that
were submitted for preliminary or final plat approval before the adoption of such provisions.
4. The provisions of this section shall not apply to development on any property owned and
used by the City, the Mansfield Independent School District and any church regardless of
zoning provided that it complies with the requirements in Sections 7400E and 7400F. Ord.
No. 1534, Adopted 4-27-05).
5. Permitted uses that are in existence at the time of adoption of the provisions of this section
shall be governed by the Nonconforming Use Regulations of this ordinance. Any expansion
or addition to such existing uses shall conform to the provisions of this section.
6. The requirements in the provisions of this section shall not be administratively deferred or
waived by city staff. Any person who wishes to seek a special exception or variance may
follow the provisions in Sections 6300 and 8400.
7. It is the intent of this section to treat property in a PR zoning classification that is occupied
by a residential use the same as it is in a single-family residential zoning classification.
Therefore, all provisions of this section that apply to property or development in a singlefamily
residential zoning classification shall also apply to property or development in a PR
zoning classification that is occupied by a residential use.
C. Setback and Height Regulations
1. Non-residential Use:
a. Structures in an I-1 or I-2 zoning classification shall setback a minimum of forty (40)
feet from the boundary of any abutting property in a residential zoning classification.
The same setback requirement shall apply to all outside storage, loading docks, truck
berths, and routine parking or storage of tractor-trailers, and vehicles that are rated to
have a carrying capacity over one ton.
§7400
7400-2
b. Structures in an OP, C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning classification shall comply with the
minimum setback from the boundary of any abutting property in a residential zoning
classification as depicted in the table below in conjunction with the specifications in
BOTH the “Maximum Height” and “No. of Stories” columns.
Zoning Min. Setback (ft.) Max. Ht. (ft.) No. of Stories
OP & C-1 20 20 1
OP & C-1 35 35 2 or less
C-2 & C-3 52.5 35 1
C-2 & C-3 60 40 2 or less
C-2 & C-3 67.5 45 3 or less
C-2 & C-3 75 50 1 or more
2. Residential Use:
a. Residential lots in a residential zoning classification or a PR zoning classification that
abut properties in an OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 or I-2 zoning classification shall provide a
forty (40) foot minimum setback for the principle residential building along the lot lines
that abut the boundary of such non-residentially zoned property.
b. In order to accommodate the forty (40) foot minimum building setback, the minimum
residential lot depth shall be increased by the difference between forty (40) feet and the
minimum rear setback required by the residential or PR zoning district where the lot is
located; or the minimum residential lot width shall be increased by the difference
between forty (40) feet and the minimum side setback required by the residential or PR
zoning district where the lot is located, whichever is applicable.
D. Noise
1. Non-residential uses shall not generate any loud noise of such intensity as to create a
nuisance or detract from the use or enjoyment of the abutting residential uses. The
provisions in this paragraph do not apply to properties in the I-2, Heavy Industrial zoning
classification.
2. Outdoor speakers shall be directed away from any abutting property in a residential zoning
classification.
E. Setback for Trash Containers and Refuse or Recycling Storage Areas: Trash containers and
storage areas for refuse or materials awaiting disposal or recycling shall be set back a minimum
of twenty-five (25) feet from the boundary of any abutting property in a residential zoning
classification.
F. Lighting: All lighting of a non-residential use must be shielded or pointed away from any
abutting property in a residential zoning classification so there shall be no direct illumination
across the common boundary with the property in the residential zoning classification. This
restriction shall not apply to special events not exceeding seventy-two (72) hours or the lighting
of a sports facility that belongs to the City or the Mansfield Independent School District.
G. Driveway Access: No non-residential driveway access shall be permitted onto a street with a
fifty (50) or sixty (60) foot right-of-way across from residential lots or tracts that front on that
street unless no other reasonable access is available as determined by the Planning & Zoning
Commission during a plan review at the developer’s request. This restriction shall not apply if
§7400
7400-3
the street is shown in the City's most recent Thoroughfare Plan to have a right-of-way of seventy
(70) feet or larger.
H. Signage: Wall or free-standing signs that are located along a street with a fifty (50) or sixty (60)
foot right-of-way shall not be electrically or artificially illuminated when located across from
residential lots or tracts that front that street. This restriction shall not apply if the street is
shown in the City's most recent Thoroughfare Plan to have a right-of-way of seventy (70) feet or
larger.
7400-4
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§7500
7500-1
Section 7500. Open Storage and Screening Regulations.
A. Purpose: To encourage the most appropriate use of the land and to conserve and protect the
value of adjacent land and buildings; regulations are prescribed for the location and screening of
open storage of materials, commodities and vehicles of all types in the various districts in
accordance with the following standards:
B. In all PR, residential and mobile home districts, no open storage or display outside a building of
materials or commodities for sale at wholesale or retail or for storage purposes shall be
permitted, nor shall any motor vehicle or machinery storage other than that which is incidental to
the use of a premises as herein provided or permitted nor shall any truck or commercial vehicle
storage be permitted, except that one (1) panel delivery or pick-up truck not exceeding one (1)
ton capacity may be stored by the owner of a premises when such vehicle storage is incidental to
the main use of such premises.
C. No open storage or display outside a building of materials and commodities or any other objects
shall be permitted in the C-1 District. In the C-2 District, the open storage or display of items
intended for direct retail sales or rental shall be permitted under the following restrictions:
1. The area used for open display shall not be greater than ten (10) percent of the gross floor
area of the establishment having such display.
2. If the open display is located in the parking lot, the number of spaces available for parking
shall not be less than that required by Section 7200 of this Ordinance.
D. No open storage or display of any object, vehicle, boat, material or equipment shall be allowed
on public right-of-ways or designated private or public recreational areas. Any aforementioned
objects, vehicle, boat, material or equipment parked or located upon any public right-of-way, or
designated private or public recreational areas for a period longer than seventy-two (72) hours
shall be classified as storage and be subject to removal by the City without prior notice at the
owner's expense.
E. Open storage or display in the C-3, I-1 and I-2 Districts shall be placed on a gravel, asphalt or
concrete surface or other surface approved by the Director of Planning and not on natural ground
unless it is located more than thirty (30) feet from any street right-of-way or screened by an eight
(8) foot opaque fence. Such surface shall be maintained in good condition and free of weeds or
debris.
7500-2
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§7600
7600-1
Section 7600. Open Air Vending.
Within any commercial or industrial district, open air vending, as that term is herein defined, shall be
allowed upon obtaining a Certificate of Occupancy for such vending from the Building Official.
A. The Building Official shall issue such Certificate of Occupancy only if he finds:
1. That such vending will not endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the public and
specifically in this regard, that said vending will not unreasonably increase congestion upon
the public roadways in and about said vending location so as to endanger the safety of
drivers and pedestrians; and,
2. That the vendor applicant shall be in compliance with all ordinances and laws, including
provisions within this Ordinance, applicable to retail commercial activity, and have obtained
all other necessary permits.
3. That the vendor applicant shall be in compliance with all conditions imposed by the Building
Official upon said commercial activity necessary for the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
B. For the purpose of this ordinance, open air vending shall be defined as the sale of any
merchandise or goods from a fixed location upon privately owned property not within any
permanent building or structure designed for the sale of such goods. The term "open air
vending" shall specifically include the sale of merchandise or goods from "stands", "stalls", and
all other sales not within a permanent structure. The term "sale" is herein defined as the actual
transfer of goods or merchandise. The term open air vending, however, shall not include activity
of itinerant vendors who continuously move about from place to place, and who do not occupy
any particular parcel of private property as a permanent or stationary place for the conduct of
their business. This term does include seasonal vending operations such as "Snow Cones" and
"Ice Cream" stands, etc.
C. No open air vending shall be allowed to be located within any public right-of-way or city parks,
or connected with public utilities unless specifically approved by the City Council.
D. No open air vending shall be allowed to be located within any property zoned in a PR, A,
residential or OP District or within the required setbacks of any other zoning districts.
E. No open air vending shall be allowed in or from an unenclosed space or area.
F. Parked vehicles shall not be used as a base of operation for any open air vending.
7600-2
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§7700
7700-1
Section 7700. Nonconforming use regulations.
A. Intent:
1. Within the districts established by this ordinance or amendments thereto, there exists lots,
structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before
this ordinance was enacted, amended or otherwise made applicable to such lots, structures or
uses, but which do not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. It is
the intent of this ordinance to permit such Nonconforming uses to continue, under
regulations herein contained, until the same are removed, but not to encourage their survival.
2. It is further the intent of this ordinance that Nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or use prohibited
elsewhere in the same district.
3. Nonconforming uses are hereby declared to be incompatible with the permitted uses in the
districts involved.
4. For use in this section, a building shall be interpreted the same as structure and vise versa.
B. Nonconforming Uses Regulated: Except as herein provided, no Nonconforming use of land or
buildings shall be enlarged, changed, altered or repaired except in conformity with the
regulations contained in this article.
C. Nonconforming Status: Any use or structure which does not conform with the regulations of
the zoning district in which it is located shall be deemed a lawful nonconforming use or structure
when:
1. Such use or structure was in existence and lawfully operating at the time of passage of this
ordinance and has since been in regular and continuous use; or
2. Such use or structure is a lawful use at the time of the adoption of any amendment to this
ordinance but by such amendment is placed in a district wherein such use is not otherwise
permitted; or
3. Such use or structure was in existence at the time of annexation to the City and has since
been in regular and continuous use.
D. Continuing Lawful Non-Conforming Use of Property and Existence of Structures:
1. The lawful use of land or lawful existence of buildings or structures at the time of the
passage of this ordinance, although such do not conform to the provisions hereof, may be
continued; but if said Nonconforming use or building is discontinued or abandoned, any
future use of said premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
2. Discontinuance of a lawful Nonconforming use shall consist of the intent of the user or
owner to discontinue a nonconforming use and the actual act of discontinuance.
Abandonment of a lawful nonconforming building shall consist of the actual intent to
abandon by the user or owner and actual act of abandonment.
§7700
7700-2
3. A lawful Nonconforming use or building, when discontinued or abandoned, shall not be
resumed. The following shall constitute prima facie evidence of discontinuance or
abandonment.
a. Nonconforming uses: When land used for a lawful Nonconforming use shall cease to be
used in such manner for a period of six (6) month.
b. Nonconforming Buildings: When a building or other structure designed or used for a
lawful Nonconforming use shall cease to be used in such manner for a period of six (6)
months.
E. Changing Nonconforming Uses or Buildings:
1. A lawful Nonconforming use may be changed to another Nonconforming use of the same or
more restrictive zoning district classification, provided, that when a Nonconforming use is
changed to a Nonconforming use of a more restrictive classification, it shall not later be
reverted to the former less restrictive classification.
2. No lawful Nonconforming use shall be changed to another Nonconforming use which
requires more off-street parking facilities or off-street loading space than the original
Nonconforming use unless additional off-street parking facilities and loading space is
provided so as to comply with the requirements of Section 7200.
3. A conforming building shall not be changed to a use which would result in the building
becoming nonconforming.
F. Extension of Nonconforming Uses or Buildings.
1. A lawful Nonconforming building or structure may be enlarged or added to provided that the
enlargement or addition, when considered independently of the original building or
structure, complies with all applicable regulations of this ordinance.
2. Expansion, enlargement or intensification of a lawful Nonconforming use shall not be
permitted unless such expansion, enlargement or intensification, when considered
independently of the lawful Nonconforming use, complies with all applicable regulations of
this ordinance.
3. A building or structure occupied or used by a lawful Nonconforming use shall not be
enlarged, extended or structurally altered unless the use occupying or using such
enlargement, extension or alteration, when considered independently of the lawful
Nonconforming use, complies with all applicable regulations of this ordinance.
4. Repairs and maintenance work on a lawful Nonconforming building or on a conforming
building occupied by a lawful Nonconforming use may be made, provided that no structural
alterations shall be made except as required by law to preserve such building in a structural
sound condition and provided that there is no increase whatsoever in the degree or extent of
the previously existing nonconformity.
5. No lawful Nonconforming use within a building may be extended to occupy any land
outside the building.
§7700
7700-3
G. Termination of Nonconforming Uses and Buildings. The right to operate a legal
nonconforming use or building shall cease and such use shall be terminated under any of the
following circumstances:
1. When such use or building is abandoned, as hereinabove provided in Section 7700 D.
2. When any provision of this ordinance or any other ordinance, or Federal or State Statute is
violated with respect to a nonconforming use or nonconforming building.
3. When a lawful nonconforming use, building or structure is damaged by fire, explosion, act
of God or other calamity to the extent that the cost of the reconstruction or repair exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of the structure; except in the following
circumstances: a) The original property owner who has been living in a lawful
nonconforming mobile home or lawful nonconforming HUD-Code manufactured home,
which has been used for residential purposes, may rebuild or re-establish such lawful
nonconforming use with a HUD-Code manufactured home within six (6) months of the
destruction of the home; and b) a lawful non-conforming dwelling unit, which does not meet
the minimum floor area requirement of the PR or residential district where it is located, may
be rebuilt or replaced by a dwelling unit of equal or larger size, provided that a special
exception is granted by the Board of Adjustment as stipulated in Section 6300 of this
Ordinance.
4. When the right to maintain or operate a lawful nonconforming use or nonconforming
structure has been terminated by the Board of Adjustments as provided in Section 8400
hereof.
5. Whenever a lawful nonconforming use or building has been changed to conforming, such
use or building shall not thereafter be changed back to nonconforming.
6. Nothing in this ordinance shall be taken to prevent the restoration of a building destroyed by
fire, explosion, act of God, a public enemy or other calamity to the extent that the cost of the
reconstruction or repair does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of the
structure, nor the continued occupancy or use of such building or part thereof which existed
at the time of such partial destruction.
H. Exceptions
1. Existing land uses or structures, that do not conform with the required yard setbacks due to
land or right-of-way acquisition by a public agency with the power of eminent domain, shall
be exempted from the provisions of Subsection 7700G.3, provided that any reconstruction or
replacement does not cause a greater extent of nonconformance to the setback requirements
than the pre-existing nonconforming uses or structures and is not in conflict with the real
estate interest of any public agency. The expansion, enlargement or intensification of a preexisting
nonconforming use during reconstruction or replacement shall not qualify for the
exemption and shall continue to be regulated by the provisions of Section 7700.F.
2. Any carport in existence on December 15, 1996, which is non-conforming as to front, side or
rear setback restrictions or any carport receiving a building permit between November 25,
1996, and December 15, 1996, and not located within five (5) feet of the City RIGHT-OFWAY,
shall be heretofore a legal non-conforming use, subject to all provisions of this
section.
§7800
7800-1
Section 7800. Special Conditions.
A. General. The following sections describe the special conditions under which certain uses are
permitted in a zoning district when reference is made to one or more of said sections in the
Ordinance. A building permit or certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any permitted
use with "Special Conditions" until all of the required conditions have been met.
B. Special Conditions By Use:
1. Zero Lot Line Dwellings: Zero lot line dwellings shall meet each of the following structural
restrictions:
a. No window, door or any kind of opening shall be allowed in the zero lot line wall.
b. A three (3) foot overhang easement shall be secured from owner of property adjacent to
the zero lot line wall in the event that the eave projects beyond the zero lot line into the
adjacent property.
c. A ten (10) foot maintenance easement shall be secured from owner of property adjacent
to the zero lot line wall.
d. A minimum of ten (10) foot building separation between zero lot line dwellings.
e. A minimum of ten (10) foot building separation shall be provided between any zero lot
line dwelling and abutting single, two-family, or multiple family dwellings.
f. No zero lot line dwellings are allowed to be located on a lot line that abuts a public
right-of-way or private alley.
2. Townhome, Multi-family Dwelling or Apartment:
a. All structures shall have a minimum roof pitch of 4/12.
b. Dumpster Setback: All dumpsters shall setback at least fifty (50) feet from any abutting
Single-family Residential Districts.
c. No private recreation facilities for multi-family residential developments shall be located
within landscape buffer yards, street landscape setback or any required landscaped areas.
d. No boats, motor homes, trailers, recreational vehicles, motor homes, towed trailers or
similar vehicular equipment shall be parked or stored on the property of any multifamily
residential development. In case of an apartment or other rental housing
development, this requirement shall be incorporated into the rental contract.
e. Lighting Requirements: Sufficient lighting shall be installed by the developer at all
driveway entrances from public streets, driveway intersections, parking lots and
throughout the multi-family residential development per the Illumination Engineering
Society’s standards on illuminance levels for safety.
f. Pavement Specifications: All parking areas and driving lanes shall be constructed with
five (5) inches of concrete pavement on a scarified and compacted subgrade. All
§7800
7800-2
dumpster pads and loading area in front of dumpsters shall be constructed with six (6)
inches of concrete pavement on a scarified and compacted subgrade. The concrete
pavement shall be reinforced with three-eighth (3/8) inch steel bars spaced twenty-four
(24) inches on center each way or six by six (6 x 6), #6 gauge welded wire fabric. An
approved paving fiber may be substituted for the reinforcing steel. Chairs shall be used
to support reinforcement.
g. Access: Principal access to multi-family residential developments shall be restricted to
minor collector or larger streets. The primary connection from such access to major
collectors or larger streets shall not pass through any street that is bordered on both sides
by one of the Single-Family Residential Districts or a combination of those districts.
h. No single structure shall exceed three hundred (300) feet in length.
3. Manufacturing Housing or Camping Trailer: A manufactured home or camping trailer shall
be permitted only in a manufactured home rental community or a manufactured home
subdivision or an approved campground or recreational vehicle park.
4. Hotel and Motels:
a. To be classified as a hotel or motel, an establishment must meet each of the following
requirements:
1. The establishment shall contain a minimum of twenty (20) individual guest rooms or
units and an office.
2. The establishment shall furnish customary hotel service, including but not limited to
laundry service, linen service, telephone, maid service, use of and up-keep of
furniture.
3. The establishment shall maintain a register of guest, however, no guest shall be
registered for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
4. Guest rooms shall not be used in any form or manner as a permanent residence.
b. Hotels or motels shall provide interior access to guestrooms. The use of exterior
corridors on hotels or motels on any exterior façade of the building shall be prohibited.
Exterior access to guestrooms shall only be permitted for rooms facing a courtyard that
is enclosed on four sides by the hotel or motel building.
c. Outdoor recreational facilities at hotels and motels such as swimming pools, sports
courts and playgrounds shall be located behind the building, or if located on the side of
the building shall not be forward of the front building elevation that is closest to the
street. The facility must be screened from view of public rights-of-way by fencing,
landscaping, or a combination of these. Wood or chain link fencing shall not be
permitted.
5. Residential Accessory Buildings:
§7800
7800-3
a. An accessory building may be attached or semi-attached to, or detached from the main
residential building. Permitted uses or buildings accessory to a single or two-family
dwelling, apartment house or farm shall include, but are not limited to the following:
1. Single or two-family dwelling: a private garage for automobile storage, tool house,
lath or greenhouse as a hobby (no business), home work shop, children's playhouse,
storage house or garden shelter, but not involving the conduct of a business.
2. Apartment: Private recreational facilities as defined and regulated under Section
7800.B.7 below, employee’s washroom, a manager's apartment and office, and
laundry. The manager's apartment may be used as an office, but such facility shall
be included in computations of lot area requirements. The laundry room may be
used for clothes washing and drying facilities for the exclusive use of the tenants and
no exterior advertising of such uses may be permitted.
3. Farm: A barn, poultry house, stable, machinery shed, granary or other buildings
used for the storage or housing of usual products and animals raised or maintained
on a farm.
b. An accessory building for the purpose of maintaining property or livestock may be
erected prior to the construction of a principle building or use in a PR or residential
district provided that it meets the requirements below. Notwithstanding any other
requirements in this Zoning Ordinance, an accessory building for the purposes stated
hereinabove may be erected prior to the property being included in an approved plat.
Further, an accessory building may be erected on property zoned for non-residential
purposes, provided that such property contains more than 50 acres. When used in the
paragraphs here-in-below, the term "property" shall mean an area or tract(s) of land
contained in one recorded deed on file in the Deed Record Office of the County in which
the property is located.
1. A minimum of three (3) acres of land shall be required.
2. The accessory building must setback a minimum of 75 feet from all property
lines and 150 feet from any adjacent residential structure. Accessory
building used for horses or other animals must conform with the
requirements set forth in Subsection 14 d, e, f, g, h and i of Section 7800B
here-in-below.
3. The size of the accessory building shall be no larger than 1,500 square feet.
4. The accessory building shall be removed from the property within 24
months from the time that fifty (50) percent or more of the property is
included in an approved final plat, unless the accessory building complies
with all applicable regulations in this Zoning Ordinance and serves a
principle building or use occupying the same lot or premises as the
accessory building.
c. An attached or semi-attached accessory building shall be made structurally a
part of and 1) have a common wall with the main residential building; or 2) have
a continuous roof assembly and common attic with the main residential building.
Attached or semi-attached accessory buildings shall comply with the setback,
§7800
7800-4
height, lot coverage, masonry construction and all other provisions of this
ordinance applicable to the main residential building. Attached or semi-attached
accessory buildings shall not be subject to paragraphs d through p below.
d. An accessory building that is not attached to the main residence by a common
wall or continuous roof assembly with a common attic shall be considered a
detached accessory building and shall comply with the regulations set forth in
the following paragraphs.
e. One (1) detached garage may be built with the main residential building as part
of the original building permit for the main residential building under the
following regulations:
1. The detached garage shall be located at least fifty (50) feet behind the front
façade of the main residential building that is closest to the street, at least
five (5) feet from the side property line, seven and one-half (7.5) feet from
the rear property line and must not encroach upon any pre-established
building lines or easements.
2. The detached garage shall not be higher than twenty (20) feet or the main
residential building, whichever is less.
3. The combined square footage of the detached garage and the main
residential building shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage for the
district in which the property is located.
4. The detached garage shall be constructed of the predominant building
material (i.e., brick, stone, siding, etc.) used on the main residential building.
5. Any additional detached garages built with the main residential building or
detached garages that are built after the issuance of the building permit for
the main residential building shall be subject to the provisions set forth
below in Paragraphs f through p.
6. On property where a detached garage was constructed at the same time as
the main residential building, other accessory buildings or structures shall be
permitted, subject to the regulations set forth below in Paragraphs f through
p.
Ordinance No. 1488, Adopted 7/12/04
f. Accessory buildings or structures shall not exceed the maximum square footage
for each zoning district as depicted in the following table.
Zoning District Maximum Total Square Feet
For All Accessory Buildings or Structure*
2F 120 sq. ft.
SF-6/12 200 sq. ft.
§7800
7800-5
SF-7.5/12 200 sq. ft.
SF-7.5/16 200 sq. ft.
SF-7.5/18 200 sq. ft.
SF-8.4/16 400 sq. ft.
SF-8.4/18 400 sq. ft.
SF-9.6/20 400 sq. ft.
SF-12/22 400 sq. ft.
A 2% of the total area of the lot
SF-5AC/24 2% of the total area of the lot
*Where the area of a lot in any SF district exceeds the minimum required lot area for that
district, accessory buildings or structures may conform to the maximum total square footage
limits established in Section 7800.B.5.g. below. (Ordinance No. 1481, Adopted 4/26/04)
g. Notwithstanding the above, accessory buildings or structures for single-family homes in
the PR, 2F and MF-1 Districts shall conform to the maximum square footage limit for
accessory buildings or structures shown below.
Max. Total Sq. Ft. for
Area of the Residential Lot All Accessory Buildings or Structures
Less than 8,400 sq. ft. 200 sq. ft.
Between 8,400 sq. ft. and 19,999 sq. ft. 400 sq. ft.
20,000 sq. ft. or greater 2% of the total area of the lot
(Ordinance No. 1481, Adopted 4/26/04)
h. The maximum square footage limits shown hereinabove shall be cumulative of all
accessory buildings or structures for each lot. The square footage within a loft or attic
shall be excluded from the calculation of maximum square footage of an accessory
building or structure.
i. Accessory buildings or structures for duplexes and townhomes in the MF-1 and MF-2
districts shall conform to the standards established for accessory buildings or structures
in the 2F District.
j. Accessory buildings or structures for multi-family apartments or dwellings in MF-1 and
MF-2 Districts shall comply with the area, height and setback standards for the principal
buildings in such districts.
k. Accessory buildings or structures shall comply with the minimum setback from the
property line as depicted in the table below in conjunction with the height of the
accessory building or structure. Accessory buildings or structures shall be limited to one
story, and may have a loft or attic, provided that such loft or attic is not used as habitable
space. The height of accessory buildings or structures shall be measured from the
ground to the highest point of the building or structure.
Max. Accessory Minimum Setbacks
§7800
7800-6
Building Height Min. Rear Yard Min. Side Yard
8' 7.5’ 5’
10’ 9.5’ 7’
12’ 11.5’ 9'
l. Accessory buildings or structures may be located in the side yard provided that they
meet the minimum height/setback requirements described in subsection 7800.B.5.k and
that they are at least 75’ from the front property line or behind the rear façade of the
main residential building that is furthest from the street.
m. On double frontage lots, accessory buildings or structures may be located within the 25’
rear yard setback provided that they meet the minimum height/setback requirements
described in subsection 7800.B.5.k.
n. On corner lots that back up to the rear yard of another lot, accessory buildings or
structures may be located within the exterior side street setback provided that they meet
the minimum height/setback requirements described in subsection 7800.B.5.k. No
accessory building or structure shall be permitted within the exterior side street setback
of a lot that backs up to the side yard of another lot that faces the side street.
o. A minimum distance of 5’ from accessory buildings or structures to the house and to
other accessory buildings or structures shall be required. No minimum separation shall
be required for accessory buildings or structures with an area of 120 square feet or less.
p. The Board of Adjustment may grant a Special Exception to allow an increase in the
maximum area or height, or a reduction of the minimum setback requirements for
accessory buildings or structures, subject to the conditions established in Section
6300.E.6 of this ordinance. (Ordinance No. 1426, Adopted 5/12/03)
6. Home Occupation: A home occupation is permitted when the occupation or activity
conducted within a dwelling unit is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the
premises for dwelling purposes and provided that:
a. No retail business of any sort is involved.
b. No stock in trade is kept nor commodities sold except those made or used on the
premises.
c. Only members of the family residing on the premises are employed.
d. No internal or external alterations, special construction or features are involved.
e. There is no advertising of any type on premise and no other display or storage of
materials or exterior identification of the home occupation or variation from the
residential character of the main building or any accessory buildings.
f. No equipment is used which creates offensive noises, vibrations, sound, smoke or dust,
odors, heat, glare, x-ray, or electrical disturbance to radio or television. In particular, a
home occupation includes the following and similar uses: artist's studio, dressmaking
§7800
7800-7
and millinery; limited professional practice provided no clients or customers are
permitted on the premises (such as lawyer, engineer, architect or accountant); music
teaching limited to not more than two (2) pupils at one time; the keeping of up to four
(4) children under the age of sixteen (16) years at any one time apart from their parents,
guardians or custodians for regular periods of time for compensation, provided that the
total number of children under the age of sixteen (16) years on the premises at any one
time, including those kept without compensation and those who reside on the premises,
shall not exceed eight (8).
g. Repair of automobiles for a fee shall not be permitted as a home occupation.
7. Private Recreation Facility: Private recreation facilities in residential districts shall, for
multi-family residential developments, subdivisions, or homeowners associations, be
restricted to use by the occupants of the residence and their guests, or by members of a club
or homeowner's association and their guests, and shall include but not be limited to such uses
as swimming pools, open game fields, common green areas or open space, basketball,
shuffleboard, racquet ball, croquet, and tennis courts, and meeting or locker rooms. Activity
areas shall be fenced and screened from abutting properties. Dispensing of food and
beverages shall be permitted on the premises only for the benefit of users of the recreation
facility and not for the general public. Off-street parking shall be required on the basis of
one parking space for each four thousand (4,000) square feet of area devoted to recreational
use with a minimum of four (4) spaces.
8. Reserved for future use.
9. Swimming Pool: All public, private and commercial pools including those permitted as
private recreation facilities shall conform to the following provisions:
a. If located in any residential zoning district, the pool shall be intended and used solely for
the enjoyment of the occupants of the principle use of the property on which it is located
and their guests.
b. A swimming pool may be located anywhere on a premise except in the required front
yard, provided that the water’s edge of the swimming pool shall not be located closer
than five (5) feet to any side property line or seven and a half (7-1/2) feet to any rear
property line, or within any easement. Swimming pool pump and filter installations
shall not be located within the front yard or any public easement and shall be screened
from adjacent property and public streets.
c. The swimming pool shall be enclosed by a wall or fence as set forth in Section 7300.
10. Private Utility Shop or Storage: Shall not be permitted to be used for commercial or
business purposes, whether full time or part time, and not including the storage of junk or
hazardous materials, equipment or vehicles not customarily associated with a residence.
11. TV Dish Antenna: Permitted only if located in the rear of a main building on the same lot
and only if conforming with all yard requirements as provided for accessory buildings in
Section 4500 C.
12. Private Stable: All private stables shall conform to the requirements as set forth for
commercial stable in subsection 14 c, d, e, f, g, h and i below. If the private stable is located
§7800
7800-8
on a lot or tract of land with less than three acres, a specific use permit shall be obtained by
the property owner in accordance to the provisions of Section 6100 prior to the construction
of the stable.
13. Stable, riding club: All stables owned by a riding club shall conform to requirements as set
forth for commercial stables in subsection 14 c, d, e, f, g, h and i below.
14. Commercial Stable: All commercial stables shall conform to the following requirements:
a. No commercial stable shall be permitted if its existence would be incompatible with
surrounding residential land uses and zoning.
b. The minimum lot size area shall be two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet.
c. If any horses (including horses, ponies, mules, donkeys and other animals used for
riding) are kept outside of any building, the maximum number of horses permitted shall
be in accordance with the following schedule:
Number of Horses Minimum Area
l 15,000 Sq. Ft. (1/3 Acre)
2 21,780 Sq. Ft. (1/2 Acre)
3 1 acre
each additional horse 1/2 Acre
A minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet of space shall be provided for each horse
kept within a corral or any outside animal retainment area.
d. If all horses (and other riding animals) are kept inside a building, the maximum number
of horses permitted shall be limited to the building capacity to house, show, and ride said
horses. A minimum area of 100 square feet shall be provided for each horse kept under
roof.
e. Stables, corrals, animal enclosure and retainment structures, feed, and bedding shall be
located seventy-five (75) feet from any lot line and one hundred fifty (150) feet from any
residential structure in order to minimize odor and nuisance problems. Open pasture
may extend to the lot line.
f. Adequate and secure fencing shall be provided around all animal retainment areas to
prevent unwanted trespassing onto adjacent properties. All fencing must be a minimum
of five (5) feet high and of sufficient strength to retain animals and maintained in good
condition. All gates must be kept closed at all times.
g. A vegetative strip at least fifty (50) feet wide shall be maintained between any corral,
animal retainment structure, and any surface water or well in order to minimize runoff,
prevent erosion, and promote quick nitrogen absorption.
h. In an area with a slope of five (5) percent or more, corrals and animal retainment
structures shall be one hundred and fifty (150) feet from a well and two hundred (200)
§7800
7800-9
feet from any natural drainage, unless the water is upgrade or there is adequate diking as
determined by the Building Inspector.
i. Premises must be maintained in such a manner as not to create a health nuisance.
Corrals and stables shall be maintained in clean, sanitary condition at all times, and
sprayed periodically to prevent the breeding of flies and insects. Refuse and manure
must be collected daily, and placed in fly and rat proof containers and disposed of
weekly.
j. Parking stalls required are one (1) stall per every two (2) horses (or other riding animals)
based on the number of horse stalls or maximum horses allowed on the property, plus
one (1) per every employee on the largest shift.
k. Special events such as fat stock shows, exhibitions, and contests shall only be permitted
when a Temporary Use Permit has been granted and are subject to the requirements of
Section 6200 B, Subsection lb.
15. Airport Landing Field and Heliport.
a. Any proposed airport or heliport shall comply with regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration or other authority qualified by law to established airport or air-traffic
regulations.
b. The approach zone to the airport or heliport shall be so situated as to minimize any
interference and negative impact upon existing and future use of adjacent properties and
to insure the safety of aircraft in landing and taking off and the safety of persons
occupying or using the area within the approach zone and the security of property
thereon. An approach zone, once designated during the establishment of the airport or
heliport, shall not be changed in the future unless approved by the City Council
c. Off-street parking required: one (1) space for every plane space within the hangers plus
one (1) space for every tie-down space plus one (1) for every two (2) employees.
d. Building setbacks; any building, hanger, or other structure shall be at least one hundred
(100) feet from any street or lot line.
e. All repairs of airplanes and machinery shall be done inside hangers. No servicing or
fueling facilities shall be included as part of a heliport. A proposed airport or heliport
shall comply with any other restrictions imposed by the City Council for the safety and
welfare of the general public.
16. Commercial Parking Lot or Structure: Facilities for servicing of automobiles may be
included in commercial parking lots or structures provided that such facilities are primarily
an internal function for use only by automobiles occupying the structure and creates no
special problems of ingress and egress.
17. Car Wash: No car wash, whether full or self service shall be permitted if its existence
generates obnoxious conditions perceptible at the abutting property lines of the tract on
which the facility is located.
§7800
7800-10
18. Auto Repair Garages, Paint and Body Shops Tire Changing and Patching Shops:
Automobile repairing, painting, glass, upholstering, auto tire body and fender work shall be
performed only under the following conditions.
a. All body and fender repairing shall be done within a completely enclosed building or
room with stationary windows, doors or other openings that may be opened only at
intervals necessary for ingress and egress;
b. No spray painting may be done except in a building or room specially designed for that
purpose;
c. All other auto repairing, glass, upholstering, and tire work shall be conducted within a
building enclosed on at least three (3) sides.
d. All temporary storage of vehicles awaiting dismantling or repair and outside storage of
materials or products for finishing, fabrication, and disposal, shall be completely
screened from the public's view by a six (6) foot high opaque fence.
19. Reserved for future use.
20. Farm, Ranch or Orchard: A minimum lot area of three (3) acres or more shall be required
for farm, ranch or orchard use. Stables, corrals, pens, barns, buildings and other structures
used for the enclosure or retainment of farm animals shall conform to requirements as set
forth in subsection 14 e, f, g, h and i above.
21. Establishments that sell alcoholic beverages: All establishments that sell alcoholic
beverages shall conform to the following provisions:
a. The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permissible only after obtaining the appropriate
licenses and/or permits in accordance with the applicable State of Texas regulations.
b. When applying for a Mixed Beverage Permit from the State of Texas, a restaurant that
holds a food and beverage certificate and private club permit from the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Commission prior to September 10, 2005 is exempt from the requirements in
subsection c and d below provided that the restaurant has not been closed for business
for more than six months preceding the application.
c. No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted by any establishment which is located
within three hundred (300) feet of a church, public or private school or public hospital.
The measurement of the distance between a place of business where alcoholic beverages
are sold and a church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street
fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. The
measurement of the distance between a place of business where alcoholic beverages are
sold and public or private schools shall be in a direct line from the property line of the
public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line
across intersections.
d. No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted by any establishment which is located
within three hundred (300) feet of a day-care center or child-care facility, as defined by
Section 42.002, Texas Human Resources Code. The measurement of the distance
between a place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a day-care center or
§7800
7800-11
child-care facility shall be in a direct line from the property line of the day-care center or
child-care facility to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across
intersections. In accordance with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, the minimum
distance requirement shall not apply if:
1. The establishment holds a food and beverage certificate from the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Commission;
2. The establishment and a day-care center or a child-care facility are located on
different stories of a multistory building;
3. The establishment and a day-care center and a child-care facility are located in
separate buildings and either the establishment or the day-care center or child-care
facility is located on the second story or higher of a multistory building;
4. The establishment is adjacent to a foster group home, foster family home, family
home, agency group home, or agency home as those terms are defined by Section
42.002 of the Texas Human Resources Code; or
5. The establishment sells alcoholic beverages for off-premise consumption in
accordance with the applicable State of Texas regulations.
e. Establishments that sell alcohol beverages under a mixed beverage late hours permit
issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission may sell alcoholic beverages on
Sundays between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. and on any other day between the
hours of 12:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. in accordance with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Code.
f. In accordance with Section 2200.B.1 of the Zoning Ordinance, any establishment which
derives more than 75 percent of its gross revenues from the sale of alcoholic beverages
shall be defined as a bar.
Ordinance No. 1549, Adopted 11/14/05
22. Retail and Service Establishments Not Elsewhere Listed: Any retail sales or service
establishment which is not listed in Section 4400B may be permitted in the designated
Districts, except in the OP, C-1 and C-2 Districts, all inventory, equipment and items for sale
are displayed entirely within an enclosed building; and further provided that such use is not
noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, gas fumes, noise or vibration
and that no type of manufacturing or treatment shall be permitted on any premises in the OP,
C-1 and C-2 Districts other than the manufacture of products clearly incidental to the
conduct of a retail business on the premises.
23. Temporary Batch Plant: The Director of Public Works may issue a permit for a temporary
batch plant provided that the plant is located at least 300 feet away from any park, school,
child care center, or residential structure and that the plant shall not be located on the same
property more than 120 days. The operator of a temporary batch plant must apply to the
Board of Adjustment for a Special Exception under Section 6300 of the Zoning Ordinance if
the plant is to be located closer than 300 feet to any park, school, child care center or
residential structure, or if the plant will be located on the same property more than 120 days.
§7800
7800-12
All temporary batch plants, whether allowed by permit or by Special Exception, shall
conform to the following requirements:
a. The stationary equipment of a temporary batch plant shall not be located closer than 100
feet to the nearest property line.
b. The hours of operation of a temporary batch plant shall be restricted to Monday through
Friday from 7:00 am to 7:00 pm, and Saturdays, 9:00 am to 5:00 pm. Hauling aggregate
(sand and gravel) to or from the site on Saturdays shall be prohibited.
c. The site on which the temporary batch plant is located shall be returned to its original
condition within thirty (30) days following the termination of the plant operations.
d. No more than one temporary batch plant shall be permitted on the same property within
a period of eighteen (18) consecutive months.
e. A temporary batch plant shall be located on property of the construction site or abutting
the construction site or project.
f. Concrete or asphalt from a temporary batch plant shall not be trucked over to any other
construction site other than the site of the project for which the plant was approved.
g. A temporary batch plant shall comply with all standards of and must receive a permit
from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. A plant shall meet all current
city ordinances pertaining to storm water, dust or other environmental standards.
(Ordinance No. 1415, Adopted 2/10/03)
24. Offices: Office development in the OP, Office Park District, shall be subject to the
following additional supplemental conditions:
a. Impervious surface coverage consisting of all buildings and structures and all paved or
impervious surfaces shall not exceed ninety (90) percent of the total lot area.
b. Store front, show window, or display window effects shall not be permitted and there
shall be no display from windows or doors and no storage of merchandise in the building
or on the premises except in quantities customarily found in professional or business
offices and the associated retail and service type business.
c. Permitted retail and service type uses in the OP district shall be conducted for the sole
convenience of the occupants of the associated office building and there shall be no
entrance to any such place of business except from the inside of the building.
25. Industries Not Elsewhere Listed: Industrial uses in the I-l, Light Industrial District shall
include only those operations which are not offensive by reason of the creation of a hazard
or emission of detectable dust, odor, glare, noise, smoke, gas, fumes or vibration beyond the
bounding property lines of the lot or tract upon which the use is located. It is the intent of
the I-l, Light Industrial District that the processing of raw material, to be used by another
industrial operation, not be permitted. Manufacturing or industrial operations not
specifically listed in the Permitted Use Table are intended to be located in the I-2, Heavy
Industrial District unless such operations meet the special conditions set forth above for the
§7800
7800-13
I-l, Light Industrial District. Said conditions shall apply to both listed and unlisted uses
permitted in the I-l District. The installation of abatement devices for control of dust, odor,
noise, etc. may be necessary in certain instances.
26. New and Used Car Sales Lot: No combined new and used car sales lot shall have more than
fifty (50) percent of the vehicle units for sale made up of used cars.
27. Warehouses: All mini-warehouses located in the C-3 District shall setback a minimum of
one hundred (100) feet from the front lot line. No outside storage or display of merchandise,
vehicles, equipment or objects are permitted in the C-2 District except as provided in Section
7500C of the Ordinance.
28. Building Material and Lumber Sales, Nursery Garden Center – Notwithstanding the
restrictions of Section 7500C, outside storage of materials, supplies, products and containers
customarily associated with building materials, lumber sales and plant nurseries are
permitted in the C-2 and C-3 Districts provided such storage area is visually screened from
the street by a six (6) foot high solid fence, and provided that all building materials and
lumber shall be placed on pallets or neatly packaged and consist of no used items; and
provided that all plant or landscaping materials be balled or burlaped or neatly contained in
pots and/or buckets.
29. In the C-3, Commercial-Manufacturing District, no trailer, truck or recreational vehicle
available for rent shall exceed the size of a single rear axle vehicle. Trailers available for
rent in said Districts shall be limited to a single wheel, dual axle, bumper pull type
maximum.
30. Adult Entertainment Establishment: Adult entertainment establishments shall conform to
with all applicable regulations in the Mansfield Code of Ordinances as now existing or as
hereafter amended.
31. Reserved for future use.
32. Quarters for an On-Site Manager or Caretaker of a Mini-warehouse Facility: Residential
quarters for mini-warehouse facilities shall conform to the following requirements:
a. One residential unit shall be permitted as an accessory use for each mini-warehouse
facility.
b. Occupancy of the residential unit shall be limited to the on-site manager or caretaker of
the mini-warehouse facility and immediate family of the occupant.
c. The residential unit shall not be leased or rented.
d. The residential unit shall be located inside the office or attached to the office by a
common wall.
e. The residential unit shall be limited to 1,000 square feet of floor area.
f. A minimum of two (2) parking spaces, enclosed in a garage or unenclosed, shall be
provided for the residential unit, exclusive of the required parking for the miniwarehouse
office.
§7800
7800-14
33. Food Carts: Food carts shall conform to the following requirements:
a. For the purposes of this section, a food cart is defined as a non self-propelled, vehicle
mounted food service establishment designed to be readily movable. A food cart may be
used only for packaged or unpackaged non-potentially hazardous food and hot dog-like
products including bratwurst. A food cart business shall not include a grill, smoker or a
cart where food is prepared over an open flame.
b. For the purposes of this section, the health authority is that authority designated in
Section 94 of the Mansfield Code of Ordinances.
c. All food cart operators are required to obtain an annual food service permit from the
health authority.
d. No food cart shall operate within the City of Mansfield unless the owner or operator of
the cart first obtains a business license from the City. An application for a business
license will not be processed unless accompanied by a copy of the food service permit
issued by the health authority and a letter from the property owner stating that the food
cart is permitted to operate on the property.
e. If any unwrapped foods are prepared, stored, displayed, or served on the food cart, a
three-compartment sink and hand sink with soap and disposable towels shall be required
on the food cart.
f. Carts requiring sinks must be equipped with a potable water system that is under
pressure or gravity feed and be capable of providing hot and cold water at a minimum
rate of one-half (.5) gallon per minute. The system must be of an adequate capacity, as
determined by the health authority, for food preparation, utensil cleaning and hand
washing. The water inlet must be located so it will not be contaminated by waste
discharge, road dust, oil, grease and similar materials. The water outlet must be capped
at all times except during time of service. Liquid waste must be stored in a retention
tank that is at least fifteen (15) percent larger than the water supply tank. Liquid waste
may only be disposed of in an approved sanitary sewer. Discharge of wastewater on the
ground or into a storm sewer is prohibited.
g. Mechanical refrigeration and hot food storage must be provided for the maintenance of
all potentially hazardous foods. All potentially hazardous food must be kept at 41F or
below or at 140F or above. The use of ice, dry ice, and Sterno as a means of
maintaining proper food temperatures is not approved unless written permission is given
by the health authority. Coolers that are smooth, durable, and easily cleanable may be
used for the storage of soft drinks. The use of Styrofoam is prohibited.
h. All food products must come from sources approved by the health authority. All
prepackaged foods must be properly labeled. Home-prepared foods of any kind are
prohibited.
i. All finishes on the food cart must be smooth, durable, non-absorbent, and easily
cleanable.
j. All food and any items coming in contact with food are to be stored above the ground
and protected from contamination. The use of open condiments is prohibited.
§7800
7800-15
Condiments must be dispensed from individual packets or from a closed dispenser such
as a squeeze container.
k. Wiping cloths must be stored in an approved sanitizer at appropriate strength when not
in actual use.
l. A covered trash receptacle must be provided for the public’s use and removed from the
premises when the food cart is not present.
m. Public restrooms must be easily accessible to employees of the food cart.
n. Every portion of a food cart must be entirely covered by a building overhang or a
canopy or umbrella that must be removed from the premises when the food cart is not
present.
o. The following items must be kept on site and used as necessary:
1. A calibrated product thermometer scale 0F to 220F;
2. Test strips for the type of sanitizer used; and
3. Food grade gloves.
p. Each employee of the food cart and the owner must obtain all appropriate cards, permits,
licenses or certificates regarding food handling from the health authority prior to the
issuance of a food service permit.
q. All food carts must operate from a commissary approved by the health authority. The
food cart operator must submit to the health authority a letter from the owner of the
commissary giving permission to use that establishment as a commissary. All food carts
must report at least once per day to the commissary for supplies, clean up of the food
cart and any other activities related to the operation of the food cart, such as the use of a
three-compartment sink for washing large items. When not in use the food cart must be
stored at the commissary in a covered area protected from the weather.
r. The owner or operator of a food cart must submit to the health authority such plans,
drawings, specifications and other information that fully describe the food cart as the
health authority may require.
s. Any food cart that operates with propane must be located at least ten (10) feet from the
building and at least twenty feet from any opening into the building. Additionally, a
minimum of one (1) two and one-half (2.5) pound fire extinguisher must be located
within twenty (20) feet of the food cart.
t. Electrical cords may not extend more than six (6) feet beyond the food cart, and must be
installed and secured to prevent safety hazards.
u. A food cart shall only be permitted on property with an existing retail shopping center
that has at least one (1) anchor tenant with a minimum floor area of 50,000 square feet.
The food cart must be located on the same lot occupied by said anchor tenant.
§7800
7800-16
v. Only one (1) food cart shall be permitted per retail shopping center.
w. A food cart shall not be allowed in any required parking space of the retail shopping
center.
34. Gas well drilling and production and line compressors: Gas wells, drilling and production of
gas, and Line Compressors facilities shall conform to the regulations set forth in Section
7960 of the Zoning Ordinance. (Ordinance No. 1703-08, Adopted 8/25/08) (OR-1766-10,
Amended 4/27/10)
35. The construction of an accessory dwelling in any A, PR or SF zoning district shall be
permitted, subject to the following:
a. The accessory dwelling shall be built with the main residential building at the time of the
original building permit.
b. The accessory dwelling shall be made structurally a part of the main residential building
and:
1. Have a common wall with the main residential building, or,
2. Have a continuous roof assembly and common attic with the main residential
building.
c. The habitable floor area of an accessory dwelling shall not exceed 1,000 square feet or
fifty (50) percent of the habitable floor area of the main residential building, whichever
is less. The accessory dwelling and the main residential building together shall not
exceed the maximum lot coverage allowed by the regulations of the zoning district in
which the property is located.
d. The maximum height of an accessory dwelling shall not exceed the height of the main
residential building.
e. Occupancy of the accessory dwelling shall be limited to domestic servants or caretakers
employed on the premises, temporary guests, or family members of the owner of the
premises. Guests may occupy such dwelling no more than 90 consecutive days in any
twelve-month period.
f. An accessory dwelling shall not be rented as an apartment or used as a separate
domicile.
g. No more than one accessory dwelling shall be allowed on any lot or tract.
h. An accessory dwelling must comply with the same minimum side and rear setback
requirements as the main residential building.
i. No separate driveway approach shall be permitted for an accessory dwelling.
j. An accessory dwelling shall be constructed of the predominant building and roofing
materials used on the main residential building.
§7800
7800-17
k. All utilities must be on the same meter as the main residential building.
l. Applications may be made to the Board of Adjustment for a special exception for any
accessory dwelling which does not comply with the regulations above, subject to the
provisions of Section 6300.E.7 of this ordinance.
Ordinance No. 1487, Adopted 7/12/04
36. Eating Places with Drive-Through Service: In addition to the conditions specified in
Sections 6100.F and G of this Ordinance, Eating Places with Drive-Through Service shall be
subject to the following supplemental conditions:
a. For the purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
1. Cross access shall mean a service drive providing vehicular access between two or
more contiguous sites so that drivers need not enter the public street system.
2. Stacking lane shall mean an area of stacking spaces and driving lane provided for
vehicles waiting for drive-through service that is physically separated from other
traffic and pedestrian circulation on the site.
3. Stacking space shall mean an area within a stacking lane for vehicles waiting to
order and/or finish a drive-through transaction.
b. Two (2) points of access to the property shall be provided to aid in traffic circulation.
c. Shared access with adjacent lots should be established wherever feasible. Shared access
should be provided by a driveway connecting two or more contiguous lots to the public
street system.
d. Cross access should be provided across the width of the property to adjacent lots. An
access easement must be established wherever cross access is provided.
e. The stacking lane(s) shall not be parallel to a public street when there is not a building or
a row of parking spaces between the stacking lane(s) and the street.
f. The stacking lane(s) should be designed to prevent circulation congestion on the
property and on adjacent public streets. The design should minimize conflicts between
pedestrian and vehicular traffic and should not impede access in or out of parking
spaces.
g. The stacking lane(s) for vehicles waiting for drive-in service shall be clearly delineated
from traffic aisles, other stacking lanes and parking areas with striping, curbing,
landscaping or alternative paving.
h. The stacking lane(s) shall be integrated with the on-site circulation pattern and shall not
enter or exit directly into a public street.
i. For a stacking lane next to a curb, landscaping or property line, a by-pass or exit lane
shall be provided to allow vehicles to leave the stacking lane.
§7800
7800-18
j. The stacking lane(s) should accommodate at least five (5) stacking spaces before the
order board and four (4) stacking spaces between the order board and the transaction
window.
k. The intersection of a stacking lane and walk-in customer access shall be clearly
delineated with a crosswalk with alternative paving, and/or striping.
l. Each stacking lane shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet along straight segments
and a minimum width of twelve (12) feet along curve segments.
m. The stacking lane, menu or order board and speaker shall be located a minimum of one
hundred (100) feet from the property line of residential zoning district.
n. When a stacking lane(s) is not screened by the restaurant building, additional screening
shall be provided by planting shrubs along the entire lot line that is parallel or close to
parallel to the stacking lane. The shrubs must be planted at three (3) feet on center and
have a minimum height of three (3) feet at the time of planting.
o. A landscape buffer with a minimum width of twenty (20) feet shall be provided along
the side lot lines of the property. The buffer must have one (1) tree planted for each
twenty-five (25) linear feet or portion thereof.
p. Exposed machinery and areas for storage, service and disposal shall be screened from
adjacent lots and public streets using the same predominant construction materials on the
building.
q. The design of proposed buildings and additions should complement, whenever feasible,
the roof line, roof pitch, arrangement of openings, color, exterior materials, proportion
and scale of existing non-residential buildings in the vicinity.
r. An Eating Place with Drive-Through Service shall not be permitted on property within
the boundaries of Historic Mansfield TIRZ No. 2 as established in Ordinance No. OR-
1861-12 unless it is approved by the City Council as a Planned Development District.
s. An Eating Place with Drive-Through Service should comply with the driveway design
and spacing requirements and other application requirements in the City of Mansfield
Roadway Design Manual.
t. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
recommend and the City Council may approve such modifications, changes or
alternatives to the above conditions as they deem appropriate.
37. Solar panel systems shall conform to the following requirements:
a. Solar panel systems shall meet all applicable codes and ordinances and shall be installed
only after issuance of a building permit.
b. Roof-mounted solar panel systems shall comply with the following:
§7800
7800-19
1. Solar panel systems shall be permitted on the roof of a building provided that the
panels are not located on a front or side roof slope facing any public street or a rear
roof slope facing a street with four or more lanes as shown in the Thoroughfare Plan.
2. Solar panel systems shall have a top edge that is parallel to the roof ridge and shall
conform to the slope of the roof.
3. Solar panel systems may be located on any roof slope of an accessory building or
structure, such as a patio cover or detached garage, subject to the regulations in this
Sub-section b, Paragraphs 2 and 5.
4. Solar panel systems mounted on flat roofs shall not exceed the maximum height
permitted within the zoning district and shall be screened in accordance with Section
7301.A of this ordinance.
5. Solar panel systems shall be positioned on the roof so as not to extend above or
beyond the edge of any ridge, hip, valley or eave.
c. Ground-mounted solar panel systems shall comply with the following:
1. A ground-mounted solar panel system is not permitted as the primary use of a
property.
2. On residential property, ground-mounted solar panel systems shall comply with the
maximum square footage and minimum setback requirements for residential
accessory buildings and structures. On non-residential property, ground-mounted
solar panel systems shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for nonresidential
buildings and structures and shall not be located within any required
bufferyard or parking space.
3. Ground-mounted solar panel systems shall not be located between a property line
abutting a street and the building.
4. Masonry and architectural requirements shall not apply to ground-mounted solar
panel systems.
5. Ground-mounted solar panel systems on residential property shall be screened from
view of the street or adjacent properties by an opaque screening fence. Except in the
I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts, ground-mounted solar panel systems on non-residential
property shall be screened from view of the street and adjacent properties by a
screening wall constructed of materials that match the predominant material used on
the building.
6. The maximum height of ground mounted solar panel systems shall not exceed the
height of the required opaque fence and in no case shall exceed eight (8) feet.
7. Long lengths of conduit and wiring associated with the system’s connection to the
primary electrical panel shall be placed underground.
d. Supporting equipment for solar panel systems, including power conditioning equipment
such as batteries for electricity storage and stand-by gasoline electric generators shall be
§7800
7800-20
located behind the building and shall be screened by an opaque screening device, except
that wall-mounted inverters may be located next to the electric meter.
e. Solar panel systems shall be installed in conformance with all applicable City codes and
ordinances, including the 2015 International Fire Code and future amendment thereof.
f. On residential lots or tracts of two (2) acres or larger, roof-or ground-mounted solar
panel systems may face a public street provided that the solar panel system is located at
least three hundred (300) feet from any street right-of-way line. An opaque fence shall
not be required to screen ground-mounted solar panel systems meeting this provision.
g. Solar panel systems incorporated into building materials such as roof shingles or tiles,
windows, siding, or other architectural features integral to a building’s design and are
reasonably indistinguishable from traditional building materials may be installed on any
roof or façade of the building. The eligibility of a solar panel system under this
paragraph shall be subject to the determination of the Director of Planning.
h. The City Council may approve an alternate location than specified in this Section for a
roof-mounted or ground-mounted solar panel system at one (1) meeting after holding a
public hearing. Written notice of the hearing shall be sent to owners of real property, as
they appear on the last approved tax roll, situated within two hundred (200) feet of the
exterior boundary of the property on which the solar panel system is requested at least
ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall also be
published in the official newspaper of the City of Mansfield at least ten (10) days prior
to the date of the hearing.
§7900
7900-1
Section 7900. Industrialized Housing and Building Regulations
A. General Provisions.
In compliance to Article 5221f-1, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, all local requirements and
regulations relating to land use, zoning, building setback, site planning and development, subdivision
control, landscaping and architectural requirements, erection and installation shall be uniformly
applied to industrialized housing and building without distinctions as to whether the housing or
buildings are manufactured or are constructed on-site.
B. Construction and Installation Requirements.
For each installation and related on-site construction of industrialized housing or building within its
corporate limits, the City of Mansfield specifically requires:
1. That a compete set of design plans and specifications bearing the stamp of the Texas
Industrialized Building Code Council be submitted to the City for review for compliance with
the mandatory state codes.
2. That all applicable local permits and licenses and fees be obtained before any construction
begins on a building site.
3. That all modules or modular components within an industrialized housing or building bear an
approved decal or insignia under rules of the Texas Department of Labor and Standards
reflecting that they have been inspected at the manufacturing plant or facility.
4. That the industrialized housing or building be placed on an approved permanent foundation.
5. That the Building Official be notified for inspection of all foundation and other on-site
construction, and installation of modules or modular components on the permanent foundation to
assure compliance with approved designs, plans and specifications.
§7900
7900-2
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§7950
7950-1
Section 7950. Wireless Telecommunication Facility Regulations.
A. Purpose: Wireless telecommunications facilities used in transmitting and receiving signal
energy are essential and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the
City. The purpose of this section is to govern the placement of these facilities to:
1. assure that their location and use do not compromise the aesthetic quality of the community;
2. encourage operators of antenna facilities and antennas to locate them in areas where the
adverse impact on the community is minimal;
3. encourage co-location on both new and existing antenna facilities;
4. encourage operators of antenna facilities and antennas to configure them in a way that
minimizes the adverse visual impact through careful design, landscape screening, and
innovative stealth techniques;
5. enhance the ability of antenna facilities and antennas to provide services to the community
effectively and efficiently; and
6. promote the aesthetic quality of the city as a significant aspect of the health, safety, and
general welfare of the community.
B. Definitions: In this section the following definitions apply:
1. Amateur Radio Antenna: A radio communication antenna used by a person holding an
amateur station license from the federal communications commission.
2. Antenna: A device used in communications, which transmits or receives radio signals.
3. Antenna, Building Attached: Antenna attached to an existing structure in two general
forms: (1) roof-mounted, in which antennas are placed on the roofs of buildings, or (2)
building-mounted, in which antennas are placed on the sides of buildings. These antennas
can also be mounted on structures such as water tanks, billboards, church steeples, electrical
transmission towers, etc.
4. Antenna Facility: Any structure, monopole, tower, or lattice tower used to support
antennas.
5. Co-location: The act of locating wireless communications equipment for more than one use
on a single antenna facility.
6. Equipment Storage Building: An unmanned, single story equipment building used to
house radio transmitters and related equipment.
7. Monopole: A self-supporting antenna facility composed of a single spire used to support
communications equipment or other visible items.
8. Satellite Receive-Only Antenna: An antenna that enables the receipt of television signals
transmitted directly from satellites to be viewed on a television monitor. Such antennas are
§7950
7950-2
commonly known as a satellite dish, television receive-only antenna, dish antenna, parabolic
antenna, or satellite earth station antenna.
9. Stealth Facility: An antenna facility that is virtually transparent or invisible to the
surrounding neighborhood. Stealth facilities may include totally enclosed antennas, wireless
facilities that replicate or duplicate the construction of common structures such as flagpoles,
and camouflaged wireless facilities that are constructed to blend into the surrounding
environment.
10. Tower, Lattice: A self-supporting tower having three or four support legs with crossbracing
and the capacity to hold a number and a variety of antennas.
11. TV Antenna: An antenna that enables the receipt of television signals transmitted from
broadcast stations.
C. General Regulations: The following regulations apply to all antenna facilities and antennas
located within any district:
1. Equipment and Storage Building: An equipment storage building associated with an
antenna facility or an antenna shall be screened and landscaped as described in other sections
of this ordinance, or be incorporated into the stealth treatment so that it is consistent and
complementary with the existing structures and uses on the premises.
2. Driveway Surfaces: All driveways accessing any antenna facility site or equipment storage
site shall be constructed of concrete. (Ordinance No. 1447, Adopted 10/13/03)
3. Lights: No outdoor lighting shall be allowed on antennas located on residentially zoned
property except lights or lighting that is by required by the Federal Aviation Administration
or the Federal Communications Commission.
4. Limitations: Antenna facilities are limited to stealth facilities and monopoles except where
other facilities are allowed by this section.
5. Antenna Facility Capacity: An antenna facility shall not have more than the number and
size of antennas attached to it than are allowed by the antenna facility manufacturer's designs
and specifications for maximum wind load requirements.
6. Monopoles: No guy wires are permitted with the use of monopoles.
7. Prohibited in Easements: Antenna facilities constructed solely for the purpose of
supporting antennas shall not be placed in an easement.
8. Construction Standards: A building permit must be obtained prior to the construction or
installation of a tower, antenna, or mast. An antenna facility must be installed according to
the manufacturer’s recommendations or under the seal of a registered professional engineer
of the State of Texas.
9. Use and Repair: Antenna facilities and antennas not in use shall be removed within 30
days following notice given by the Building Official. Antenna facilities or antennas in need
of repair as determined by the Building Official, shall be removed or brought into
compliance within 30 days following notice given by the Building Official. This notice
§7950
7950-3
requirement shall not preclude immediate action by the Building Official if public safety
requires it.
10. Contained on Property: No part of an antenna facility, antennas, or other attachment may
extend beyond the property lines of the lot on which the antenna or antenna facility is
located.
11. Special Exception Requirement: A Special Exception is required from the Zoning Board
of Adjustment for an antenna or antenna facility which will not comply with any
requirement of this section. See Section J. Special Exceptions.
D. Amateur Radio and TV Antennas: Amateur radio and TV antennas are permitted as accessory
uses in the A, SF-5AC/24, SF-12/22, SF-9.6/20, SF-8.4/18, SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/18, SF-7.5/16, SF-
7.5/12. SF-6/12, 2F, MF-1, MF-2 or MH or PR zoning districts. Amateur radio and TV antennas
must comply with the following regulations:
1. Antenna Facility Type: The antenna facility may be either building attached, a monopole,
tower, or a lattice tower.
2. Number of Facilities per Lot: Only one antenna facility exceeding 35 feet in height is
permitted on each lot.
3. Height Limitations: An antenna facility, exclusive of the height of any antenna or mast,
shall not exceed 35 feet in height; except, that an antenna facility shall be permitted
additional height at the ratio of one added foot in height for each additional foot of setback
beyond the minimum setback required of an accessory building in the Zoning District
Regulations to a maximum height of 65 feet in a residential district. A special exception is
required for additional height.
4. Height Limit for Building Mounted Antenna: An antenna shall not extend more than
eight-feet above a building on which it is mounted.
5. Setbacks: The following minimum setbacks apply:
1. Antennas and antenna facilities shall not be permitted in front or side yards. Guy wires
are not permitted in front yards;
2. Guy wires are permitted in required side and rear yards;
3. Setback for antenna facilities shall be the same as is required for accessory buildings in
residential districts;
6. Separation: There shall be no minimum or maximum separation requirements for antenna
facilities from other structures on the same lot of record;
7. Lights: No outdoor lighting above 20 feet shall be allowed on antenna facilities located on
residentially zoned property, and no lights so located shall be directed off one’s property,
except lights or lighting that is required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the
Federal Communications Commission;
§7950
7950-4
E. Satellite Receive-Only Antennas Generally: A satellite receive only antenna is permitted as an
accessory use under the following conditions:
1. The satellite receive-only antenna is not greater than one meter in diameter: all zoning
districts.
2. The satellite receive-only antenna is one meter or greater in diameter, but not greater than
two meters in diameter: all nonresidential zoning districts.
F. Satellite Receive-Only Antennas Greater Than One Meter in Diameter in Residential
Districts and Greater Than Two Meters in Diameter in Nonresidential Districts are
permitted as accessory uses if they comply with the following regulations:
1. Number of Antennas per Lot: Only one satellite receive-only antenna per lot of record.
2. Height: not exceeding ten feet in height.
3. Set backs:
1. Front and side yards: Not permitted.
2. Rear yard: Minimum setback as required for accessory buildings in residential districts
and as for all buildings in nonresidential districts.
4. Separation: No minimum or maximum separation requirements for satellite receive-only
antennas from other structures on the same lot of record.
5. Screening: Satellite receive-only antennas that are mounted on the ground shall be screened
from view from adjoining properties by solid fencing or evergreen plants to a height of a
least six feet. A satellite receive-only antenna located within a fence surrounding the yard in
which the satellite receive-only antenna is located shall be considered to be screened.
G. Placement of Antenna Facilities (Other Than Amateur Radio, TV, and Satellite Receive-
Only Antennas) within Land Use Thresholds: For the purpose of determining the appropriate
locations for the placement of antenna facilities other than amateur radio, TV, and satellite
receive-only antennas, the City is divided into land use threshold areas that require different
regulations pertaining to height, location, and type of antenna facility. These land use thresholds
are defined as follows:
1. Interior Industrial "II" - Property within the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts that is located
more than 1,000 feet away from any other zoning district.
2. Exterior Industrial "EI" - Property within the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts, that is located
within 1,000 feet of any other zoning district.
3. Full Commercial "FC" - Property within the OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, or C-4 zoning districts,
which is located more than 600 feet from an A, SF-5AC/24, SF-12/22, SF-9.6/20, SF-8.4/18,
SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/18, SF-7.5/16, SF-7.5/12. SF-6/12, 2F, MF-1, MF-2, MH or PR zoning
district.
§7950
7950-5
4. Undeveloped Residential "UR" - Property within the A, SF-5AC/24, SF-12/22, SF-9.6/20,
SF-8.4/18, SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/18, SF-7.5/16, SF-7.5/12. SF-6/12, 2F, MF-1, MF-2, MH or
PR zoning districts, that:
1. is not a part of a recorded subdivision; or
2. is a part of a recorded subdivision but has not had a building permit issued for a
residential structure; and
3. is not located within the calculated limits of the "DR" threshold.
5. Edge Commercial “EC” –Property within the OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, or C-4 zoning districts,
which is located within 600 feet of an A, SF-5AC/24, SF-12/22, SF-9.6/20, SF-8.4/18, SF-
8.4/16, SF-7.5/18, SF-7.5/16, SF-7.5/12. SF-6/12, 2F, MF-1, MF-2, MH or PR zoning
district
6. Wireless Corridors “WC” - Property within, and 75 feet either side of, the right-of-way of
a freeway or a major or minor arterial roadway, as indicated on the City’s Thoroughfare
Plan.
7. Developed Residential “DR” –Property within the A, SF-5AC/24, SF-12/22, SF-9.6/20,
SF-8.4/18, SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/18, SF-7.5/16, SF-7.5/12. SF-6/12, 2F, MF-1, MF-2, MH or
PR zoning districts, which:
1. is a recorded subdivision that has had at least one building permit for a residential
structure; or
2. is within the exterior surfaces of an existing primary residential structure; or
3. is within 600 feet of areas described by paragraphs 7.a and 7.b above.
8. Scenic / Limited “SL” - Property that has been defined as a Scenic/Limited area, the
boundary of which has been delineated on the zoning map.
H. Antenna Facility Impact Levels: For the purpose of determining appropriate locations for
antenna facilities, the city recognizes differing levels of impact for antenna facilities depending
upon physical location, aesthetics, and land uses compatibility. These antenna facility impact
levels are defined as follows:
1. 90 Foot Monopole - A monopole no greater
than 90 feet in height. The antenna
equipment may not extend more than 5 feet
above the highest point on the monopole.
2. 60 Foot Monopole - A monopole no greater
than 60 feet in height. The antenna
equipment may not extend more than 5 feet
above the highest point on the monopole.
3. 35 Foot Monopole - A monopole no greater
than 35 feet in height. The antenna
§7950
7950-6
equipment may not extend more than 5 feet above the highest point on the monopole.
4. Level 4 Stealth Facility - The antenna on a Level 4 Stealth facility is located on an existing
structure (other than an antenna facility) including, but not limited to, a building, water
tower, utility tower, steeple, or light pole. The antenna is not screened nor hidden. For the
purpose of this level, a pole or tower may be reconstructed to structurally hold the antenna
but shall not be any higher than the original structure that it is replacing.
5. Level 3 Stealth Facility - The antenna on a Level 3 Stealth facility is located on an existing
structure (other than an antenna facility) including, but not limited to, a building, water
tower, utility tower, steeple, or light pole. The antenna may be aesthetically painted,
constructed, or applied with
material so that it is incorporated
into the pattern, style, and
material of the structure to
effectively render the antenna
unnoticeable. A new structure
may be constructed to hold or
house the antenna or equipment;
however, the structure must be
consistent with the overall
architectural features of the
primary buildings.
6. Level 2 Stealth Facility - The
antenna on a Level 2 stealth
facility is attached to the
structure in such a manner that if
it is seen it appears
unrecognizable as an antenna,
and the structure in which or on
which the antenna is attached is
an integral part of an overall
development.
7. Level 1 Stealth Facility - The
antenna on a Level 1 stealth
facility is attached to the
structure in such a manner that
the antenna is completely unseen
and the structure in which or on
which the antenna is attached is
an integral part of an overall
development.
I. Antenna Facility Siting Matrix: Antenna facilities shall be located in accordance with the
following siting matrix. This matrix provides for areas where antenna facilities may be located
as permitted uses, areas where they may be located with a special exception, and areas where
they are prohibited.
§7950
7950-7
1. Additional Height - Permitted monopoles shown as 90 ft., 60 ft., and 35 ft. in the Antenna
Facility Siting Matrix may be increased in height up to 20 feet, if the antenna facility is
constructed to accommodate co-location. Co-location must include area requirements for
ground storage buildings, driveways, screening, and any other accommodation that is
required for the successful operation of a multiple-user antenna facility site. The extension
of height may only occur twice to a maximum 40 additional feet.
Antenna Facility Siting Matrix
Permitted Use Requires a Special Exception Prohibited
Special Exception
90 - 130 ft. Monopole
60 - 100 ft. Monopole
35 - 75 ft. Monopole
Level 4 Stealth Facility
Level 3 Stealth Facility
Level 2 Stealth Facility
Level 1 Stealth Facility
II EI FC UR EC WC DR SL
J. Special Exception: When a special exception is required by this section for the location of an
antenna facility or an antenna, the property owner must submit an application to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
1. Application: To properly evaluate an application to locate an antenna facility or an antenna
that requires a special exception, the following information must be provided by the
applicant:
1. Describe the nature of the antenna site. Indicate whether the proposed structure is a
monopole or mounted to a self-supporting structure. Indicate the proposed height.
2. Provide photos or drawings of all equipment, structures, and antennas.
§7950
7950-8
3. Describe why the antenna or tower is necessary at the particular location.
4. State the name(s) of the telecommunications providers or other users of the antenna or
tower and describe the use to be made by each user.
5. Indicate if this antenna or tower site is to be connected to other sites; and if so, describe
how it will be connected and who will be the back haul provider.
6. The applicant must address whether it has made an effort to co-locate the facilities
proposed for this antenna facility on existing antenna facilities in the same general area.
Identify the location of these existing sites, and describe in detail these efforts and
explain in detail why these existing sites were not feasible. Attach all studies or tests
performed which demonstrate why the existing sites will not provide sufficient signal
coverage. Provide written documentation from existing sites' owners and/or operators
which confirm the statements provided. Indicated whether the existing sites allow/
promote co-location and, if not, describe why not.
7. Indicate whether co-location will be allowed to other telecommunications providers at
the requested site. If they are not allowed, state every reason and the basis of each
reason.
8. If the requested location is in a residential district the applicant must address whether it
has made an effort to locate the facility in a nonresidential district. Identify the location
of these nonresidential district sites, describe in detail these efforts, and explain in detail
why these nonresidential sites were not feasible. Attach all studies or tests performed
which demonstrate why the nonresidential sites will not provide sufficient signal
coverage. Provide written documentation from nonresidential district sites' owners or
operators which confirm the statements provided.
9. Indicate the proposed provider's current coverage area for the City. Attach maps
showing the areas the proposed provider's existing antenna currently covers, the areas
the applicant's existing sites and the requested site would cover.
10. Describe the applicant's master antenna facilities plan for the City. Attach maps and
other related documentation. Provide information indicating each phase of the plan.
11. Describe the applicant's plan to minimize the number of antenna facilities needed to
cover the City.
2. Consideration of application. In considering whether to grant a Special Exception, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consider the following:
1. The effect on the value of the surrounding property;
2. The potential for interference with the enjoyment or the use of surrounding properties;
3. Aesthetics;
4. The proposed height of the antenna facility.
§7950
7950-9
5. The zoning district and the adjoining zoning districts of the property for which the
Special Exception is sought; and
6. The unique conditions that govern reasonable reception on any given lot.
3. The Zoning Board of Adjustment will approve a requested application subject to the finding
that co-location of this facility with a nearby existing antenna facility is technically not
feasible and subject to the following conditions:
1. Applicant will permit co-location of others at the site;
2. Applicant will construct and configure its antenna facility and other equipment to
accommodate other providers;
3. Applicant will identify its backhaul provider connecting antenna sites; and
4. Applicant will give notice to the City identifying any provider who co-locates to the site
and identify its backhaul provider.
K. Written Report Upon Denial of Request: The Board of Adjustment shall document in writing
any denial of a request to place, construct, or modify an antenna facility. This documentation
shall be supported by substantial evidence within the written record.
§7960
7960-1
Section 7960. Gas Well Drilling & Production
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this Section, the definitions set forth in section 114.02 of the
Code of Mansfield, Texas, shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. All technical industry words or phrases related to the Drilling and production of Gas
Wells not specifically defined shall have the meanings customarily attributable thereto by
prudent Operators in the Gas industry.
B. Specific Use Permit Required: The Drilling and production of Gas within the City shall only
be permitted by Specific Use Permit in accordance with Section 6100 of this Ordinance. A site
plan is required with the Specific Use Permit application and must include all
information required by Section 6100.D and the following additional information:
1. The total number of Wells to be drilled.
2. The location of the Drill Site and a layout of the site showing all related facilities,
including, but not limited to, Drilling rig, pipe rack, water and sanitary sewer facilities,
electrical supply, camper/office trailers, reserve pit, and fracturing pits.
3. The location of the Operation Site and a layout of the site showing all related facilities,
including but not limited to Wellheads, separators, dehydrators, tank batteries,
compressors, and metering stations.
4. Size, location and purpose of any shared facilities, including, but not limited to,
centralized tank batteries or fracturing pits for multiple Wells or Drill Sites.
5. The design, location, and arrangement of all access roads.
6. A map of the public streets to be used by truck traffic to the Drill Site.
7. The location of any floodplain, drainage or flowage easement.
8. A tree survey if required by the Landscape Administrator for compliance with the City’s
Natural Resources Management Ordinance.
9. A pipeline routing map indicating the location and size of all existing and planned
pipelines within both the territorial and extraterritorial limits of the City intended to
serve the well or wells identified in the above-referenced site plan. If approved by the
City Council, the submitted pipeline routing map shall be made a condition of the
Specific Use Permit. Proposed revisions or modification to an approved pipeline routing
map shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6100.J of this
Ordinance.
10. A video, provided in DVD format only, documenting existing conditions of the City
streets within one (1) mile of the Drill Site or Line Compressor facility that will be used
by truck traffic to the site, plus a DVD video or still photographs taken from the well(s)
in four directions depicting the existing conditions of the property being used for the
Drill Site or Line Compressor.
11. Time Limits:
§7960
7960-2
a. A Specific Use Permit issued under this section shall expire as to each drill site,
operation site or Line Compressor facility authorized by the Specific Use Permit,
and a new Specific Use Permit shall be required approving each unused drill site,
operation site or line compressor facility if two (2) years have elapsed since the
approval of the specific Use Permit and at the time of the proposed use an unused
drill site, operation site or line compressor facility would no longer comply with the
setback limitations set forth in Section 7960.E of this ordinance.
b. The authorization for gas well drilling and production activities under a Specific Use
Permit issued under this section shall be valid for a period of five (5) years from the
date of issuance and shall expire for any surface activity, including, but not limited
to, the drilling, fracturing and completion of wells or the installation of new
equipment, that is not completed within said five (5) year period, unless an extension
of time is approved by the City Council in accordance with the following procedure:
1. An operator of an existing Drill Site or Operation Site seeking an extension
of time shall submit an application for a new Specific Use Permit in
accordance with Section 6100 of this ordinance, including a site plan and
any other required documentation.
2. Before the City Council takes any action on the application, the Planning
and Zoning Commission must submit its recommendation and report to the
City Council, and public hearings before both the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council must be held and public notice must be
given in accordance with Section 8600.C of the Zoning Ordinance.
3. Written consent for a distance setback specified in Section 7960.E of this
ordinance shall not be required for an existing Drill Site or Operation Site,
provided that there are no changes, other than the extension of time, being
proposed from the preceding Specific Use Permit. If changes are proposed,
that in the opinion of the City Manager or his or her designee, would change
the character of the site and increase its impact on surrounding properties,
the Manager or his representative shall advise the Mayor and Council that
the staff is recommending that the renewal request comply with
requirements of 7960.E of this Ordinance. An Applicant may appeal such
decision to the City Council.
4. The City Council may grant additional extensions of time, not to exceed five
years in duration per request. Additional extensions of time may be sought
subject to the limitations set forth in this Section, provided that the
application is made not sooner than the four year anniversary and prior to
the five year anniversary of the new Specific Use Permit.
5. Notwithstanding the foregoing Sub-subparagraph 4, the operator of an
existing Drill Site or Operation Site shall be entitled to make an application
for an extension of time regardless of the expiration of the preceding
Specific Use Permit, provided that the application is made prior to April 28,
2016. Any application received after April 28, 2016, shall conform to Subsubparagraph
4 above.
§7960
7960-3
6. If the application for the new Specific Use Permit is approved by the City
Council, the operator shall conduct all gas well drilling and production
activities in compliance with the regulations in Chapter 114 of the Code of
Ordinances and all other applicable City ordinances, and any amendments
thereof.
c. A Specific Use Permit issued for the activities regulated by this Section shall not be
subject to expiration pursuant to Section 6100.H.
d. An approved Specific Use Permit shall expire for each drill site operation site or line
compressor facility that is used and then abandoned. A drill site, operation site, or
line compressor facility that is used will be deemed abandoned once the use
thereafter ceases for at least twelve consecutive months. Intent to abandon shall be
irrelevant.
C. Line Compressors
1. A Specific Use Permit is required for the establishment and operation of a Line
Compressor and its related facilities and equipment whether in conjunction with a Gas
Well or as an independent operation, in accordance with Section 6100 of the Mansfield
Zoning Ordinance
2. A site plan is required with the Specific Use Permit application and must include all
applicable information required by Sections 6100.C and this Subsection. The site plan
must identify the location of the proposed Line Compressor and provide a layout of the
site showing all related facilities and equipment. If the compressor is established
separately from a Drill Site or Operation Site, a video documenting the existing
conditions where the compressor is to be located shall also be required.
D. Efficient Use of Surface: It is the intent of this Section to encourage efficient surface land use
by requiring compact and centrally located gas well development that minimizes the total
amount of surface area needed for gas well facilities and avoids the creation of unusable strips
and parcels. In order to implement this requirement, each Operator shall, to the extent permitted
by Railroad Commission spacing rules, strive to locate new Drill Sites in close proximity to preestablished
Drill and/or Operation Sites, if located within six hundred (600’) feet of the proposed
new Site. This requirement shall apply regardless of whether the pre-established Drill and/or
Operation Sites are owned or managed by a different Operator.
E. Required Setback
1. No Drill Site or Line Compressor facility shall be permitted within six hundred (600’)
feet of the boundary of any preliminary or final platted residential subdivision, except
under one of the following conditions:
a. A Drill Site or Line Compressor facility shall be permitted as close as three hundred
(300’) feet to any boundary line of a platted subdivision if all affected property
owners within six hundred (600’) feet of the Drill Site or Line Compressor facility
consent in writing; or
b. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Drill Site or Line Compressor facility may be
located on a lot within the boundaries of a preliminary or final platted residential
§7960
7960-4
subdivision with the written consent of the property owner, provided the Drill Site or
Line Compressor facility is located at least three hundred (300’) feet from the
boundary of any final platted residential lot within the subdivision and the required
distances set forth in subsections (2) and (3) are adhered to in accordance with their
terms.
c. For the purpose of Subparagraph (a) above, “affected property owner” shall mean
the owner of property that is both within six hundred (600) feet of the proposed Drill
Site or Line Compressor facility and located within the boundary of a preliminary or
final platted residential subdivision.
2. No Drill Site or Line Compressor facility shall be permitted within six hundred (600)
feet of the boundary line of a property with a residential structure (if located on an
unplatted tract), public building, institution, public or private school, day care center, or
commercial building, except under one of the following conditions:
a. A Drill Site or Line Compressor facility shall be permitted as close as three hundred
(300) feet to any boundary line of a property described in Paragraph 2 above if all
affected property owners within six hundred (600) feet of the Drill Site or Line
Compressor facility consent in writing; or
b. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Drill Site or Line Compressor facility may be
located on a property containing a residential structure (if located on an unplatted
tract), public building, institution, public or private school, day care center, or
commercial building with the written consent of the property owner and the required
distances set forth in subsections (1) and (3) are adhered to in accordance with their
terms.
c. For the purpose of Subparagraph (a) above, “affected property owner” shall mean
the owner of property that is both within six hundred (600) feet of the proposed Drill
Site or Line Compressor facility and contains a building or structure described in
Paragraph 2 above.
3. No Drill Site or Line Compressor facility shall be permitted within one thousand (1,000)
feet from any hospital, nursing home, or the City’s Law Enforcement Center. For the
purposes of this Section, “nursing home” means a place for the care of individuals who,
because of injury, incapacity, age or infirmity are generally non-ambulatory and require
twenty-four hour supervised personal and/or medical care.
4. No Well or Line Compressor may be located within one hundred (100) feet of a railroad
right-of-way.
5. In addition to obtaining written permission from property owners in accordance with
Sections 7960.E.1.a or 7960.E.2.a above, a Gas Well Operator shall give written notice,
in a form acceptable to the city, to the tenants or lessees of any residential Protected Use
or the owner of a residential structure such as a manufactured home on a rental property
within six hundred (600) feet of the proposed Drill Site for which the operator is making
an application for a Specific Use Permit. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and by first class U.S. mail. The Operator shall provide copies
of the return receipts and an affidavit certifying that notice has been sent to the abovereferenced
tenants or lessees.
Ordinance No. 1703-08, Adopted 8/25/08
Ordinance No. 1766-10, Amended 4/27/10
§8100
8100-1
ARTICLE 8. ADMINISTRATION, AMENDMENTS AND ENFORCEMENTS.
Section 8100. Enforcement, Violations and Penalties.
A. Enforcement. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the City.
Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a site plan in triplicate drawn to
scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size, shape, and location of
the building and or structure to be erected, and such other information as may be necessary to
provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance.
B. Violations and Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or entity that violates or assists in the
violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building or use in violation of any plan or
permit submitted and approved hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be punished as provided in Section 10.99 of the Code of Ordinances of
Mansfield, Texas. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Civil Remedies. In order to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance, the City Attorney is
authorized to institute any civil action in the appropriate court upon the prior approval of the
City Manager.
Section 8200. Issuance of Building Permits and Utility Service.
A. No building permit for the construction of a building or structure upon any tract, parcel or
premise shall be issued, and public utilities shall not be extended or connected to a building or
structure unless the lot, tract, parcel or premise is part of a plat of record properly approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission or a lot of record. However, nothing herein shall require a
plat to be approved and filed as a prerequisite to construction where such construction occurs in
an area zoned in a PR, A or Single-family Residential District for any of the following purposes:
1. adding to an existing building or structure; or
2. altering an existing building or structure; or
3. adding an accessory building or structure; or
4. restoring any building or structure previously destroyed by fire, explosion or any other
casualty or act of God where the extent of the destruction is not more than fifty percent
(50%) of its reasonable market value.
8100-2
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§8300
8300-1
Section 8300. Certificate of Occupancy and Compliance.
A. No existing building or structure shall be changed in use, and no building or structure erected,
enlarged or structurally altered after the effective date of this ordinance, unless a Certificate of
Occupancy and Compliance shall first have been issued by the Building Official of the City of
Mansfield certifying that the building and the proposed use of the building and premises comply
with all building and fire codes, and any other applicable codes and ordinances.
B. A Certificate of Occupancy and Compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application
for a Building Permit and will be issued within ten (10) working days after the completion of the
erection, alteration or conversion of such building or land provided such construction or change
has been made in complete conformity to the provisions of this Ordinance. All existing or
hereafter created nonconforming uses shall obtain Certificates of Occupancy within eighteen
(18) months of the effective date of this Ordinance. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be
considered evidence of the legal existence of a lawful nonconforming use as contrasted to an
illegal use and violation of this Ordinance.
8300-2
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)
§8400
8400-1
Section 8400. Board of Adjustments.
A. Membership, Appointment and Term of Office: There shall be a Board of Adjustments
composed of five (5) regular members and up to three (3) alternate members who serve in the
absence of one or more regular members. The members of the Board shall be residents and real
property taxpayers in the City of Mansfield, appointed by the City Council for a term of two (2)
years or until their successors are appointed. Four (4) members of the Board shall be so
appointed each odd-numbered year and four (4) members shall be appointed each even–
numbered year. The City Council may remove a board member for cause, as found by the City
Council, on a written charge after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term of any member whose position becomes vacant for any cause in the same manner as the
original appointment was made. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
Ordinance No. 1517, Adopted 2/28/05
B. Proceedings. The Board of Adjustments shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings provided,
however, that such rules are not inconsistent with this Ordinance or statutes of the State of
Texas. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman or at such other times as
the Board may determine. The Chairman, or in his absence, the Acting Chairman, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be
open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact, and shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in
the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
C. Appeal Process.
1. Appeals to the Board can be taken by any person aggrieved by an officer, department, or
board or bureau of the municipality affected by any decision of the administrative officer.
Such appeal shall be taken within fifteen (15) days after the decision has been rendered by
the administrative officer, by filing with the Officer from whom the appeal is taken and with
the Board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed was taken.
2. At a public hearing relative to any appeal or variance, any interested party may appear in
person or by agent of attorney. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to establish the
necessary facts to warrant favorable action of the Board of Adjustments on any appeal.
D. Stay of Proceeding. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustments,
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise, than by a restraining order which may be granted by
the Board or by a court of record on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and on due cause shown.
§8400
8400-2
E. General Powers. The Board shall have the following powers.
1. To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this
Ordinance. The Board must find the following in order to grant an appeal:
a. That there is a reasonable difference of interpretation as to the specific intent of the
zoning regulations or zoning map.
b. That the resulting interpretation will not grant a special privilege to one property
inconsistent with other properties or uses similarly situated.
c. The decision of the Board must be such as will be in the best interest of the community
and consistent with the spirit and interest of this Ordinance.
2. To initiate, on its motion or otherwise, action to bring about the vacation and demolition of a
nonconforming structure which is deemed to be obsolete, dilapidated or substandard or the
discontinuance of a non-conforming use under any plan whereby full value of the structure
or use can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the
general character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the
regulations of this ordinance.
3. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this Ordinance as
will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of said law will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the
spirit of the Ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. The term "variance"
shall mean a deviation from the literal provisions of the Zoning Ordinance which is granted
by the Board when strict conformity to the Zoning Ordinance would cause an unnecessary
hardship because of circumstances unique to the property on which the variance is granted.
Except as otherwise prohibited under Paragraph F hereto, the Board is empowered to
authorize a variance from a requirement of the Zoning Ordinance when the Board finds that
all of the following conditions have been met:
a. That the granting of the variance will not be contrary to the public interest; and
b. That literal enforcement of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship because of
exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, topography or other extraordinary or
exceptional physical situation or physical condition unique to the specific piece of
property in question. "Unnecessary hardship" shall mean physical hardship relating to
the property itself as distinguished from a hardship relating to convenience, financial
considerations or caprice, and the hardship must not result from the applicant or property
owner's own actions; and
c. That by granting the variance, the spirit of the Ordinance will be observed and
substantial justice will be done.
The applicant shall have the burden of proving to the Board that the foregoing
conditions have been met.
4. To authorize special exceptions as specified in Section 6300 of this Ordinance.
§8400
8400-3
F. Use Variance Prohibited. No variance shall be granted to permit a use in a zoning district in
which that use is prohibited, or a use which is explicitly prohibited by this ordinance.
G. Additional Conditions. The Board is empowered to impose upon any variance any condition
reasonably necessary to protect the public interest and community welfare.
H. Revocation or Modification. A variance or special exception may be revoked or modified for
any of the following reasons:
1. That the variance or special exception was obtained or extended by fraud or deception.
2. That one or more of the conditions imposed by the Board in granting such variance or
special exception has not been complied with or has been violated.
3. That the variance or special exception although granted in accordance with all requirements
hereof, has caused a nuisance or is otherwise detrimental to public health, safety and welfare.
An action to revoke or modify a previously granted variance or special exception may be
initiated by order of the Board, or the person who obtained the variance or special exception.
The Board of Adjustments shall hear a request for the revocation or modification of a
variance or special exception in accordance with the same notification and hearing
procedures established for the original variances or special exception.
I. Notification and Public Hearing Process. Any request for an appeal, variance or special
exception shall require a public hearing before the Board. Notice of said public hearing shall be
published at least one time in a newspaper of the City of Mansfield, at least ten (10) days prior to
the date of the hearing. A written notice of the hearing shall be sent to owners of property
situated within two hundred (200) feet of the exterior boundary of the property with respect to
which such appeal or variance is requested at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
It shall be sufficient that such written notice is addressed to the owner appearing on the last
approved tax roll of the City and addressed to such owner at the address stated on said roll. If no
owner is stated on the tax roll or no address appears thereon, the written notice to such property
owner shall not be required. An application fee as set forth in the Mansfield Fee Schedule
Ordinance shall be paid to the City in advance of the hearing except as indicated in Section 6300
of this Ordinance. No refund shall be made under any circumstances except in the event the
application is withdrawn prior to the mailing of the required written notification or publication in
the official newspaper, the fee shall be refunded.
J. Action of the Board. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary
to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official,
or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any
such ordinance, or to effect any variation in such ordinance.
K. Appeal from Decision of Board. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of
Adjustment, or any officer, department or other board or commission of the City of the City
Council, may appeal the decision or action of the Board of Adjustments by filing a petition for
same in a court of competent jurisdiction, setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in
part, and specifying the grounds for the alleged illegality. Such petition shall be filed with the
§8400
8400-4
court within ten (10) days from the day the Board renders its decisions, and not thereafter. The
time period set forth herein shall be deemed jurisdictional.
L. Reapplication. No application for a variance or appeal which has been denied shall be again
filed earlier than one (1) year from the date of original denial unless other property in the
immediate vicinity has, within the said one year period, been changed or acted on by the Board
of Adjustments or City Council as to alter the facts and conditions on which the previous Board
action was based. Such change of circumstances shall permit the rehearing of an appeal by the
Board of Adjustments prior to the expiration of the one year period, but such conditions shall in
no wise have any force in law to compel the Board of Adjustments, after a hearing, to grant a
subsequent appeal. Such subsequent appeal shall be considered entirely on its merits and the
peculiar and specific conditions related to the property on which the appeal is brought.
§8500
8500-1
Section 8500. Planning and Zoning Commission.
A. Membership, Appointment and Term of Office: There shall be a Planning and Zoning
Commission composed of seven (7) members, who shall be residents and real property taxpayers
in the City of Mansfield. The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the City
Council for two (2) year terms or until their successors are appointed. Three (3) members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall be so appointed each odd-numbered year and four (4)
members shall be appointed each even-numbered year. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term of any member whose position becomes vacant for any cause in the same manner
as the original appointment was made. The City Council may remove a Commissioner for cause
set forth in writing. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. Ordinance
No. 1517, Adopted 2/28/05
B. Proceedings. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power to adopt its own rules,
regulations or bylaws to govern its proceedings; provided that such rules shall not be
inconsistent with the ordinances of the City or the laws of the State of Texas. All meetings of
the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be open to the public. A majority of the members of
the Planning and Zoning Commission entitled to vote shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
C. Powers and Duties. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the following powers and
duties:
1. To make studies and project plans for the improvement of the City, with a view toward its
future development and extension, and to recommend to the City Council all matters for the
development and advancement of the City's facilities, layout and appearance, and to perform
all duties imposed upon the City Planning and Zoning Commission by the Statutes of the
State.
2. To make plans and maps of the whole or any portion of the City and of land outside the City
located within one (1) mile of the City which, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, bears a relation to the planning of the City, and to make changes in, additions
to and extensions of such plans or maps when it deems same advisable.
3. To assist all other municipal and governmental agencies, and especially the City Council, in
formulating and executing proper plans of municipal development.
4. To plan and recommend the location, plan, and extent of City alleyways, viaducts, bridges,
subways, parkways, parks, playgrounds, airports, automobile parking places and other public
properties, and public utilities, including bus terminals, railroads, railroad depots, and
terminals, whether publicly or privately owned, for water, lights, sanitation, sewerage
disposal, drainage, flood control, communication, marketing, and shipping facilities, power
and other purposes, and for the removal, relocation, widening, extension, narrowing,
vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the foregoing public places, works,
buildings, facilities, or utilities.
5. To select and recommend to the City Council routes of streets, avenues and boulevards, and
particularly to investigate and recommend the opening, widening, or abandonment of streets,
avenues, boulevards, and alleys or the changing thereof to conform with the City's system,
present and future, of boulevards, streets, avenues, alleyways, parks and parkways.
§8500
8500-2
6. To investigate, consider and report to the City Council upon the layout or platting of new
subdivisions of the City or of property situated within one (1) mile of the City limits, and to
approve all plans, plats, or replats of additions within the City limits, or within one (1) mile
of the City limits.
7. To recommend to the City Council for adoption and promulgation rules, regulations, terms
and conditions governing plats and subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the
City to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community, and the
safe, orderly and healthful development of such community.
8. To recommend plans to the City Council for improving, developing, expanding, bayous and
streams, river front and yacht basins in or adjoining the city, and to cooperate with the City
Council and other agencies of the City in devising, establishing, locating, improving,
selecting, expanding and maintaining the public parks, parkways, playgrounds and places for
public recreation.
9. To aid and assist the City Council by recommending plans for the development of civic
centers.
10. To recommend the boundaries of the various districts or zones, to recommend appropriate
regulations to be enforced therein, to make their preliminary report as to such zoning
districts and regulations and to hold a public hearing or public hearings on the same before
submitting a final report, and to submit a final report to the City Council and to perform all
other duties and exercise all other powers conferred upon it by the statutes of the State of
Texas.
11. To suggest plans for clearing the City of slums and blighted areas.
D. Cooperation by Other Department Heads and Officials. All department heads and officials
of the City shall be available to the Planning and Zoning Commission for advice and
consultation, and they shall cooperate with and render such services for the Department of
Planning as shall come within the scope of the duties of such department heads and officials. All
such department heads and officials shall attend meetings of the Planning and Zoning
Commission upon the request of the Planning and Zoning Commission or its duly authorized
official or officials and upon prior approval of the City Manager.
§8600
8600-1
Section 8600. Changes and Amendments.
A. Authority to Amend: The City Council may, from time to time, on its own motion, or on
petition of an interested property owner or owners:
1. Amend, supplement, or change by ordinance the zoning classification of any property or the
regulations herein established or issue or revoke Specific Use Permits; or
2. Issue or revoke Specific Use Permits, following the receipt of a report from the Planning and
Zoning Commission on any application for a Specific Use Permit, the Council may:
a. Authorize the issuance of the permit.
b. Attach conditions relating to use limits, duration of the permit, time of operation, or
other appropriate conditions to the proposed permit and then authorize its issuance.
c. If the Council approves a Specific Use Permit that authorizes specialized construction of
improvements that may only be utilized under the terms of the Specific Use Permit, the
Council will not consider revocation of the permit unless evidence is presented showing
that the property owner/operator is in direct and knowing violation of a specific
performance condition attached to the Specific Use Permit when issued.
d. The Council may consider the revocation of any Specific Use Permit if after a properly
noticed hearing in which any interested party has an opportunity to present evidence and
be heard, the Council makes a determination that a performance condition attached to
the original permit has been violated by the owner/operator of the permitted activity, or
if the original permit was issued with an expressly stated condition that the permit was
for a limited period of time and was subject to periodic review to determine impact on
adjoining properties or activities. If a permit is issued for a limited duration, the
applicant undertakes the permitted activity with the knowledge that the permit may be
revoked or not renewed by future Council action.
e. Specific Use Permits issued for a limited time duration may be extended for additional
increments of time following a properly noticed hearing.
f. All Specific Use Permits shall be approved, conditioned, modified or revoked following
a public hearing in a single meeting action of the City Council. Specific Use Permits do
not constitute a change in zoning and, therefore, do not proceed through a three reading
ordinance amendment requirement as would be required for a change in zoning
classification.
B. Recommendation by Planning and Zoning Commission. Before taking any action on any
proposed amendment, supplements, change or a Specific Use Permit, the City Council shall
submit the same to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its recommendation and report.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing before submitting its
recommendation and report to the City Council.
C. Public Hearing and Notification Requirements. No regulation, restriction or zoning district
classification of any property shall be amended, supplemented or changed and no Specific Use
Permit approved or revoked until after public hearings in relation thereto are held by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, at which parties in interest and citizens
§8600
8600-2
shall have an opportunity to be heard. Written notice of all public hearings before the Planning
and Zoning Commission on proposed changes in zoning district classification or Specific Use
Permits shall be sent to owners of real property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the
property on which the change in classification or Specific Use Permit is proposed, such notice to
be given, not less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing, to all such owners who have
rendered their said property for City taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved City tax
roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid,
with the United States Postal Service. At least fifteen (15) days notice shall be published in an
official paper, or a paper of general circulation in the City of Mansfield before the City Council
public hearing.
D. Application Fee. Any person, firm or corporation applying for a change in this Ordinance or
the zoning district classification of any property or a Specific Use Permit shall be required to pay
an application processing fee as set forth in the Mansfield Fee Schedule Ordinance. No part of
this fee shall be refundable unless the application is withdrawn prior to the mailing of the
required written notification or publication in a newspaper. The limitation in reference to giving
of notice is to protect owners of nearby properties against insincere applicants simply using the
City's notice procedure to test public reaction. No harm is done in terms of public image if case
is withdrawn prior to giving of public notice.
E. Limitation of Re-applications. No application for a change in zoning districts or Specific Use
Permit shall be heard for a particular parcel of property if within twelve (12) months prior to the
date of said application either a zoning case was denied by the City Council or a zoning case was
withdrawn after the giving of public notice, and such application currently under consideration
includes property which was all or a part of the previously denied or withdrawn case, and the
application currently under consideration is for the same or a more intense zoning district than
provided, however, on receipt of written request by the original applicant stating how conditions
have changed substantially in the community since prior consideration of his proposal so as to
justify an earlier review of this matter, the City Council may waive the mandatory delay period
and authorize the acceptance of a new application. The term "more intense zoning district" shall
mean one that generally permits uses of higher intensity, progressing from the first district listed
in Section 3100 as the least intense to the I-2, Heavy Industrial District as the most intense, in the
order listed in Section 3100.
F. Postponement of Public Hearings at Applicant's Request: An applicant for a zoning change
or Specific Use Permit may request a postponement of a scheduled public hearing on such
zoning request not less than ten (10) days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, prior to
such scheduled public hearing. In the event that any publication or notification has been made
by the City of the public hearing prior to such request for postponement, such applicant shall
include, with his request, payment to the City of Mansfield of such fee for such postponement as
may be set by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council.
G. Zoning Districts not Available for Application – The City will not accept any application for
zoning change to the SF-5AC/24, SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/16, SF-7.5/12 or SF-6/12 District.
§8700
8700-1
Section 8700. Historic Landmark Commission
A. Membership, Appointment and Term of Office: There shall be a Historic Landmark
Commission composed of seven (7) regular members and one (1) alternate member who
serves in the absence of a regular member. The members of the Commission shall be
residents and real property taxpayers in the City of Mansfield, appointed by the City Council
for two (2) year terms or until their successors are appointed. Four (4) members of the
Commission shall be so appointed each odd-numbered year and four (4) members shall
be appointed each even-numbered year. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of
any member whose position becomes vacant for any cause in the same manner as the
original appointment was made. Members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation. Ordinance No. 1517, Adopted 2/28/05
B. Organization: The Historic Landmark Commission shall hold an organizational meeting within
thirty (30) days of appointment in October of each year and shall elect a chairman and
vice-chairman from among its members before proceeding to any other matters of business. The
Planning and Development Director of the City of Mansfield, or her (his) designated
representative, shall be the secretary of the Board. The Planning and Development Director shall
provide technical assistance to the Historic Landmark Commission. The Planning and
Development Director or his designee shall serve as Local Historic Preservation officer. The
Historic Landmark Commission shall meet regularly and shall designate the time and place of its
meetings. It shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings in
accordance with the State Statutes and the Zoning Ordinance and the Charter of the City of
Mansfield. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first regular meeting after their
appointment.
C. Meetings and Quorum: Three (3) members of the Historic Landmark Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the conduct of business; however, three (3) affirmative votes shall be
required to decide any issue before the Historic Landmark Commission. The members shall
regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the Historic Landmark Commission and shall
serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for authorized expenses attendant to the
performance of their duties.
D. Powers and Duties. The Historic Landmark Commission shall thoroughly familiarize itself
with the buildings, land, areas and districts within the city which may be eligible for designation
as historic landmarks and shall prepare an Historic Landmark Preservation Plan hereinafter
referred to as the "Preservation Plan," which shall:
1. Identify and catalog buildings, land, areas, and districts of historical, architectural,
archaeological or cultural value, along with statements of fact which verify their
significance;
2. Identify criteria to be used in determining whether to grant or deny Certificates of Approval
for proposed alterations to the exterior of a designated historic landmark;
3. Identify guidelines to be used in determination of whether to grant or deny Certificates of
Approval for proposed alterations to the exterior of a designated historic landmark;
4. Formulate a program for private and public action which will state the role of various
agencies in the City for preservation of historic landmarks;
§8700
8700-2
5. Suggest sources of funds for preservation and restoration activities and for acquisitions, to
include federal, state, municipal, private and foundation sources; and
6. Recommend incentives for preservation
The Preservation Plan shall be presented to the City Planning and Zoning Commission.
The Historic Landmark Commission shall recommend to the City Planning and Zoning Commission that
certain buildings, land areas, and districts in the City be designated as historic landmarks. Each
recommendation shall include:
1. Those premises, lots, or tracts to be designated;
2. Any additional uses to be permitted in the specific "H" Historic Landmark Overlay District;
3. Specific criteria for the required preservation of the exteriors of the premises within the
designated sub-district.
If the Historic Landmark Commission finds that certain buildings, land, areas or districts cannot be
preserved without acquisition, the Commission shall recommend to the City Planning and Zoning
Commission that the fee or a lesser interest in the property be acquired by gift, or purchase, using
funds available for preservation or restoration.
Where there are conditions under which the required preservation of an historic landmark would
cause undue hardship to the owner or owners, use changes may be recommended by the
Commission. Such changes shall be in keeping with the spirit and intent of Section 5400 of this
Ordinance.
Periodically the Commission shall review the status of designated Historic Landmark Overlay
Districts and include in the Commission's minutes a report of such review.
The designation of a Historic Landmark Overlay District may be amended or removed using the
procedure provided in Section 5400 L of this Ordinance.
§8800
8800-1
Section 8800. Miscellaneous Provisions.
A. Uses Prohibited by Other Ordinances. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as
repealing any existing ordinance of the City of Mansfield regulating nuisances or permitting uses
which are not prohibited by this ordinance.
B. Deed Restriction. No provision or application of this Ordinance shall be construed as affecting
in any manner the rights of individual property owners to privately enforce deed restrictions
upon the use of any property zoned under the terms of this Ordinance if such restrictions are of
higher or more restrictive classification than the provisions contained herein.
C. Conflicting Provisions. Whenever a conflict arises among any provisions of this Ordinance, the
most restrictive requirement shall apply.
D. Completion of Building.
1. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated
use of a building actually under construction at the time of the passage of this Ordinance and
which entire building shall be completed within one (1) year from the date of the passage of
this Ordinance.
2. In the event construction drawings have been submitted for a building permit prior to the
effective date of this ordinance showing development proposed under terms of the prior
ordinance, the Building Official may grant a permit for the development and construction
based on the requirements of the previous ordinance and set a reasonable time limit for the
completion of such development.
E. Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of
this Code, or whenever the Building Official or his authorized representative has reasonable
cause to believe there exists in any building or upon any premises a violation of this Code, the
Building Official or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Building Official
by this Code, provided that if such building or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper
credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises are unoccupied, he shall first
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the
building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused or if no owner or other person
having charge or control of the building or premises can be located, the Building Official or his
authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
Section 2.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be fined
as provided in Section 1-6 of the City Code of Ordinances, and each day and everyday that the
provisions of this Ordinance are violated shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The owner
or owners of any building or premises, or part thereof, where anything in violation of this Ordinance
shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation
employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such
violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be fined as herein provided.
Section 3.
By the passage of this Ordinance, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been
legalized unless specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming
use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as
the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this Ordinance that no offense
committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time
the existing Zoning Ordinances were repealed and this Zoning Ordinance adopted, shall be
discharged or affected by such repeal; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities,
penalties or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending proceeded with in all respects
as if such prior ordinances had not been repealed.
Section 4.
If any section, paragraph, subsection, clause, phrase or provision of this Ordinance shall be
adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a
whole or any part or provisions thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or
unconstitutional.
Section 5.
That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in force when the provisions of this Ordinance
becomes effective which are inconsistent or in conflict with the terms or provisions contained in this
ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of any such conflict.
Section 6.
This Ordinance shall be effective and shall be in full force and effect on and after the 27 DAY
OF APRIL, 1986.
PASSED AND ADOPTED ON ITS FIRST READING THIS THE 31 DAY OF MARCH, 1986.
PASSED AND ADOPTED ON ITS SECOND READING THIS THE 14 DAY OF APRIL,
1986.
PASSED AND ADOPTED ON THIS THIRD AND FINAL READING THIS THE 15 DAY
OF April, 1986.
/S/___________________________
L. Wayne Wilshire, Mayor
ATTEST:
/S/___________________________
Kathryn Howard, City Secretary
This page left empty
(Reserved for Future Use)

W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 4 of 54
EXHIBIT “A”
SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE
OF THE CITY OF MANSFIELD, TEXAS
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 5 of 54
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS ............................................................................... 7
Section 1.01 Title .............................................................................................................................. 7
Section 1.02 Authority ..................................................................................................................... 7
Section 1.03 Policy and Purpose ..................................................................................................... 7
Section 1.04 Enforcement ................................................................................................................ 9
Section 1.05 Minimum Standards and Levels of Service ............................................................ 10
Section 1.06 Jurisdiction ................................................................................................................ 11
Section 1.07 Definitions .................................................................................................................. 12
Section 1.08 Delegation of Authority ............................................................................................ 22
Section 1.09 Authority of the Director of Planning ..................................................................... 22
ARTICLE 2. REQUIREMENTS FOR PLAT SUBMITTAL ......................................... 22
Section 2.01 Platting Required ...................................................................................................... 22
Section 2.02 Rules Applicable to All Plats .................................................................................... 23
Section 2.03 Preliminary Plat ........................................................................................................ 27
Section 2.04 Final Plat ................................................................................................................... 30
Section 2.05 Minor Plat ................................................................................................................. 32
Section 2.06 Replat ......................................................................................................................... 33
Section 2.07 Amending Plat ........................................................................................................... 34
Section 2.08 Plat Vacation ............................................................................................................. 36
Section 2.09 Subdivision Ties to City Monuments ...................................................................... 37
ARTICLE 3. PROCESSING PROCEDURES .................................................................. 37
Section 3.01 Pre-application Conference ..................................................................................... 38
Section 3.02 Requirement for Completeness Determination ...................................................... 38
Section 3.03 Process for Completeness Determination ............................................................... 39
Section 3.04 Expiration of Incomplete Application ..................................................................... 40
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 6 of 54
Section 3.05 Application Review ................................................................................................... 40
Section 3.06 Proper Zoning ........................................................................................................... 41
Section 3.07 Official Filing Date ................................................................................................... 42
Section 3.08 Thirty Day Action Required .................................................................................... 42
Section 3.09 Methods of Approval ................................................................................................ 42
Section 3.10 Action Required on Administrative Plats ............................................................... 43
Section 3.11 Denial of Plat ............................................................................................................. 43
Section 3.12 Plat Expiration .......................................................................................................... 43
Section 3.13 Project Expiration .................................................................................................... 43
Section 3.14 Continuance of Plat Application .............................................................................. 45
Section 3.15 Recording of Plats ..................................................................................................... 45
ARTICLE 4. DEDICATIONS AND ROUGH PROPORTIONALITY ............................ 47
Section 4.01 Dedications ................................................................................................................ 47
Section 4.02 Exaction Requirements ............................................................................................ 47
Section 4.03 Rough Proportionality Appeal ................................................................................ 49
Section 4.04 Rough Proportionality Appeal Procedure .............................................................. 49
Section 4.05 City Council Decision ............................................................................................... 52
Section 4.06 Action Following City Council Decision ................................................................. 53
Section 4.07 Appeal of City Council’s Decision ........................................................................... 54
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 7 of 54
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.01 Title
This Ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the Subdivision Ordinance of the
City of Mansfield, Texas, and shall be part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Mansfield, Texas.
Section 1.02 Authority
This Ordinance is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State of
Texas, including Chapters 42, 43, and 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, as
amended.
Section 1.03 Policy and Purpose
A. These regulations are designed and intended to achieve the following purposes:
1. to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community and the
safe, orderly and healthful development of the City;
2. to establish adequate policies and procedures to guide development of the City and
its extraterritorial jurisdiction;
3. to provide for the establishment of minimum specifications for construction and
engineering design criteria for public infrastructure improvements to maintain land
values, reduce inconveniences to residents of the area and related unnecessary costs
to the City for correction of inadequate facilities that are designed to serve the public;
4. to ensure that development of land and subdivisions shall be of such nature, shape
and location that utilization will not impair the general welfare;
5. to ensure against the dangers of fires, floods, erosion, landslides or other such
menaces;
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 8 of 54
6. to preserve the natural beauty and topography of the City and to ensure appropriate
development with regard to these natural features;
7. to realistically and harmoniously relate new development to adjacent properties;
8. to provide the most beneficial circulation of traffic throughout the City, having
particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, to
provide for pedestrian traffic movements, and to provide for the proper location and
width of streets;
9. to ensure that public facilities for water supply, drainage, disposal of sanitary and
industrial waste, and parks are available for every building site and with adequate
capacity to serve the proposed subdivision before issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or release of utility connections or final inspection within the boundaries
of the plat;
10. to assure that new development adequately and fairly participates in the dedication
and construction of public infrastructure improvements that are necessitated by or
attributable to the development or that provide value or benefit that makes the
development feasible;
11. to help prevent pollution, assure the adequacy of drainage facilities, control storm
water runoff, safeguard the water table, and encourage the wise use and management
of natural resources throughout the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction in order to
preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community, and the value of the
land; and
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 9 of 54
12. to provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land,
while preserving the land use intensity as established in the Zoning Ordinance of the
City.
B. To carry out the purposes hereinabove stated, it is the policy of the City to guide and
regulate the subdivision and development of land in such a manner as to promote orderly
growth both within the City and, where applicable, within its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
C. Land must not be platted until proper provision has been made for adequate public
facilities for water, sanitary sewer, roadways, drainage, parks, and recreation facilities.
D. There is an essential nexus between the demand on the City’s public facilities systems
created by a new development and the exaction requirements necessary to offset such
impacts.
E. Proposed plats or subdivisions which do not conform to these policies and regulations
shall be denied, or, in lieu of denial, disapproved subject to conformance with all
conditions stipulated for approval.
Section 1.04 Enforcement
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission, and for minor plats, the Director of Planning, are
authorized to refuse approval of any plat of any subdivision unless such plat meets the
requirements as set forth in this Ordinance.
B. No building permit for the construction of a building or structure upon any property shall
be issued unless the property is part of a recorded plat, except that a building permit may
be issued on an unplatted tract with a “PR”, “A” or “Single-Family Residential” zoning
classification for one of the following purposes:
1. to add to an existing building or structure;
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 10 of 54
2. to alter an existing building or structure;
3. to construct an accessory building or structure; or
4. to restore any building or structure previously destroyed by fire, explosion or any
other casualty or act of God where the extent of the destruction is not more than fifty
percent (50%) of its reasonable market value.
C. The City shall be under no obligation to furnish any public utilities or allow any public
utility service unless and until a plat meeting all rules, regulations, and requirements of
this Ordinance has been approved and recorded at the County.
Section 1.05 Minimum Standards and Levels of Service
A. The standards established in this Ordinance for dedication and construction of public
facilities and infrastructure are based upon engineering studies, historical usages and
demands by different categories of development. These regulations identify certain
minimum requirements and sizes for utilities, roadways, drainage, parks, and other
facilities that the City Council has determined to be necessary in order to provide the
minimum level of service necessary to protect or promote the public health, safety, and
welfare, and to assure the quality of life currently enjoyed by the citizens of Mansfield. It
is the intent of these subdivision regulations that no development occurs until and unless
these minimum levels of service are met. Therefore, each development in the City shall
be required to dedicate, construct, or upgrade required facilities and infrastructure to a
capacity that meets these minimum levels.
B. For each category of public infrastructure, a minimum standard of infrastructure has been
developed based upon historic studies and construction projects of the City and other
municipalities. The minimum standards take into consideration the soil conditions, the
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 11 of 54
topographic configuration of the City, and the use and impact analyses of the North
Texas Central Council of Governments in developing standard specifications. The
minimum standards reflect the minimum level of facilities that can be built to meet the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Mansfield.
C. If adequate levels of service cannot be provided concurrent with the schedule of
development proposed, the Commission may deny the plat application until the necessary
public infrastructure improvements and services can be provided, or require that the
subdivision be phased so that availability and delivery of services coincide with the
demands generated by the development.
D. Whenever the City Council determines that levels of service in excess of these minimum
standards are necessary in order to promote the orderly development of the City, the
developer shall qualify for reimbursement for any costs in excess of the minimum levels
of service through City participation, to the extent funds are available, or a pro rata
reimbursement policy or other means adopted by the City.
Section 1.06 Jurisdiction
A. Subject to the provisions of this section, the regulations of this Ordinance shall apply to
all land within the corporate limits of Mansfield and all land within the City’s
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
B. When land is subdivided in the City’s extraterritorial jurisdiction, approval by the County
Commissioners of the County in which the land is located shall be required in addition to
approval by the City, unless otherwise provided by interlocal agreement between the City
and County. It is the obligation of an applicant seeking to plat property in the City’s
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 12 of 54
extraterritorial jurisdiction to determine whether the concurrent approval of the County is
required.
C. The City shall be under no obligation to extend utilities beyond the limits of the City’s
Certificate of Convenience and Necessity.
Section 1.07 Definitions
A. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following rules shall apply in constructing,
interpreting or otherwise defining the terms and provisions hereof:
1. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, words used in the singular
number shall include the plural number and words used in the plural shall include the
singular.
2. The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is permissive.
3. The phrase “used for” shall include the phrases “arranged for”, “designed for”,
“intended for” and “occupied for” and shall apply exclusively to physical uses.
B. When used in this Ordinance, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them. Words and terms not defined herein shall be applied according
to customary use in municipal planning and engineering practices.
Acreage, Gross: The acreage included within the boundary of a subdivision.
Acreage, Net: The acreage included within the boundary of a subdivision, excluding all
public rights-of-way.
Adequate Public Facilities: Facilities determined to be capable of supporting and
servicing the physical area and designated intensity of the proposed subdivision as
determined by the City and based upon specific levels of service.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 13 of 54
Alley: A public or private way less in size than a street, designed to accommodate the
property it reaches, and not intended for general travel or primary access.
Applicant: The owner of land proposing to subdivide property or file an application for
plat approval or the owner’s authorized representative, including, but not limited to, a
land planner, surveyor, engineer, developer, real estate agent, or contractor.
Base Flood or 100-year Flood: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Block: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public
parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, or boundary lines of
municipalities.
Bond: Any form of security, other than a cash deposit, to be used as surety or as
guarantee in an amount and form satisfactory to the City.
Building: Any temporary or permanent structure having a roof or other covering, and
designed, built or intended for the shelter or enclosure or partial enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind. Where independent units with
separate entrances are divided by appropriate fire separations, each unit shall be deemed a
building.
Building Line: A line, generally parallel to a lot line or street right-of-way, located the
required distance to provide the minimum yards established by the Zoning Ordinance, as
amended, to limit the area in which buildings are permitted.
City: The City of Mansfield, Texas, including all its governing and operating bodies.
City Council: The governing and legislative body of the City of Mansfield.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 14 of 54
City Engineer: A person appointed to serve as City Engineer or authorized to act in such
capacity.
City Manager: A person appointed to serve as City Manager by the City Council, under
the authority of the City Charter, or authorized to act in such capacity.
City Secretary: A person appointed by the City Council under the authority of the City
Charter, including any appointed deputy, or authorized to act in such capacity.
Commission: The City of Mansfield Planning and Zoning Commission.
Common Area: A private lot(s) established, owned and maintained by a homeowners’
association or a property owners’ association.
Comprehensive Plan: A series of planning documents intended to guide the growth and
development of the City and its adjoining areas including, but not limited to, the City’s
Comprehensive Land Use Plan, Parks, Open Spaces and Trails Master Plan,
Thoroughfare Plan, Storm Water Management Plans, and Master Utility Plans.
Concept Plan: A sketch or rough layout of the proposed development plan for use in a
pre-application meeting. At a minimum, the drawing should show the perimeter of the
property being platted, adjoining properties, and adjacent roadways.
Cul-de-sac: That street or part of a street having one (1) common entry and exit and no
other entry and/or exit.
Density, Gross: The number of dwelling units per gross acre.
Density, Net: The number of dwelling units per net acre.
Developer: The owner of land proposed for subdivision or development or an authorized
representative of the owner. A subdivider is a developer.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 15 of 54
Development: Any activity that requires the submission of a plat or plan for
development, or the securing of a permit, or any manmade change to real estate,
including, but not limited to, construction of a building or structure, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or storage of equipment or
materials. The subdivision of land is development.
Director of Parks and Recreation: A person appointed to serve as the City’s Director
of Parks and Recreation or authorized to act in such capacity.
Director of Planning: A person appointed as the City’s Director of Planning or
authorized to act in such capacity.
Director of Public Works: A person appointed as the City’s Director of Public Works or
authorized to act in such capacity.
Dwelling Unit: An individual residence, including each individual residential unit in a
multi-family residential structure or manufactured home park, designed or intended for
habitation by a single family.
Easement: Authorization by a property owner for another to use any designated part of
the owner’s property for a specified purpose or use and evidenced by an instrument or
plat filed with the County Clerk. Among other things, easements may be used to install
and maintain utility lines, drainage ditches or channels, or for other City or public
services.
Easement, Common Access: An easement to provide shared access to and from
commercial, industrial, and certain residential developments, owned and maintained by
the owners of the property upon which the easement is located or as otherwise provided
by deed restrictions or the terms of the easement instrument.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 16 of 54
Easement, Drainage: An easement for the overland or underground transfer of storm
water.
Easement, Emergency Access: An easement to provide ingress, egress, access, and
passage to and across private property for police, fire, ambulance, and other public safety
vehicles and personnel.
Easement, Pedestrian Access: An easement to provide pedestrian ingress, egress, and
passage to and across private property.
Easement, Private: An easement granted by a property owner to a specified person,
group of persons or entity in, on, across, over, or under property for a specified use or
uses.
Easement, Public: An easement granted to the public or governmental agency in, on,
across, over or under property for a specified use or uses.
Easement, Screening: An easement granted to a homeowners’ or property owners’
association for the construction and perpetual maintenance of a screening device along
the perimeter of a subdivision.
Easement, Utility: An easement for the installation, maintenance, and operation of water,
sewer, electric, telephone, cable, gas, and other similar utilities.
Engineer: A person duly authorized and licensed under the provisions of the Texas
Engineering Registration Act, Chapter 1001, Occupations Code, to practice the
profession of engineering.
Engineering Design Standards: The documents adopted by the City that establish the
minimum criteria for the design of public infrastructure improvements.
Escrow: Money deposited with the City to guarantee performance of an obligation.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 17 of 54
Exaction Requirement: A requirement imposed as a condition of approval for a plat or
other permit to accomplish the following:
1. dedicate an interest in land for a public infrastructure improvement;
2. construct a public infrastructure improvement; or
3. pay a fee in lieu of constructing a public infrastructure improvement.
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction: The unincorporated area, not a part of any other
municipality, which is contiguous to the corporate limits of the City of Mansfield, the
outer boundaries of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate limits of
the City outward for such distances as prescribed in Chapter 42 of the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended, according to the total population of the City and by
interlocal agreements with surrounding cities.
Floodway or Regulatory Floodway: The channel of a watercourse and the adjacent
floodplain that must be reserved to convey the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the base flood elevation more than a designated height.
Floodplain: Any land area inundated by the base flood.
Front or Frontage: That portion of a tract of land that abuts a public or private street to
which it has direct access.
Line, Feeder: An electrical line that emanates from an electrical sub-station or hub to
distribute power throughout an area.
Line, Lateral: An electrical line that emanates from a feeder line, typically through a
sectionalizing device like a fuse or a disconnect, to distribute power to a smaller areas of
electric consumers; such line can be either single or three phase.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 18 of 54
Line, Secondary Service: An electrical line that, through a transformer, connects a lateral
line to a customer’s electrical service entrance.
Line, Transmission: An electrical line operated at voltages of 60,000 volts or higher that
brings power from a generating plant to an electrical sub-station.
Lot: A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by a recorded plat which
is recognized as a separate legal entity for transfer of title.
Marker: A permanent survey device such as an iron rod, generally used on points such as
lot corners, points of curvature and points of tangency.
Non-residential Subdivision: A subdivision whose intended use is primarily other than a
residential subdivision.
Off-site: Any premises not located within the area of the property to be platted.
Owner: A person who has a fee simple ownership in land, or a person acting on behalf of
or through authority granted by the owner.
Person: Any individual or group of individuals, general or limited partnership, joint
venture, unincorporated association, corporation, limited liability company, trust,
governmental or quasi-governmental entity, or other legal entity similar to the foregoing.
Plan for Development: A plan outlining the proposed use(s) of a tract or tracts of land
which provides the City fair notice of the intended project and the nature of the permit
sought. It includes an application for approval of a plat or an application for approval of
a zoning change or site plan which contains, at a minimum, a graphic depiction or sketch
of the tract and, where required, the buildings to be located thereon, describing the
proposed uses of the land and the location within the tract(s) and the general layout of
streets and parks or other open spaces. It does not include any information or exhibit
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 19 of 54
presented to (1) City staff for the purpose of seeking information regarding the applicable
regulations or (2) the Commission or City Council unless the information or exhibit is
required to be submitted with the permit application.
Plat: A map, plan or drawing of a subdivision established and provided for in this
Ordinance. A plat may be a preliminary plat, final plat, replat, amending plat, minor plat,
plat vacation, or other plat.
Plat, Amending: A plat that meets the requirements set forth in Section 212.016 of the
Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
Plat, Final: A plat of a subdivision to be recorded after approval by the Commission and
any accompanying material as described in these regulations.
Plat, Minor: A plat of subdivision for four (4) lots or less, regardless of size, that front on
an existing street, which does not require the creation of any new streets or the extension
of public facilities.
Plat, Preliminary: A plat consisting of a preliminary drawing or drawings, described in
these regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be
submitted to the Commission for approval. A preliminary plat is only a proposal for the
City to review and shall not be recorded.
Plat Processing Schedule: An annual schedule furnished by the Planning Department
including cut-off days and times, meeting dates, and other pertinent dates needed to
process plats.
Plat, Vacation: A plat that meets the requirements as set forth in Section 212.013 of the
Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 20 of 54
Public Infrastructure Improvement: The addition, extension or improvement of the
public water, sanitary sewer, roadway, drainage, or park facilities.
Recordation Date: The date on which the final plat is filed of record with the County
Clerk of the appropriate county for permanent recording in the plat records of the county.
Replat: A plat which provides for the re-arrangement of any part or all of any previous
platted lot or lots, or for the combining of platted and unplatted property.
Residential Subdivision: A subdivision developed primarily for residential uses as
enumerated in the City’s Zoning Ordinance.
Site-related Facility: A public infrastructure improvement that is for the primary use or
benefit of a new development for the purpose of safe and adequate minimum provision of
water, sanitary sewer, roadway, drainage, or park facilities, as applicable. A site-related
facility may be located offsite, within or on the perimeter of the development site.
Street: A public roadway for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however
otherwise designated.
Subdivide: The act or process of creating a subdivision.
Subdivider: A person who subdivides or seeks to subdivide land or a person or persons
authorized to act in such capacity.
Subdivision: The division of a tract situated within the City or the City's extraterritorial
jurisdiction into two or more parts for the purpose of sale, lease or development. A
division of a tract includes a division regardless of whether it is made by using a metes
and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or a contract for a deed, by using a
contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other method, and
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 21 of 54
shall include a replat and a one-lot plat. A division of land into parts greater than five
acres, where each part has access and no public improvement is being dedicated, shall not
constitute the subdivision of land.
Submittal Fee: The fee charged for an application for approval of a plat. The amount is
as stipulated in the most recently approved City of Mansfield Fee Ordinance and any
amendments thereof.
Surveyor: A person registered as a licensed state land surveyor or a registered
professional land surveyor (RPLS), as authorized by the Texas Land Surveyors
Registration Act.
System-related Facility: A public infrastructure improvement or expansion that is for the
use or benefit of the overall water, sanitary sewer, roadway, drainage, or park facilities
systems, as applicable. A system-related facility has capacity larger than needed to serve
a single new development and exceeds the minimum standards required. A systemrelated
facility may include a public infrastructure improvement that is reflected in the
capital improvement plan or the Comprehensive Plan. A system-related facility may be
located off-site, within the development site, or on the perimeter of the development site.
Thoroughfare Plan: The master plan of major and secondary streets and highways which
is a part of the City’s Comprehensive Plan and adaptations, amendments or supplements
thereto as adopted by the City Council.
Tract: All contiguous property in common ownership.
Utility Provider: A person that provides a public or private utility or service to the
general public, including but not necessarily limited to, a municipal water, sewer or
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 22 of 54
drainage utility, electric company, telephone company, natural gas company and a cable
television provider.
Section 1.08 Delegation of Authority
A. A particular official that is assigned a specific responsibility under these regulations may
delegate the authority to carry out such responsibility to an employee of the same
department. Likewise, the City Manager shall be authorized to reassign specific
responsibilities among different officials or departments, or delegate such responsibilities
to additional officials and departments, as the case may be.
B. Authority to approve certain types of plats may be delegated to one (1) or more officials
of the City in accordance with State Law.
Section 1.09 Authority of the Director of Planning
Subject to approval of the City Manager and the Commission, the Director of Planning is
authorized to promulgate, amend, and enforce rules of procedure and submittal policies to
regulate interdepartmental coordination and processing of plats and other related
development applications.
ARTICLE 2. REQUIREMENTS FOR PLAT SUBMITTAL
Section 2.01 Platting Required
A. Every owner of a tract of land located within the limits or in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City who divides the tract into two or more parts to lay out a
subdivision of the tract, including an addition to the City, to lay out suburban lots,
building lots or other lots, or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the
tract intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 23 of 54
fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts must have a
plat of the subdivision prepared and approved.
B. A person is required to obtain approval of a plat for any of the following purposes:
1. to create a building site on a single lot or tract;
2. to subdivide a lot or tract into two or more parcels;
3. to combine lots or tracts;
4. to amend a plat;
5. to include vacated and abandoned property into a legal building site; or
6. to correct errors on an approved and recorded plat.
Section 2.02 Rules Applicable to All Plats
A. All plats shall be prepared by a professional engineer or surveyor. Folded paper copies of
the plat shall be submitted to the City in the manner and quantity specified by the most
current submittal policies.
B. In addition to the paper copies of the plat, the developer shall also provide the City with a
digital copy of the plat, using the North American Datum 1983 (NAD 83), Texas State
Plane - North Central Zone (4202), United States, according to the Electronic Data
Submittal requirements in Appendix A.
C. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not have the same spelling as or be
pronounced similarly to the name of any other subdivision located within the City or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, unless an approved preliminary plat establishes multiple
phases, in which case, the proposed name may be used for the entire subdivision.
D. Prior to the submission of an application for approval of a plat, a developer shall provide
a copy of the plat to each utility provider that will serve the subdivision.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 24 of 54
E. All plats shall be submitted with a complete application to include all required
information and shall be signed by the owner of the property to be platted or the owner’s
authorized agent as assigned on the appropriate Property Owner Representation Form.
F. All plats shall be drawn on a sheet size of 24" x 36" or 18" x 24" unless otherwise
approved by the Planning Department. If the plat requires more than one (1) sheet, each
sheet shall be numbered as it corresponds to the total number of sheets (i.e., 1 of 2, 2 of
2). When a match line is required, a key map shall be provided.
G. All plats shall contain the following information:
1. the case number, provided by staff after the first submittal, in the lower right hand
corner of the plat;
2. a permissible scale of 1”=100’ or larger unless otherwise approved by the Planning
Department;
3. a north arrow, graphic scale and written scale in close proximity;
4. a vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision by references to existing
streets or highways;
5. a title block placed in the lower right corner of the plat to include the information
specified in Appendix B;
6. the name, address, telephone number, and fax number and/or electronic mail
address of the record owner, developer, engineer, and surveyor;
7. the name of the record owner and the volume and page of the corresponding deed of
record for all unplatted tracts within two hundred (200) feet, to include owners across
any adjacent rights-of-way;
8. all adjacent platted properties within two hundred (200) feet, shown in dashed lines,
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 25 of 54
labeling the lot and block numbers, subdivision name, street names and plat record
reference;
9. a legend identifying and describing all symbols used on the plat;
10. the location of City limit lines and/or the outer border of the City’s extraterritorial
jurisdiction when such lines or borders traverse or are contiguous to or within two
hundred (200) feet of the subdivision;
11. all existing and proposed easements on or adjacent to the subdivision shown and
labeled as to type, size, and deed or plat record information;
12. the legal description, by metes and bounds, of the land to include the current owner’s
deed record reference, survey name and abstract number, city, county, state and gross
acreage;
13. lots and blocks labeled with numbers in consecutive order. Common areas shall be
assigned a lot and block number;
14. building setback lines along street frontages shown and labeled;
15. the square footage of each lot noted on the graphic or in a table on the plat;
16. the point of beginning labeled on the plat and tied to a survey corner or previously
filed subdivision corner;
17. graphic depiction of all boundary lines shown in heavy lines with deed record
dimensions or field surveyed dimensions if available, matching the legal description;
18. the location of existing and proposed rights-of-way, labeled and dimensioned,
including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, and railroads;
19. proposed street names, which shall not have the same spelling or be pronounced
similarly to the name of any other street located within the City or the City’s
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 26 of 54
extraterritorial jurisdiction, unless a proposed street is a continuation of an existing
street;
20. right-of-way dedications or reservations;
21. floodplain and floodway delineations from the current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate
Maps, the City Master Drainage Plan, or other analyses approved by the City
Engineer;
22. minimum finished floor elevations for all lots adjacent to the floodplain or other
significant drainage ways; and
23. a description of the project which shall include the proposed uses of the property and
of the location of the proposed uses within the development.
H. Plats for developments located adjacent to gas wells shall be subject to the following
requirements:
1. The provisions of this Subsection shall apply to all land within the corporate limits of
Mansfield and all land within the City’s extraterritorial jurisdiction:
a. that is subject to any zoning designation which allows for a single family dwelling
within the City, or is designated for single-family residential use by plat within
the City’s extraterritorial jurisdiction;
b. where any portion of the boundary of the land is located within three hundred
(300) feet of the boundary of an existing drill site as established by the applicable
Specific Use Permit authorizing the drill site on property within the City limits, or
the boundary of an existing drill site established by lease, surface use agreement
or other documentation on property within the City’s extraterritorial jurisdiction;
and
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 27 of 54
c. whose owner is required to have a plat prepared and approved pursuant to the
Subdivision Control Ordinance of the City of Mansfield, Texas.
2. The owner of land meeting the criteria set forth in this Subsection shall, at the time of
platting, include on the face of the plat, framed in a bold line so as to be distinctly
visible, in capital letters and in a minimum type font size of fourteen (14) point, the
following note: “LOTS ________________ ARE LOCATED WITHIN 300 FEET
OF AN APPROVED GAS WELL DRILL SITE.” The owner of the property shall
complete the blank in the plat note to indicate the lots subject to this Subsection.
3. For the purposes of this Subsection the terms “owner” and “plat” shall have the
meanings ascribed to them by the Subdivision Control Ordinance of the City of
Mansfield, Texas. (Ordinance No. OR-1943-15, Adopted 4/13/15)
Section 2.03 Preliminary Plat
A. Approval of a preliminary plat is required for any proposed subdivision of five (5) or
more lots or proposing any public infrastructure improvements unless the Director of
Planning and City Engineer approve a waiver of the preliminary plat requirement.
B. When subdividing an unplatted tract into four (4) or fewer lots, the developer may submit
a preliminary plat for processing and approval before approval of a final plat. The
developer may elect to subdivide an unplatted tract into four (4) or fewer lots without a
preliminary plat and may submit an application for approval of a final plat or a minor plat
as authorized by this Ordinance.
C. In addition to the information required by Section 2.02 above, the preliminary plat
submittal must contain the following information:
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 28 of 54
1. topographical information, including contour lines on a basis of two (2) vertical feet
in terrain, based upon City of Mansfield datum;
2. a designation of the existing zoning of land within the subdivision and properties
adjacent to the subdivision;
3. the sections or phases of the subdivision, if any; and
4. a lot summary table showing the following:
a. the total gross acreage of the subdivision; and
b. the number of lots and common areas in the subdivision.
D. The following plans shall be required with a preliminary plat submittal:
1. Preliminary Drainage Study: The developer shall submit a preliminary drainage plan
that indicates the general location and approximate size of all existing and proposed
drainage facilities. A preliminary drainage analysis shall be submitted to support the
plan. The plan and analysis shall be prepared in accordance with the drainage
requirements established by the City Engineering Design Standards.
2. Preliminary Utility Plan: The developer shall submit a preliminary utility plan that
indicates the general location and approximate sizes of all existing and proposed
public water and sanitary sewer utilities. The proposed water and sewer lines shall be
designed in accordance with the requirements established by the City Engineering
Design Standards.
3. Tree Preservation Plan: The developer shall submit a tree survey or an aerial
photograph indicating the general coverage of trees as required by the City’s Natural
Resources Management Ordinance.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 29 of 54
4. Preliminary Access Plan and Preliminary Traffic Impact Analysis: The developer
shall submit a preliminary plan indicating all access points to the proposed
subdivision and any internal and external routes providing interconnection. A traffic
impact analysis may be required to determine the traffic generated by the proposed
subdivision and to demonstrate the adequacy of the proposed access points as well as
the impact to and the adequacy of the adjacent roadway systems. The analysis shall
be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineering Design
Standards.
E. The preliminary drainage plan, utility plan, access plan, and traffic impact analysis
submitted by the applicant shall be prepared by an engineer and shall identify the
adequacy of existing facilities, the nature and extent of any deficiencies, and the public
infrastructure improvements needed to meet the adopted level of service assuming
development at the uses and intensity proposed in the plat application. The plans and
analyses shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer who may request additional
information.
F. If an owner proposes substantive changes to a preliminary plat after the Commission has
approved it, a revised preliminary plat shall be prepared, processed and approved by the
Commission prior to the preparation of the final plat. If the Director of Planning
determines the proposed changes are not substantive, a revised preliminary plat may be
approved administratively.
G. The revised preliminary plat shall include all property within the boundary of the original
preliminary plat that is not part of an approved final plat. A revision to an approved
preliminary plat shall not extend the expiration date of the preliminary plat.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 30 of 54
H. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. The
preliminary plat shall be used as a guide in the preparation of the final plat.
I. An application for approval of a preliminary plat shall not be deemed as filed until the
requirements of Section 3.05 are satisfied.
Section 2.04 Final Plat
A. A final plat application may only be filed with the Planning Department if the final plat
substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat and any and all conditions of
approval. A final plat may include all or only a portion of the area of the approved
preliminary plat.
B. When a final plat deviates substantially from the approved preliminary plat, a revised
preliminary plat must be approved prior to the submission of the final plat.
C. In addition to the requirements set forth in Sections 2.02 and 2.10 of this Ordinance, the
final plat shall contain or show the following information:
1. plat notes and conditions listed on the plat in a readily identifiable location with each
note numbered consecutively;
2. the location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set aside for public use or
common reservation shown on the plat, with designation of the purpose thereof, and
conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation;
3. a certification that the land being platted was surveyed under the supervision of a
surveyor, containing the registered professional land surveyor’s name, registration
number, seal, and signature;
4. a City approval signature block as shown in Appendix C;
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 31 of 54
5. a dedication statement executed by the owner(s) and notarized by a notary public in
the form as shown in Appendix D;
6. for a subdivision that contains improvements such as common areas, private streets,
and screening walls or devices, a statement regarding responsibility, maintenance and
indemnification, as required by this Ordinance;
7. a recording information block shown on the plat in the lower right side corner, to read
as follows:
This plat filed in Cabinet ______ Slide ____ Date _________.
8. a note shown at the lower left hand corner of the plat to read as follows:
After recording, return to City of Mansfield
1200 E. Broad Street, Mansfield, TX 76063;
9. complete curve data (delta, length, radius, chord, and chord bearing) for street
centerlines, property lines, boundaries, and easements labeled on the graphic or
shown in a curve data table; and
10. a note on the plat to read: Notice: Selling a portion of any lot in this addition by
metes and bounds is a violation of state law and City ordinance and is subject to
penalties imposed by law.
D. The following plans shall be required with a final plat submittal:
1. Final Drainage Analysis: The developer shall submit a final drainage analysis to
support the drainage improvements proposed in the final construction documents.
The plan and analysis shall be prepared in accordance with the drainage requirements
established by the City Engineering Design Standards.
2. Final Construction Documents: The developer shall submit construction plans and
specifications adequate for the construction of all necessary public infrastructure
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 32 of 54
improvements to serve the proposed subdivision. The proposed improvements shall
be designed in accordance with the City Engineering Design Standards.
3. Final Access Plan and Final Traffic Impact Analysis: The developer shall submit a
plan and report indicating all access points to the proposed subdivision and any
internal and external routes providing interconnection. A traffic impact analysis shall
be required to determine the traffic generated by the proposed development and to
demonstrate the adequacy of the proposed access points as well as the impact to and
the adequacy of the adjacent roadway systems. The City Engineer may waive the
requirement for a traffic impact analysis if he determines that the proposed
development does not warrant the preparation and submission of an analysis.
4. Tree Preservation Plan: The developer shall submit a tree survey or an aerial
photograph indicating the general coverage of trees as required by the City’s Natural
Resources Management Ordinance.
E. The final drainage analysis, construction documents, access plan, and traffic impact
analysis submitted by the applicant shall be prepared, signed and sealed by an engineer
and shall identify at a minimum the adequacy of existing facilities, the nature and extent
of any deficiencies, and the public infrastructure improvements needed to meet the
adopted level of service assuming development at the uses and intensity proposed in the
plat application. The plans and analyses shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer
who may request additional information.
F. An application for approval of a final plat shall not be deemed as filed until the
requirements of Section 3.05 are satisfied.
Section 2.05 Minor Plat
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 33 of 54
A. When a tract of land has not been previously platted and filed of record, the developer
may elect to submit a minor plat if the proposed subdivision:
1. is to be subdivided into four (4) or fewer lots;
2. fronts on an existing street;
3. does not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities;
and
4. does not require that a public hearing be held in accordance with Chapter 212 of the
Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
B. An application for approval of a minor plat shall not be deemed as filed until the
requirements of Section 3.05 are satisfied.
Section 2.06 Replat
A. A replat of a subdivision or part of a subdivision shall be recorded and is controlling over
the preceding plat without vacation of that plat if the replat:
1. is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted;
2. is approved by the Commission after a public hearing on the matter at which parties
in interest and citizens have an opportunity to be heard; and
3. does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions.
B. If any of the proposed property to be re-subdivided or replatted, within the immediate
preceding five (5) years, was limited by any interim or permanent zoning classification to
residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot, or if any lot in the
approved subdivision was limited by deed restriction to residential use for not more than
two (2) residential units per lot, notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance
with state law.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 34 of 54
C. A replat shall contain a note describing the purpose of the change or modification framed
in a bold line so as to be distinctly visible on the face of the plat.
D. An application for approval of a replat shall not be deemed as filed until the requirements
of Section 3.05 are satisfied.
Section 2.07 Amending Plat
A. A developer may elect to submit an amending plat, when such plat will not increase the
number of lots or alter or remove existing covenants or restrictions, for one (1) or more of
the following purposes:
1. to correct an error in course or distance shown on the preceding plat;
2. to add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat;
3. to correct an error in real property description shown on the preceding plat;
4. to indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of
the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments;
5. to show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or
character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat;
6. to correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously
approved by the municipal authority responsible for approving plats, including lot
numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats;
7. to correct an error in courses and distance of lot lines between two adjacent lots if:
a. both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat;
b. neither lot is abolished;
c. the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions;
and
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 35 of 54
d. the amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of
the other owners in the plat;
8. to relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other
improvement on a lot line;
9. to relocate one (1) or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if:
a. the owners of all those lots join in the application for amending plat;
b. the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions;
and
c. the amendment does not increase the number of lots;
10. to make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six or fewer lots in the
subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if:
a. the changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the City;
b. the changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and
c. the area covered by the changes is located in an area that the City Council has
approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area; or
11. to revise a plat of one (1) or more lots fronting on an existing street if:
a. the owners of all those lots join in the application for an amending plat;
b. the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions;
and
c. the amendment does not increase the number of lots; and the amendment does not
create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of
municipal facilities.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 36 of 54
B. Notice, a public hearing, and the approval of other lot owners shall not be required for
approval of an amending plat.
C. Amending plats shall contain a note describing the change, correction, or modification
framed in a bold line so as to be distinctly visible on the face of the plat.
D. The following certification shall be added to the owner's dedication on all amending
plats: This plat does not increase the number of lots or alter or remove existing covenants
or restrictions, if any, on this property.
E. An application for approval of an amending plat shall not be deemed as filed until the
requirements of Section 3.05 are satisfied.
Section 2.08 Plat Vacation
A. An application for approval of a plat vacation shall include the following:
1. a completed plat vacation application form supplied by the Planning Department,
signed by all owners, notarized by a notary public and identifying the plat to be
vacated; and
2. the signatures from authorized representatives of each utility provider serving the
property.
B. Any easements in which improvements have been constructed or installed must be
dedicated by separate instrument prior to recording of the plat vacation instrument.
C. The owners of a tract or tracts covered by a plat may vacate the plat or any portion of a
plat by submitting a plat vacation application form signed by all the current owners of the
lots in the original plat. A request for plat vacation shall be placed before the
Commission for consideration and approval.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 37 of 54
D. Upon the execution and recording of the vacation instrument, the vacated plat or portion
vacated thereof shall have no effect.
Section 2.09 Subdivision Ties to City Monuments
A. All plats to be recorded shall have two (2) corners (permanent control corners) tied, either
by conventional surveying methods, or by use of GPS equipment, to official GPS
monuments within the City. A list of official GPS monuments, their locations and their
coordinates are available from the City of Mansfield GIS Department.
B. These control corners shall be on intervisible corners of the subdivision, with a note
identifying the Texas State Plane coordinates (Texas State Plane Coordinate System,
North Central Zone, NAD 83, US Survey Feet) for each corner. The State Plane
Coordinates will be generated from GPS monuments described in the City of Mansfield
Horizontal and Vertical Control Manual. The plat shall include a note describing the
official City GPS monuments to which the subdivision is tied.
C. The plat will have a bearing basis note on the face of the plat as follows:
Bearing Basis Note:
The bearing basis for the survey shown hereon was taken from the grid
bearings referenced in the City of Mansfield Horizontal and Vertical Control
Manual, which is based upon the grid bearings for the Texas State Plane
coordinate system.
D. No GPS monumentation shall be used other than those available through the City’s list of
official GPS monuments or National Geodetic Survey (NGS) H.A.R.N. Monuments shall
be utilized by the surveyor to establish the coordinates of subdivision corners.
E. These corners shall be set as Permanent Control Monuments as required by this
Ordinance.
ARTICLE 3. PROCESSING PROCEDURES
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 38 of 54
Section 3.01 Pre-application Conference
A. An applicant may request a pre-application conference or meeting with the Director of
Planning, Director of Parks and Recreation, or City Engineer for the following purposes:
1. to identify requirements that are applicable to a proposed plat; and/or
2. to present a plan for development or plat that describes the property, the proposed
uses for the property, and their proposed location on the property and the permit
which is sought.
B. If the request for the meeting is to ascertain platting requirements, the request shall be
made in writing on a form prepared by the responsible official and shall state that any
proposed development concept discussed at the pre-application conference is not
intended as a plan for development or application for plat approval. If the request for the
meeting is to present a plan for development or application which meets the criteria set
forth in subsection A.2., the Director of Planning shall process the plan or application in
accordance with Section 3.03.
Section 3.02 Requirement for Completeness Determination
A. Every application for approval of any type of plat or plan for development shall be
subject to a determination of completeness by the Director of Planning.
B. No application shall be deemed complete and accepted for processing unless it is
accompanied by all documents required by and prepared in accordance with the
requirements of this Ordinance or other applicable ordinances.
C. The Director of Planning and the City Engineer may from time to time impose additional
requirements for a complete application that are not contained within but are consistent
with the application contents and standards set forth in this Ordinance.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 39 of 54
D. A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with
the substantive requirements of this Ordinance.
Section 3.03 Process for Completeness Determination
A. Not later than the tenth (10th) business day after the date an application for approval of a
plat or plan for development is submitted, the Director of Planning shall make a
determination whether the application constitutes a complete application and that the
developer has submitted the following required information:
1. for a preliminary plat application, the documents and information specified in Section
2.03;
2. for a final plat application, the documents and information specified in Section 2.04;
3. for a minor plat application, the documents and information specified in Section 2.05;
4. for an amending plat application, the documents and information specified in Section
2.07;
5. for an application of any other type, the documents and information specified in
applicable ordinances;
6. for all applications, a statement signed by the Director of Parks and Recreation
regarding the requirement for park land dedication or fee in lieu thereof; and
7. for applications, a description of the project which is the subject of the application,
which shall include the proposed uses and their proposed locations.
B. The Director of Planning shall mail the applicant a written determination that the
application is incomplete not later than the 10th business day after the application is
submitted. The determination shall be mailed by United States Certified Mail or regular
mail to the address listed on the application or hand delivered to the applicant or the
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 40 of 54
applicant’s representative. The determination shall specify the documents or other
information needed to complete the application and shall state that the application will
expire if the documents or other information is not submitted within forty-five (45) days
after the date the application was submitted.
C. The processing of an application by any City employee prior to the time the application is
determined to be complete shall not be binding on the City as the date of filing. The
filing date shall be determined as set forth in Section 3.05. The incompleteness of an
application shall be grounds for denial of the application regardless of whether a
determination of incompleteness was mailed to the applicant.
Section 3.04 Expiration of Incomplete Application
A. An application for approval of a plat or plan for development shall be deemed to expire
on the forty-fifth (45th) day after the application is submitted to the Director of Planning
for processing if the applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary
to meet the requirements of this Ordinance or such other applicable ordinances as
specified in the determination provided to the applicant. Upon expiration, the application
will be returned to the applicant together with any accompanying documents. Thereafter,
a new application must be submitted.
B. No vested rights accrue solely from the filing of an application that has expired pursuant
to this section, or from the filing of a complete application that is subsequently denied.
Section 3.05 Application Review
A. A developer shall submit a written application for approval of a plat or plan for
development to the Department of Planning on forms prepared by the City, together with
all required documents, such as studies, drawing, exhibits, or other ordinance
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 41 of 54
requirements, in sufficient size and number as required by the City’s current submittal
policies, and any reasonable information requested by the Department of Planning to
assist the City in its review of the application.
B. An application shall not be processed for review until after a determination of
completeness has been issued. An application lacking required documentation or
information shall be returned to the applicant by the Department of Planning as provided
in Section 3.04.
C. After the Director of Planning has determined that the application is complete, the
Department of Planning shall compile a report of written comments regarding the
compliance of the application with City ordinances and provide a copy of the report to
the applicant.
D. The plat application shall be deemed filed with the City on the date that the Director of
Planning determines that the application and all supporting documents meet the
requirements of this Ordinance and other applicable ordinances, except for any variances
requested in writing by the applicant. This shall constitute the filing date. Thereafter, the
plat shall be scheduled for review by the Commission.
Section 3.06 Proper Zoning
Except as otherwise provided herein, a plat application must conform to the zoning
regulations applicable to the property at the time of the application. If a zoning change is
contemplated for the property, the zoning change must be completed before the approval of
any final plat of the property. The Commission shall not approve a plat reflecting a condition
not in accordance with the zoning requirements until any available relief from the board of
adjustment has been obtained.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 42 of 54
Section 3.07 Official Filing Date
The time period established by state law for processing or deciding a plat application shall
commence on the filing date, as established by Section 3.05.D.
Section 3.08 Thirty Day Action Required
A. The Commission shall review a plat and associated materials and shall, within thirty (30)
days of the filing date, approve, approve with conditions, or deny a plat application. If
approved with conditions, the Commission shall state the conditions of such approval; or
if denied, shall state reasons for denial. A plat approved with conditions shall constitute
approval subject to conformity with the prescribed conditions, but shall constitute
disapproval until such conditions are met.
B. If no action is taken within thirty days of the filing date, the plat is considered approved.
C. The action of the Commission shall be entered into the minutes of the meeting and kept
on file in the Department of Planning.
D. Except for a preliminary plat, the Commission’s approval of the plat shall authorize the
chairperson and secretary of the Commission to execute the certificate of approval on the
reproducible transparency of the plat.
E. A certificate, showing the submittal date and failure to take action on the plat within
thirty (30) days of the filing date, shall be issued upon request.
Section 3.09 Methods of Approval
A. The Commission shall review and approve all preliminary plats, final plats, any plat
requiring a public hearing, any plat requiring variances and plat vacations.
B. The Director of Planning may review and approve amending plats and minor plats.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 43 of 54
Section 3.10 Action Required on Administrative Plats
A. The Director of Planning may, for any reason, elect to withhold approval and present a
plat described by Section 3.09B for approval to the Commission.
B. The Director of Planning shall not disapprove any plat, and shall be required to refer any
plat which the Director of Planning refuses to approve to the Commission within the time
period specified in Section 212.009 of the Texas Local Government Code. The
Commission’s decision shall be final.
B. A plat requiring a public hearing shall not be eligible for administrative approval.
Section 3.11 Denial of Plat
A. Regardless of the type of plat being submitted for review, no further action shall be taken
on a plat that has been denied except as specified in Section 3.13.
B. A denied plat may not be resubmitted for approval in the same form until six (6) months
have elapsed from the date the plat was denied.
C. The re-submittal of a denied plat shall constitute a new application and require payment
of applicable fees.
Section 3.12 Plat Expiration
A. Approval of a preliminary plat shall expire six (6) months from the date of approval
unless a final plat of all or a portion of the preliminary plat has been filed with the
Department of Planning. If a final plat consistent with the approved preliminary plat for
the property is not submitted within six (6) months from the date of approval of the
preliminary plat, the preliminary plat will be void.
B. In the case of a development involving multiple phases and incremental final plats, the
approval of a preliminary plat shall become null and void if no further final plat is
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 44 of 54
submitted for review within twenty-four (24) months from the approval of the most
recent final plat. Thereafter, a new preliminary plat shall be submitted for approval
before any final plat will be accepted for the remaining portion of the development.
C. Approval of a final plat, replat, amending plat or a minor plat that has not been recorded
in the County Plat Records shall expire twenty-four (24) months from the date of
approval.
D. Prior to the expiration of an approved plat, the developer may submit a written request for
an extension of the expiration date to the Commission. The Commission may grant an
extension for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months.
Section 3.13 Project Expiration
For purposes of this Section, “project” means an endeavor over which a regulatory agency
exerts its jurisdiction and for which one or more permits are required to initiate, continue, or
complete the endeavor. A project shall expire on the fifth anniversary of the date the
application for the first permit for the project was filed with the City if no progress has been
made towards completion of the project. Progress towards completion of the project shall
include any one of the following:
1. An application for a final plat or plan for development is submitted to a regulatory
agency.
2. A good-faith attempt is made to file with a regulatory agency an application for a
permit necessary to begin or continue towards completion of the project.
3. Costs have been incurred for developing the project including, without limitation,
costs associated with roadway, utility, and other infrastructure facilities designed to
serve, in whole or in part, the project (but exclusive of land acquisition) in the
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 45 of 54
aggregate amount of five percent of the most recent appraised market value of the real
property on which the project is located.
4. Fiscal security is posted with a regulatory agency to ensure performance of an
obligation required by the regulatory agency.
5. Utility connection fees or impact fees for the project have been paid to a regulatory
agency.
Section 3.14 Continuance of Plat Application
If the applicant desires that the Commission delay action on a plat application beyond the
statutory thirty (30) day period, the applicant shall submit a written request to the
Commission stating the applicant’s desire to waive the requirement for action within thirty
(30) days.
Section 3.15 Recording of Plats
A. For a plat to be recorded after approval by the Commission, all conditions of approval
must be satisfied, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. All required fees shall be paid.
2. All plats other than minor plats shall be provided in an electronic format approved by
the City geographic information system officer.
3. All covenants required by ordinances shall be reviewed and approved by the City.
4. On-site easements and rights-of-way shall be properly described and noted on the
proposed plat.
5. Off-site easements and rights-of-way shall be dedicated by the respective owners and
filed of record with the county.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 46 of 54
6. All required abandonments of public rights-of-way or easements that must be
approved by the City Council and the abandonment ordinance numbers shall be
shown on the plat.
7. Original tax certificates shall be presented from each taxing unit with jurisdiction of
the real property.
8. A copy of the ownership and dedication statement from the plat shall be submitted on
separate letter or legal size paper, executed before a notary public, with all original
signatures.
9. A copy of the executed developer’s agreement, if required, shall be submitted.
10. The required financial assurance and contractor’s proof of insurance for any proposed
public improvements shall be submitted.
11. Approval of any necessary permits from the Texas Department of Transportation, any
utility district, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, or any other state or federal agency
shall be submitted.
B. Any lienholder of the property to be platted must execute a statement on the plat or a
separate instrument subordinating the lienholder’s interest to the plat and the dedications
thereon.
C. The owner shall furnish the City a title insurance policy or other documentation of title
satisfactory to the City, covering the platted area dedicated to the City. The documents
shall reflect that the applicant has fee simple title to the property to be dedicated and shall
be updated to the date the City Engineer releases the plat to be filed with the county clerk.
D. The plat must be filed and recorded with the county clerk of the county or counties in
which the subdivision is located.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 47 of 54
ARTICLE 4. DEDICATIONS AND ROUGH PROPORTIONALITY
Section 4.01 Dedications
A. Subject to the provisions of Subsection 4.02.D. hereof, dedications shall be determined in
accordance with the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan in relation to the nature and
extent of the impact of the proposed subdivision upon the water, sanitary sewer,
roadways, drainage, parks and other public facilities of the City. The City will determine
the location of the required dedication based upon the maximum benefit to the public and
the requirements of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan.
B. The approval of a plat is not considered an acceptance of any proposed dedication and
does not impose on the City any duty regarding the maintenance or improvement of any
dedicated property until the City accepts the dedication by use, entry or improvements.
The disapproval of a plat is considered a refusal by the City of the offered dedication
indicated on the plat.
Section 4.02 Exaction Requirements
A. The owner(s) of property for which a development application has been submitted shall
dedicate to the City that portion of such property as is necessary for the orderly
development of water and sanitary sewer facilities, roadways, drainage, parks or other
public purposes, as required by these regulations, and in accordance with the City’s
Comprehensive Plan.
B. The developer of property for which a development application has been submitted shall
construct such public infrastructure improvements as required by this Ordinance and the
determination of the City Engineer.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 48 of 54
C. Prior to a decision on an application for approval of a plat by the Commission or other
permit application by the City official responsible for issuance of the plat or permit, the
City Engineer shall affirm in writing that each exaction requirement to be imposed as a
condition of approval is roughly proportionate to the impact and demand created by the
development on the City’s public infrastructure, taking into consideration the nature and
extent of the development proposed.
D. In making a determination in this regard, the City Engineer may rely upon the following:
1. the proposed or potential use of the land;
2. the timing and sequence of development in relation to availability of adequate levels
of public infrastructure facilities;
3. impact fee studies or other studies that measure the demand for services created by
the development and the impact on the City’s public infrastructure;
4. the function of the public infrastructure improvements in serving the proposed
subdivision;
5. the degree to which public infrastructure improvements necessary to serve the
subdivision are supplied by other developments;
6. any reimbursements for the costs of public infrastructure improvements for which the
proposed development is eligible; and/or
7. the anticipated participation by the City in the costs of public infrastructure
improvements.
E. Based upon the proportionality determination, the City Engineer shall affirm that the
exaction requirements of this Ordinance or other applicable ordinances do not impose
costs on the developer for such improvements that exceed those roughly proportionate to
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 49 of 54
those costs incurred in providing public infrastructure improvements to serve the
development.
F. The City Engineer may require that the applicant submit any information or studies, at
applicant’s sole expense, that may assist in making the proportionality determination.
Section 4.03 Rough Proportionality Appeal
A. An applicant seeking approval of any type of plat or permit which imposes an exaction
requirement as a condition of approval may file an appeal to contest any exaction
requirement, other than impact fees, imposed as a condition of approval or in which the
failure to comply is grounds for denying the application.
B. The purpose of a proportionality appeal is to assure that an exaction requirement imposed
on a proposed plat or other permit as a condition of approval does not result in a
disproportionate cost burden on the applicant, taking into consideration the nature and
extent of the demands created by the proposed development on the City’s system-related
facilities.
Section 4.04 Rough Proportionality Appeal Procedure
A. An applicant seeking approval of a plat or other permit for which an exaction requirement
is imposed as a condition of approval shall file a written appeal appealing the imposition
of an exaction requirement with the City Secretary within ten (10) days of the date the
Commission or the City official responsible for issuing the permit takes action applying
the exaction requirement. This may include denial of the plat or permit. A separate
appeal shall be submitted for each exaction requirement for which relief is sought. The
applicant shall submit the number of copies of the appeal as required by the Director of
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 50 of 54
Planning. The City Secretary shall forward a copy of the appeal to the Director of
Planning and the City Engineer and to the City Council for consideration.
B. In an appeal of an exaction requirement related to a plat application, the plat application
shall be denied unless the applicant requests postponement of consideration of the plat
application pending preparation of the study required by subsection D., in which case the
applicant shall also file a written waiver of the statutory period for acting upon a plat for
the time necessary to decide the appeal.
C. The appeal shall state the reasons that application of the exaction requirement is not
roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed
development on the City’s system-related facilities.
D. The appellant shall submit to the City Secretary a study in support of the appeal within
thirty (30) days of the date of filing the appeal. The applicant shall submit the number of
copies of the study as determined by the Director of Planning. For each specific exaction
requirement appealed, the study shall include the following information:
1. the total capacity of the City’s water, sanitary sewer, roadway, drainage, or park
system, as applicable, to be utilized by the proposed development for each phase,
employing standard measures of capacity and equivalency tables relating the type of
development proposed to the quantity of system capacity to be consumed by the
development;
2. the total capacity to be supplied to the City’s system-related facilities for water,
sanitary sewer, roadway, drainage or parks, as applicable, by the exaction
requirement, including any capacity supplied by prior public infrastructure
improvements;
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 51 of 54
3. a comparison of the capacity of the applicable City system-related facilities to be
consumed by the proposed development with the capacity to be supplied to such
facilities by the proposed exaction requirement, taking into consideration the impacts
on the City’s system-related facilities from the entire development;
4. the amount of any City participation in the costs of oversizing the system-related
facilities to be constructed by the applicant in accordance with the City’s
requirements;
5. a comparison of the minimum size and capacity required by City standards for the
applicable public infrastructure improvements to be utilized by the proposed
development with the size and capacity to be supplied by the proposed exaction
requirement; and
6. any other information that shows the alleged disproportionality between the impacts
created by the proposed development and the exaction requirement imposed by the
City.
E. If the development or the public infrastructure improvements are located in the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City and are to be dedicated to a county under an
interlocal agreement under Texas Local Government Code Ch. 242, an appeal or study in
support of the appeal shall not be accepted as complete unless the appeal or study is
accompanied by verification that a copy has been delivered to the county in which the
facilities are to be located.
F. The City Engineer shall evaluate the appeal and supporting study and shall make a
recommendation to the City Council based upon the City Engineer’s analysis of the
information contained in the study.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 52 of 54
Section 4.05 City Council Decision
A. The City Council shall decide the appeal within thirty (30) days of the date the applicant
files a written certification with the City Secretary that all evidence is submitted. After
the applicant certifies to the City Secretary that all evidence is submitted, the City
Secretary shall schedule a time and date for the City Council to consider the appeal and
shall cause the applicant to be notified at the address specified in the appeal of the time,
date and location at which the City Council shall consider the appeal.
B. The applicant shall be allotted time, not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes, to present
testimony at the City Council meeting. The City Council shall base its decision on the
criteria listed in subsections 4.02.C. and 4.04.E.
C. The City Council may grant the appeal, in whole or in part, or deny the appeal and
impose the exaction requirement in accordance with the City Engineer’s recommendation
or the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission on the plat application or the
decision of the official responsible for approving any other type of permit application. If
the appeal is granted, the City Council may waive, in whole or in part, an exaction
requirement to the extent necessary to achieve proportionality or direct that the City
participate in the costs associated with the system-related facilities.
D. In deciding an appeal, the City Council shall determine whether application of the
exaction requirement is roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impact
created by the proposed development on the City’s public infrastructure for water,
sanitary sewer, roadway, drainage, or park facilities, as applicable, and reasonably
benefits the development. In making such determination, the Council shall consider the
following information:
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 53 of 54
1. the evidence submitted by the applicant;
2. the City Engineer’s recommendation, considering in particular the factors identified
in Sections 4.02.C. and 4.04.E.; and
3. if the property is located within the City’s extraterritorial jurisdiction, any
recommendations from the County, or, if the property abuts a state highway, any
recommendations from the State.
D. The City Council may require additional information that it deems relevant in making its
decision.
E. The applicant shall not be deemed to have prevailed in the event that the City Council
modifies the exaction requirement.
Section 4.06 Action Following City Council Decision
A. If the City Council finds in favor of the applicant and waives the exaction requirement or
modifies the exaction requirement to the extent necessary to achieve rough
proportionality, the applicant shall resubmit the plat to the Commission or permit
application to the City official responsible for issuing the permit within thirty (30) days of
the date the City Council takes action, with any modifications necessary to conform to
the City Council’s decision. Failure to do so shall result in expiration of any relief
granted by the City Council.
B. If the City Council denies the appeal and the applicant has executed a waiver of the
statutory period for acting upon a plat, the City staff shall place the plat application on the
agenda of the Commission within thirty (30) days of the City Council’s decision.
W:\Mansfield\Ordinances\Subdivision Ordinance\Articles 1-4.100506.CL.doc Page 54 of 54
C. If the plat application is modified to increase the number of residential dwelling units or
the intensity of non-residential uses, the Director of Planning or City Engineer may
require a new study to validate the relief granted by the City Council.
D. If the plat application for which relief was granted is denied on other grounds, a new
appeal shall be required on any subsequent application.
Section 4.07 Appeal of City Council’s Decision
An applicant may appeal the decision of the City Council to the county or district court of the
county in which the property is located within thirty (30) days of the date that the City
Council makes its decision. In the event the applicant prevails in such action, the applicant is
entitled to reasonable attorney’s fees and costs, including expert witness fees.

































































































 
 
 
 




 


